Selection of Staff for Enterprise using Fuzzy Logic 
Bohdan S. Butkiewicz 
Institute of Electronic Systems, 
Warsaw University of Technology, 
Nowowiejska 15/19, 00-665 Warsaw, Poland 
E-mail bb(9ise.pw.edu.pl 
Abstmct-A method of staff selection using approx- 
imate reasoning is presented in the paper. Board of 
enterprise must choose selection criteria before. The 
method allows avoiding non objective choice of peo- 
ples by staff of lower administrative hierarchy. It is 
important in medium or big enterprises where board 
can not select staff personally. Fuzzy logic is very 
convenient for such problem. 
Keywords- personnel selection, fuzzy logic, man- 
power, approximate reasoning 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Fuzzy logic is very good tool for decision problem es- 
pecially when non-precise or partially precise descrig 
tion is possible. Although it can be apply with success 
in management problems, fuzzy logic is not popular in 
management, because lack of knowledge. St& selection 
problem is very old. Different methods are used to solve 
the problem (see example [6] [2]). Staff selection prob- 
lem may be conveniently described in terms of fuzzy 
logic. Decision making problems using fuzzy logic were 
firstly considered by Bellman and Zadeh [l]. Probably 
first try to apply fuzzy logic to personnel evaluation was 
work of Cannamciuolo et al. [3]. Other approach may 
be found in (71. Decision may be taken using numerical 
values, as age, grades in school certificate, test eval- 
uation, and also non numerical, human description of 
candidate performances as resourcefulness, ingeniousity, 
apparition, patiency, loyalty, etc. The first version of the 
method, index of performance P, was proposed to se- 
lection of personnel for tourism office Scan Holiday [8]. 
11. SELECTION CRITERIA 
As it was mention above selection criteria may include 
numerical appreciation of candidates and non-precise 
appreciation. Numerical evaluation is easier. It may be 
based on quite different measures as candidate weight, 
height, age and number of years of experience, num- 
ber of points obtained during special tests organized by 
employer. Non numerical evaluation is more difficult. 
Physical, psychical performance of ideal candidate, his 
level of education, type of diploma or special knowledge 
must be carefully determined before. 
Depending on the kind of work selection criteria may 
be different. Stahl in [7] presents hierarchical structure 
of criteria. He proposed criteria: cognitive (knowledge, 
formal abilities), affective (social competence, work at- 
titude), psychomotor (dexterity, reaction ability), psy- 
chological (senses, endurance and strength, body char- 
=.--. =[ 
ZT, ZT, 
Fig. 1. Structure of tourist enterprise 
acteristics). 
In the paper two methods of selection are proposed and 
an example of tourist agency Scan Holiday is used for 
demonstration the selection methods. Fig. 1 presents 
the structure of enterprise [SI. The personnel of the 
agency is employed on typical posts: seller consultant, 
agency consultant, airport manager, booking personnel, 
marketing personnel, guide of excursion, book-keeper, 
administrator, law consultant. Of course, any post re- 
quires different abilities. For example, seller consultant 
ought to have: 
minimum secondary education 
working knowledge of at least one foreign language, min- 
imum good level 
good geographical knowledge 
know how of office equipment: phone, fax, copy, PC 
computer, Windows program 
female with nice apparition 
good behavior and character: serenity, patience, respon- 
sibility, competence, ability of good discussion 
at least medium disposability 
In this paper fuzzy logic is used for description of se- 
lection process. For example, level of education may be 
expressed by three fuzzy sets: elementary, secondary, 
and university education (Fig. 2). 
The candidate feature are compared with job de- 
mands. Consider a set of demands D,, i = l, ..., n which 
is desirable for the job and appropriate set of features 
F, of the candidate. Typical demand Di has one of the 
forms 
feature Fi must be not lower than Lj 
feature F, must be not higher than Lk 
feature F, must be not lower than Lj and not 
higher than Lk 
0 2002 IEEE SMC 
TA2N4 
Fig. 2. Membership function for education level. 
ci ea common area 
secondary at least secondary 
c1 
1 
0 '  Education 
Fig. 3. Candidate feature comparison with job demand. 
where L,, Lk (j, k = 1, ..., 1 )  are a fuzzy set describing 
possible levels of the feature F,. This situation is pre- 
sented in the Fig. 3. Common area Ca represent area 
of agreement between candidate feature Fa and demand 
D, . 
Of course, not all requirements have the same im- 
portance. Thus, for any i-th rule important level 2, is 
introduced. Total evaluation of a candidate must be nu- 
merical to avoid any possibility of groundless favoritism. 
Thus, for any requirement level of importance must be 
chosen and total evaluation must be weighted mean. 
111. SELECTION OF CANDIDATE 
Any candidate performance must be compared with 
appropriate performance required for ideal candidate for 
the post considered. It may be done describing any i-th 
feature, numerical or non-numerical, as fuzzy set with 
membership function PF. (z) for candidate and p ~ ,  (z) 
for the post. Now, it is possible to compare them calcu- 
lating membership function pc, of fuzzy set representing 
consistence between feature and demand 
PC. = i$f[PF, (I), PD, (z)1 (1) 
This consistence may be expressed numerically as index 
of compliance K, 
for i-th requirement. Generally, index K ,  may be calcu- 
lated using any t-norm (see ex. [4],[5]) denoted in the 
paper by A 
Ki = S:P{PF, (z) A PD, (.)I (3) 
T-norm may be for example algebraic product. In this 
C a S e  
Xi  = S;PP(PF, (2) PD; (.)I (4) 
However, the value of K may be significantly lower 
than in previous case, i.e. more pessimistic, if maxi- 
mum value of each function j i ~ +  (z) p ~ ,  (z) not attains 
unity. Very pessimistic appreciation can be obtained 
using bounded product defined as 
my{o PF; (z) -k PO; (I) - 1) (5) 
If for some z value pp, + PD, not exceed 1 the index 
equals zero. Minimum operation gives maximum value 
for any t-norm, so equation (2) gives the most optimistic 
value of the index K i .  
Let for i-th requirement level of importanceZi is chosen. 
Total evaluation of the candidate performances may be 
find in different ways, for example simply as weighted 
mean 
ZiKi p=- 
Zi 
However, this solution have disadvantage when not only 
triangular but trapezoidal or other shapes of member- 
ship functions are used. In the case of trapezes, such 
index may be often equal to 1 for two candidates in situ- 
ations when one is better. Example, first candidate has 
secondary education, second finished university. Both 
candidates fulfill requirement "at least secondary edu- 
cation". Index of compliance not solve the problem who 
is better. After global appreciation of features such sit- 
uation may be not frequent, but in the case of many 
candidates solution is not unique. It gives possibility to 
corruption or something like this. 
For above reason, in the paper solutions based on com- 
mon area calculations are proposed. It is supposed that 
levels Li of any feature Fi may be ordered. In another 
case there are no possibility to appreciate and compare 
levels Li for different candidates. Thus, this assumption 
not limits our considerations. Suppose that all levels 
are placed on numerical scale [0, 101 and for any level 
membership function p ~ ,  is determined, example as for 
"education". For levels of numerical features the scale 
is also adjusted to section [0, lo]. Now, a result of com- 
parison of feature Fi with demand D, is fuzzy set Ci 
with membership pc,. Let surfaces under membership 
functions are equal SC, and SO,. Now, a new index of 
demand satisfaction DS may be defined as follows 
(6) 
(7) 
In similar way as before, membership function of h a y  
set C, may be defined using t-norm operation, example 
algebraic or bounded product. In this situation surface 
Sc, will be different. In general case smaller because 
these operations are more pessimistic. 
Iv .  NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
The first step of the selection procedure is the choice 
of linguistic or numerical values for different feature. 
’TL M G VG 
0 ’  1 25 4 5.5 7 8 5  10 
Fig. 4. Membership functions for candidate feature 
Let linguistic values are described by: 
education: elementary, secondary, university, 
each language: any, low, medium, good, very good, 
geographical knowledge: low, medium, good, very good, 
behavior and character: low, medium, good, very good, 
apparition: non suficient, suficient, nice, 
disposability: low, medium, high 
and numerical values by: 
know how: Yes, No, 
Windows programs: levels U,l,2,3,4,5 
For every requirements a level of importance Z, is at- 
tached in the following way: 
1.0 for each language, know how, 
0.8 for education, competence, responsibility, 
0.6 for serenity, patience, 
0.5 for Windows programs, apparition, 
0.4 disposability, geographical knowledge, 
0.3 for other features 
Consider now a candidate with features as below: 
she has secondary education 
she know very good French and good German 
she has good geographical knowledge 
know how of office equipment: phone Yes, fax No, copy 
Yes, PC computer Yes, Windows programs: level 3 
she has apparition in sufficient level 
behavior and character: medium serenity, very patient, 
medium responsibility, not very decided, very good com- 
petence, ability of good discussion 
low disposability 
As it will be seen some features are described by fuzzy 
sets, example education, languages, disposability, some 
by crisp boolean values Yes No, and some as crisp 
many valued as Windows programs. In the Fig. 4 
typical membership function for candidate feature is 
presented. For education, each language, and geo- 
graphical knowledge indexes of compliance are equal 
Kl=KZ=Ks=K4=1. However, for serenity and dispos- 
ability this index is equal only Ks= K6=0.5, and for fax 
know how equal to 0. 
Taking in consideration other features and demands im- 
portance levels Zi performance index P of candidates is 
calculated P=8.7/11=0.79. She may be eventually rec- 
ommended for the post. Ideal candidate has of course 
performance index equal 1. 
As it will be seen some good features as very good 
fiench and others are not change the value of P. There- 
fore, it is recommended to use rather index of demand 
satisfaction DS defined in (7) than index of perfor- 
mance, equation (6). 
Also, it must be mentioned that using algebraic prod- 
uct as triangular norm, equation (4), values &and & 
are equal only 0.25. This method diminish performance 
index of the candidates which not satisfy some demands 
with sufficient levels. 
Moreover, other t-norms may be used to calculate in- 
dex of compliance. Some of them may be useful to solve 
the selection problem. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents some possible methods which 
may be used for selection of the candidate for work. 
Fuzzy logic is very good tool for selection methods. Gen- 
erally, two methods are proposed - performance index 
l’and index of demand satisfaction DS. In the pa- 
per index DS is recommended as better describing the 
candidate features, especially when the features surpass 
demands for the work post. Both index may be calcu- 
lated using different t-norms operations. Minimum, as 
t-norm, gives more optimistic index value then algebraic 
product and bounded product which is most pessimistic. 
REFERENCES 
[l] R. E. Bellman and L. A. Zadeh, “Decision making in 
fuzzy environment,” Management Science, vol. 17, 1970, 
pp. 241-164. 
121 W. C. Borman. N. G. Peterson, T.  L. Russel, “Selection, 
Training, and Development of Personnel”, in Handbook of 
Industrial Engineering, G.  Salvendy (ed.), Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1992. 
(31 A. Cannavacciuolo, G.  Capaldo, A. Ventre and G. 20110, 
“Linking the fuzzy set theory to organizational routines: a 
study in personal evaluation in a large company,” in f izzy  
Logic Technology and Applications, R. J. Marks I1 (ed.), 
IEEE Inc., New York, 1994, pp. 515-520. 
[4] M. M. Gupta and J. Qi, “Theory of T-norms and fuzzy 
inference methods”, f i z z y  Sets and Systems, vol. 40, 1991, 
pp. 431-450. 
[5] E. S. Lee and Q. Zhu, &zzy and Evidence Reasoning, 
Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1995. 
[6] Ch. Leek, “Techniques of Manpower Selection and Devel- 
opment”, in Manpower Planning, Edwards et al., Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1983. 
[7] J. Stahl, “A Method for Personnel Selection in Concur- 
rent Engineering Using Fuzzy Sets”, in fizzy sets in Engi- 
neering design and Configuration, H.-J. Sebastian, E. K. 
Antonsson (eds.), Kluwer Acad, Publ., Boston, 1996. 
IS] R. plewska, Selection of Personnel for  Tourist En- 
terpnse Using f izzy  Logic (in polish) (diplome work), 
Wyzsza Szkola Ekologii i Zarzadzania, Warszawa, 1998. 
