Converslon cost reductlon using advanced process control (SPC) and real-time data analysis with ERP 
ilnkage 
Hersh Kohli 
Motorola Inc. 
50 NW Point Road, Elk Grove Village, IL 60007, USA 
h.kohli@motorola.com 
KL Lai, 2 Matsalleh 
Motorola SDN BHD 
Bayan Lepas, Malaysia 
Ph: +1-847-907-8864 
Abstract 
Electronic Manufacturers worldwide are currently 
facing a big challenge to reduce conversion costs in 
order to be competitive in the market. With rising labor 
costs. Surface Mount Technology (SMT) machine 
capital costs and, cost of scrap and poor quality, all SMT 
manufacturers need to focus on efficiently utilizing their 
fixed assets, controlling cost of quality and scrap, and 
utilizing out-of-the-box techniques to reduce conversion 
costs. This paper will discuss some of the Six Sigma 
methodologies and tools used to achieve business 
results of reducing scrap costs by as much as 46% and, 
increase utilization of fixed assets (SMT machines) by 
as much as 30%. The paper also gives details on how 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)/Matrial Resource 
Planning (MRP) integration of factory data has helped 
engineers think out-of-the-box and helped deploy Six 
Sigma techniques to control scrap costs in real time. 
Motorola's Manufacturing Pulse'M Equipment Monitor 
software was used as the 6-Sigma tool to achieve 
business results and reduce conversion costs in a short 
time period at different SMT manufacturing sites 
worldwide. This paper will discuss in detail Statistical 
Process Control (SPC) charts and methodology used for 
real-time process control. Several examples of real- 
world data will be included in the paper. 
Introduction 
Traditionally most SMT manufacturing has 
manuallsemi-automated control systems to ensure 
process control and quality of Printed Circuit Board 
(PCB) assemblies. Some level of automation of process 
control systems have emerged by means of AOI 
(Automatic Optical Inspection) machines for both solder 
paste as well as component inspection but these 
systems are designed to catch imperfections after the 
fact. The need for real-time process control is 
paramount. Each process can be characterized by its 
input variables that influence the process and the output 
variables. Not all variables are critical, but in general 
unless there is control over input process variables, 
process variance and drifts cannot be controlled 
effectively. Six Sigma techniques, in addition to input 
and output variable control strategies, are discussed in 
this paper. Motorola's Manufacturing Pulse Equipment 
Monitor tool was used to monitor the critical input 
variables as well as some of the output variables from 
the screen print and placement processes. Conversion 
cost improvement was seen by maximizing the 
utilization and improving the quality of SMT boards 
being assembled. 
introduction to Manufacturing Pulse Equipment 
Monitor 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor software is 
being used by manufacturing facilities worldwide to 
monitor and control SMT processes and has three main 
modules in addition to web access capability for 
historical reports. The three modules are comprised of 
the Utilization module to monitor equipment utilization 
based on the SEMI E-10 standards, the Quality (SPC) 
module to monitor quality using SPC charts, and the 
Alarm Management System (AMs) module to enable 
alarming for out-of control processes. These modules 
can interface with both Generic Equipment Model (GEM) 
and non-GEM compliant machines to collect vital data, 
store it in a database and display the information to 
users. Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor has 
standard charts and reports and provides users the 
ability to dynamically configure additional charts and 
reports to serve the needs of their specific production 
environment. These real-time and historical charts and 
reports can be viewed via computer monitors on the. 
production floor or via the web-reporting tool from any 
networked computer in the enterprise. 
Utilization (E10) Module 
This module collects real-time events from electronic 
assembly machines and calculates E10 based 
performance metrics. Event data is collected and used 
to calculate reliability, availability, and maintainability 
metrics, which include the following: 
Time in State 
Mean Cycle Time 
Mean Time Between Failures 
Mean Time Between Assists 
Mean Cycles Between Failure 
Mean Cycles Between Assists 
Optimum Build Rate 
Mean Time to Repair - Operational Utilization 
0-7803-7682-X/02/$10.00(C)2002 IEEE 89 2002 Int'l Symposium on Electronic Materials and Packaging 
Total Utilization 
SPC Module 
The SPC module provides a. variety of statistical 
charts that can be used to monitor machines in real-time 
and raise alarms for any process that is not in statistical 
control. Through the use of an intuitive graphical user 
interface, users are able to dynamically configure SPC 
event-variable relationships for process monitoring 
across various types of SMT equipment. By using sets 
of user-configurable parameters, the SPC module 
collects the corresponding equipment data, computes 
and then displays the relevant statistical charts in real- 
time. Time-based sampling, event-based sampling, and 
unit-based sampling are supported. The supported 
calculation updating mechanisms include moving 
u:indow, growing window, constant window. and no 
updating. SPC violations are determined on the basis of 
Westem Electric rules. Some of the supported SPC 
charts are: . . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
Process Capability (Cp, Cpk) 
X-R (Standardized Normals) 
X-R (Actuals) 
X-S2 (Standardized Normals) 
X-S2 (Actuals) 
X-S2 (Short-run, Standardized Normals) 
X-S2 (Short-run, Actuals) 
X-Batch 
Individual (Standardized) 
Individual (Actuals) 
U (DefectslUnit) 
p (Defectives) 
C (Defects) 
Pareto (Standard) 
Combination Pareto 
Pareto Control 
Alarm Management System (AMS) Module 
This module provides a unified view of alarms for the 
users, in addition to providing pager and email 
notification to specified individuals. These alarm 
notifications are automatically generated when control 
limits are exceeded for rapid closed-loop response. 
Upon alarm notification (see Fig.l), an on-line Out-of- 
Control Action Plan (OCAP) leads an equipment 
operator through a series of steps to correct the issue 
and then captures the operator's feedback to determine 
the root cause of the problem. As a result, AMS fulfills 
many corporate quality standards and supports some of 
the IS0 9000 requirements. 
In the Figure 1 below, when the control chart (C chart) 
goes out of control an Out-of-Control Action Plan (OCAP) 
will pop up and the operatorluser will be required to 
provide input. The AMS can be easily configured to 
emaillpage a user or a group of users. 
1 
Pager E-mail 
Fig 1. Control chart implementing an OCAP 
Quality Improvement case studies using 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor: 
Manufacturing Pulse has been used in various factories 
worldwide, and its SPC module has helped identify and 
resolve quality issues in these factories. 
Case study A: Scrap reduction based on real-time 
monitoring of feeders, vision errors and component 
scrap rate 
Scrap has been one of the major cost drivers increasing 
conversion costs in SMT manufacturing. To monitor 
and control scrap of components used in SMT 
manufacturing, pareto charts were setup on chip 
placement machines. In one factory utilizing the 
software application, a very high part reject rate was 
detected in real-time from one of the SMT machines 
(see Fig.2). This figure shows the Optical errors by part 
number coming from the placement machine. The 
operator was immediately alerted and was able to 
determine the root cause of the problem, which was 
identified as a bad component definition. Through the 
use of the real-time pareto chart in the SPC module the 
factory was able to save valuable components, which 
resulted in a significant savings for the facility. Similarly, 
a pareto of feeder mispicks was monitored in real time 
to make sure bad feeders that have high number of 
rejects are quarantined and sent for preventive 
maintenancelreplacement (see Fig 3.). Through the use 
of these reject rate quality charts, bad feeders and 
issues with pad definitions were identified and corrected. 
90 2002 Int'l Symposium on Elecuonic Materials and Packaging 
Fig 2. Pareto chart that shows top vision errors by 
production part numbers in real-time 
of parts scrapped per two boards. The control limit was 
set at four based on historical data to make sure that in 
the event if more than four parts were scraped every' two 
boards, Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor would 
sound an audible alarm, show the visual alarm on the 
line and emaillpage the appropriate personnel. An 
OCAP shown in Fig. 6 was tied to the C SPC control 
chart. 
Attrltlon Report 
Time P.M.: OI.OCT.OZ m o o  - OLOCT~Z os:4tl Lm.: un.1 
Fig 4. Web based attrition (scrap) report showing 
top reject rates by part number 
Fig 3. Pareto chart that shows top mispick erros-by 
feeder number in real-time 
A Web based reject rate chart (attrition report Fig 4.) 
was used to understand the components that were 
having the highest reject rate and to use this as the 
working report off which engineers and technicians 
could make process improvements, thereby reducing 
the overall reject rate. The reject rate is calculated by 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor in real time by 
connecting to the machines and counting the number of 
components rejected (scrap) over the number of 
components placed by each machine. The engineers 
and technicians typically ran this report every two to 
three hours to keep on top of the overall reject rate from 
the machinesllines. 
In addition to the web report, real time C SPC control 
chart (see Fig 5.) was also setup to monitor the number 
N' 
cc 
L U  
,"*Id. 
Flg 5. Real time SPC C control chart for number of 
parts scrapped per two boards 
I MISPIDK CONTROL ACTION PLAy 
91 2002 Int'l Symposium on Elccuonic Materials and Packaging 
Fig 6. Mlsplck control action plan (OCAP) tied to the 
C SPC control chart 
The combination of charts shown in figures 2, 3, 4, 5 
and 6 was used effectively by engineers, technicians 
and operators in reducing the piece part scrap on the by 
as much as 46%. This Scrap percentage was tracked by 
week and regular meetings were held to discuss the 
actions taken and results achieved. Reducing the scrap 
by 46% led to a significant reduction in conversion cost 
per PCB assembled. The conversion cost reduction was 
achieved not only by saving the actual cost of the 
scrapped component but also by saving the placement 
cost per component which would have been wasted. Fig 
7 shows the Attrition (Scrap) reduction spreadsheet 
used to track improvements over time. 
Fig 7. Attrition (scrap) Improvement tracking chart 
Case study 6: MRP 8 ERP lntegratlon of scrap data 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor tracks parts 
that have been rejected by machines in real-time. This 
information has been used to provide the MRP system 
information on scrap quantities. Traditionally, scrap 
quantities were estimated or manually tracked by 
operators on the line by counting the number of parts in 
the reject bin of each machine. This process was 
cumbersome and error prone, leading to time 
consuming cycle counting, a non-value added activity. 
By accurately identifying the part numbers and quantity 
of parts rejected by the machine, manufacturing facilities 
have been able to accurately track part inventories, thus 
avoiding part shortages. Database extracts of scrap 
quantities were automatically fed into the MRP system. 
Thus the MRP system was kept up-to-date with 
accurate data from the shop floor. 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor has the ability 
to be linked to a company's ERP system to get cost data 
for piece parts. This allows accurate calculation of scrap 
costs coming from the line in real-time. This also 
enables the process engineer to not only target the high 
drop out rate parts but also those parts that contribute 
the highest percentage to scrap dollars. 
Attrltlon Report 
Line: Ll"d 
"me Frme: O l O f T - 0 2  22:SO - 020CT-02 0 6 : S O  
P..e.nt DIaomrlbutlDn to T0f.l s=r.* c 
M i 
Fig 8. 
report 
Fig 8 above shows the web report that is linked to ERP 
systems and provides real-time data on the scrap 
dollars expended by the machines. In this case the first 
part in the pareto has a reject rate of 0.13% which is 
acceptable in most manufacturing operations. By linking 
to the ERP data it was seen that this part contributed 
70.22% towards the total scrap dollars, which warrants 
attention. Thus process engineers can use this ERP 
linkage to actively control scrap dollars. 
ERP integrated scrap dollars pareto web 
Case study C: Utilization increase uslng 
Manufacturing Pulse Equlpment Monitor 
Utilization measurement across lines and factories in 
a multi-vendor SMT machine environment has been a 
challenge that previously did not have an off the shelf 
solution. Increasing the utilization of the 
machinesllinelfactory helps reduce conversion cost, 
since with the same fixed assets and same overheads, 
the factory is able to produce more. In a multi-site 
enterprise, a subset of seven sites were selected for 
utilization improvement studies. Standard 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor software was 
installed across these sites that had multi-vendor SMT 
machines. Real-time SPC and E10 reporting across 
multiple vendors was setup. At each site installation 
training, operator training, and process improvement 
training using Six Sigma skills was imparted to the 
personnel at the sites. There were three standard 
reports for each install: Main Report. Bottleneck Report, 
and Line Summary Report. The Main Report detailed 
the installation specifics like the sewer names, clients 
and some of the line level observations made during the 
install. The Bottleneck Report identified the operational 
bottleneck machine and the utilization bottleneck 
machine for each line at the site. Lastly. the Line 
92 2002 Int'l Symposium on Elecuonic Materials uld Packaging 
Summary Report gave a comprehensive summary of all 1. Juran's Q u a l i  Control Handbook, Fourth 
machines on the line and gave the detailed E10 Edition, J.M. Juran, Frank M. Gryna 
breakdown of time over a one-week period. This 2. SEMI E10-96 Standard for Definition and 
established the baseline utilization seen across lines at Measurement of Equipment Reliability, 
the sites. These reports were all available on the Web. Availability, and Maintainability (RAM) 
All seven manufacturing sites studied were able to show 3. The Six-Sigma Way. Peter S. Pande, Robert P. 
significant improvements in machine utilization as Newman, Ronald R. Cavanagh 
shown in Fig 9. Since reports were available on the 
Web for all sites, site-to-site comparisons were done 
successfully, giving a powerful comparison tool and the 
ability to schedule Droducts across sites within the 
enterprise 
Manufacturing h l s e  Equipment Monitor 
IJllization Increase 
Factory 1. Country F 
Factory 1,  Country 
D E'm m 8 . 1 7 ~  
Factory 1, Country C 4.5 % 
Factory2, Country A 4. % 
Factory 1. Country 0 3.81 h 
Factory 1, Country A 2.2Y 
-- 
0.00% 10.00% 20.00% 30.00% 40.00% 
Fig 8. Utilization increase using Manufacturing 
Pulse Equlpment Monitor 
CONCLUSION 
Conversion cost reduction is the most important issue 
facing SMT manufacturing industry in order to remain 
competitive. The two main areas that can significantly 
reduce the conversion cost are reduction in scrap and 
increase in utilization. The case studies discussed in 
this paper addressed both these areas, and using the 
Manufacturing Pulse Equipment Monitor tool, sites were 
able to significantly reduce their conversion costs. The 
Manufacturing Pulse software tool created a supportive 
automated process monitoring and control capability 
that provided the process engineer the freedom to focus 
on process problems rather than on non-valued added 
process data collection procedures. The tool also 
provided valuable historical and real-time data, which 
was utilized to identify areas where resources could be 
allocated to improve quality and utilization. The 
integration of real time scrap data to the MRP and ERP 
systems provided for accurate material management 
and ways to control the scrap dollars coming from the 
factories. Enterprise wide deployment of real-time multi 
vendor machine interfaces across multiple sites 
provided real-time, trusted, and seamless data to 
improve utilization and quality. 
REFRENCES 
93 2002 Int'l Symposium on Elcctronic Materids and Packaging 
