Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simirlation Conference 
E. Yiicesan, C.-H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Cliarnes, eds 
USING SIMULATION TO TEACH BUSINESS PROCESSES DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT 
Marvin S. Seppanen 
Productive Systems 
2225 Garvin Heights Road 
Winona, MN 55987, U.S.A 
ABSTRACT 
A course titled, “Process Design and Improvement - Com- 
puter Based Tools” was developed and offered by the au- 
thors in Fall 2000 and 2001 for part-time graduate students 
in Manufacturing Systems Engineering and Technology 
Management programs at the University of St. Thomas, 
Minnesota, <ww.stthomas.edu/technology/ZOO1Fall/MMSE 
850-13-FOl.htm>. The objective of the course is to introduce 
students to the current software and methods used to or- 
ganize data and model manufacturing and industrial sys- 
tems through virtual representation of business operations 
choosing problems from their workplaces. The course was 
created to make the complex processes and tools of com- 
puter modeling more accessible to non-specialists for a het- 
ter understanding of how their operations work. It is not 
unusual that people only know a small part of their overall 
system. This gives them a way to see the big picture. A 
case study illustrates the application of these tools. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Competing effectively is as important today as it was be- 
fore the personal computer, but the tools available have 
created an environment that requires more speed, collabo- 
ration, targeted data analysis, and reliability than ever he- 
fore. The paper will showcase the use of popular and easy 
to use software tools, which can be used in demonstrating 
how leaning in current Internet era requires a regimen of 
pedagogy complemented by practice. Pedagogy and prac- 
tice must be integrated by designing a decision-making 
framework. This paper specifically illustrates the use of 
software tools such as, Microsoft Excel, Visio, and VBA, 
and also Rockwell Software Arena to successfully and 
conveniently design either a new business process or ana- 
lyze and improve an existing business process and also to 
show how an effective decision making framework in a 
business organization can be established. 
We start with identifying opportunities to improve a 
business process, which we cover in the next section. 
Sameer Kumar 
University of St. Thomas 
21 15 Summit Avenue 
St. Paul, MN 55105, U.S.A. 
1.1 Process Design and 
Improvement Opportunities 
In the wake of increasing global competition, the manufac- 
turing environment has to continuously change in order for 
businesses to remain productive and efficient. A growing 
number of businesses are going multinational to strategi- 
cally position themselves in global markets with world- 
wide manufacturing operations. Changing business condi- 
tions have prompted manufacturers to design equipments 
to accommodate new products without expensive retool- 
ing. This has enabled manufacturers to move into new 
markets and leave them just as quickly. These new markets 
impose demands for products to match specific consumer 
needs requiring customization of products or even altering 
an entire product line. Facilities are now being utilized 
whereby for new products, manufacturers could create pro- 
totypes in remarkably short durations. “Flexible manufac- 
turing systems’’ techniques are being utilized which are 
enabling companies to offer lower costs, faster turnaround 
time and quality that meet or exceed customer expecta- 
tions. Quality of products is more uniform and predictable 
with low wastage on scrap and rework and manufacturers 
are reaping benefits of greater flexibility and optimum 
utilization of production facilities and equipment. Conse- 
quently, we need to identify improvement opportunities in: 
Product quality, Material handling, Product design time, 
Manufacturing setups, and Factory and office overhead. 
We propose Integration and Standardization to facili- 
tate these improvements. 
1.1.1 Integration 
Most of the manufacturing and service systems are cur- 
rently being run on an informal basis. In an informal sys- 
tem, a feeling prevails that information could not be used 
properly in planning and decision making functions. A 
formal system, however, is run on numbers and these 
numbers are common, coming from the same database. 
These numbers differ in the level of their details. 
1809 
Integration within a company is achievable through a 
common policy, a common action plan and most impor- 
tantly, through shared information used in various deci- 
sions, based on common knowledge bases. 
1.1.2 Standardization 
Decision-making in a typical company is hierarchically 
distributed. Detailed decisions are taken at lower levels 
within the framework of macro decisions made at higher 
levels. For the operational level, the goal is to achieve 
more standardization and automation of operations, 
whereas for the strategic level, it is to outline policies for 
smooth functioning of operational activities. 
We achieve standardization in a manufacturing or ser- 
vice environment by identifying commonalities within, 
a) Operations, b) Processes, and c) Services. 
Standardizing operations result in common manufac- 
turing strategies and techniques for similar operations, for 
instance, sheet metal fabrication operation performed at 
different locations may be based on a common methodol- 
ogy, of course allowing flexibility to recognize unique 
needs of different markets. 
Similarly, process standardization should be carried 
out on a corporate basis allowing flexibility to recognize 
differences in markets. In the sheet metal fabrication ex- 
ample, the process of shearing would require cuts made 
with the same geometry, stress and tolerances. 
We provide a preview of computer-based tools and a 
case study to demonstrate their application for process 
mapping and business system analysis and design. 
1.2 Computer Based Tools 
The computer software required to successfully and con- 
veniently analyze a business process, design a new busi- 
ness process, and improve an existing business process in- 
clude the popular software: Microsoft's Excel, Visio, and 
Rockwell Software's Arena. Figure 1 illustrates a potential 
flow of data between computer tools. Each of these tools 
supports Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) that can be 
used to move data between applications. 
Process Process 
(Excel) 
Logic 
Process , 
(Arena) 
Figure 1: Computer Based Tools 
Seppanen and Kumar 
1810 
1.3 Analysis and Design Case Study 
The focus of this example is to design a fast food drive- 
through operation for maximum capacity to meet the ex- 
pected noon-hour rush. The Drive & Eat operator would like 
to minimize the labor input and just meet the expected de- 
mand. Specifically the operator would like to determine, if a 
staff of two could handle the expected volume of 60 custom- 
ers between 11:30 AM and 1230 PM. We will use the com- 
puter tools to analyze the Drive & Eat design problem. 
1.3.1 Visio Process Map 
We start the analysis of the Drive & Eat operation, by de- 
veloping a Visio process map for the operation shown in 
Figure 2. Arriving customer vehicles join a queue or wait- 
ing line in front of Order Speaker station used to place or- 
ders by talking with a member of Crew Type 1. After plac- 
ing the food order, the customer drives forward to the Pay 
Window and the food order is dispatched to the kitchen for 
preparation. At the Pay Window a member of Crew Type 1 
collects the customer's payment. The customer then drives 
forward to food Pickup Window. When a member of Crew 
Type 2 has prepared the food order, it is delivered to the 
customer at the Pickup Window. Being a drive through op- 
eration, the customer leaves the system after receiving the 
food order. 
Pickup Fwd from 
Figure 2: Visio Process Map 
Although not directly apparent from the process map, 
we assume in this analysis that the Drive & Eat facility has 
a single line of traffic flow, one order speaker, one pay 
window, and one pickup window. The kitchen has ade- 
quate space for more than one crewmember to be simulta- 
Seppanen and Kumar 
2 
3 . 
5 
5 
neously making food. From a practical standpoint the 
kitchen at some point is likely to become too crowded for 
efficient operation, hut it is beyond the scope of our current 
investigation. 
For our initial investigation we placed no limit on the 
number of customers who can wait at any of the service 
points: order speaker, pay window, and pickup window. 
1.3.2 Excel Data Analysis 
Some rough time process estimates were available from a 
similar fast food operation. We organized the available 
data into the spreadsheet illustrated in Figure 3. 
20 35 50 35.0 2 35.0 
15 45 86 IS.0 2 45.0 
30 55 BO 55.0 2 55.0 
35 BS 95 E.0 2 (15.0 
40 75 110 75.0 2 75.0 
or 48.3 minutes for Crew Type 1 to take order from 60 cus- 
tomers. In total Crew Type 1 has been assigned 48.3 + 21.7 = 
70.0 minutes of work for this one-hour period. Clearly, unless 
Crew Type 2 can help out, we have a problem with the origi- 
nal assumption of two crewmembers. The total workload for 
Crew Type 2 is more difficult to calculate because of the 
variable order size. If most of the orders were for three or less 
items a single Crew Type 2 may be able to help. 
1.3.3 Arena Simulation Analysis 
We developed an Arena simulation model for the proposed 
Drive & Eat operation to help determine just how large a 
crew is needed to meet the noon rush hour. Figure 4 illus- 
trates the basic structure of that model. The model tracks 
the flow of customer through the Drive & Eat operation. 
After the order has been placed, the food order is sent to 
the kitchen while the customer drives forward to pay win- 
dow and then to pickup window. Because of the wide 
range in the time required to "Make Food" it is possible 
when two Type 2 crewmembers are working, that the order 
for a single item might he ready before a larger order 
placed by the prior customer. To assure that each customer 
receives the food they ordered, we included in the Arena 
model a customer sequence number. 
The Arena simulation model includes a clock to show 
the current simulation run and a plot to show the Work In 
Process (WIP) for the number of customers and food or- 
ders in the Drive & Eat system. 
We initially tested the Arena simulation using the 
sought for solution, namely sixty customers per hour being 
handled by one crewmember of each type. Not surpris- 
ingly, based on the preliminary analysis we conducted us- 
ing Excel, this combination is quite unsatisfactory. Based 
on a five-day simulation, we found that only 47 of the de- 
sired 60 customers were served during the one-hour period. 
Further we found that as many as 29 customers were wait- 
ing to place orders. It is unlikely that so many customers 
would desire the food at Drive & Eat that they would wait 
so long just to order. We found that the average customer 
spent 8.8 minutes at Drive & Eat. Further this solution, 
with an average of 9.3 customers in the system, would not 
fit the physical layout of the Drive & Eat building site. 
Certainly some additional staffing would be required 
to meet the noon rush hour. Should the additional staff 
member be of type 1 or 2 or are two or more additional 
staff members required? In addition, the owner of the pro- 
posed Drive & Eat wanted to know at what customer vol- 
ume level would the two staff crew be adequate. 
We conducted a series of simulation experiments with 
varying crew sizes and customer arrival rates. First, the 
customer arrival rate was reduced from 60 to 50 to 40 and 
finally to 30 per hour with the original crew configuration. 
Next, the 60 per hour customer arrival rate were tested 
with various increases in the crew size. Results are re- 
ported in Figure 5. 
1811 
Seppanen and Kumar 
I - 
WP Customrs VJlP Orders 
60 000 
Figure 4: Arena Drive & Eat Simulation Display 
.,I x ’ ”  1 
D . Y m - n  M I .  
Figure 5 :  Arena Simulation Results 
While the analysis presented in Figure 5 does not 
evaluate the costlbenefit of each simulated configuration, 
we can draw several conclusions based on statistics pro- 
vided. The originally proposed two-person crew should be 
able to handle a customer arrival rate of up to 40 per hour 
with a minimum of customer delay. Adding only one 
crewmember of either type has a limited benefit, adding 
one of each type seems to be the best solution. Adding 
more than two crewmembers was of limit value in terms of 
customer service. 
Based on the analysis just presented, it seems that the 
owner of Drive & Eat has two options: either staff the rush 
hour period with four crew members, or attempt to reduce 
the estimated processing times. One option for reducing 
processing time might be a credit card swiping unit at the 
Order Station to eliminate the need for all charge custom- 
ers from stopping at the Pay Window. Other measures 
might also be incorporated to reduce the Make Food time. 
The next section briefly describes the framework of 
the graduate course titled, “Process Design and Improve- 
ment - Computer Based Tools’. 
2 COURSE STRUCTURE 
This section outlines the course objective, learning out- 
comes, methodology used, topics covered and brief de- 
scription of student projects completed: 
2.1 Course Objective 
The intent is to introduce students to the current software 
and methodologies used to organize data and model manu- 
facturing and service systems. The course was created to 
make the complex processes and tools of computer model- 
ing more accessible to non-specialists for a better under- 
standing of how their operations work. Students then apply 
computer tools, Visio for process mapping, Excel for data 
organization and Arena for process simulation, to problems 
from their workplaces. 
2.2 Learning Outcome 
Successful completion of the course implies achieving the 
following outcomes by the students: 
I.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
6. 
7. 
Learn the potential roles of data analysis, process 
mapping and simulation. 
Learn process modeling for system improvement. 
Develop an advanced level of Excel proficiency. 
Develop a medium level of Visio proficiency. 
Develop a beginning level of Arena proficiency. 
Learn a disciplined approach to business system 
modeling and simulation. 
Learn introductory level of VBA for transferring 
data between computerized tools - Excel, Visio, 
and Arena. 
Present project results to class orally and in writing. 8. 
2.3 Course Methodology 
Each class session includes a traditional lectuddiscussion 
period to review problems and to introduce new concepts. At 
the close of each session, time is allowed for hands-on com- 
puter applications and help with assignments. Students may 
wish to use their own personal computer for this work. 
Widely used computerized business tools; Visio, Ex- 
cel, and Arena, are covered in detail throughout the course. 
Students gain hands-on experience in developing graphical 
and simulation models using personal computers. The sta- 
tistical data analysis and animation aspects of simulation 
are also covered. 
The primary thrust of the course is the Term Project 
that bas been designed to closely follow the process used in 
industry to conduct computer assisted analysis studies. All 
class sessions in the second half of the course include some 
Term Project related activities. These activities include 
discussions of general problems in the class sessions and 
1812 
Seppanen and Kumar 
individual student presentations. Both instructors are avail- 
able via the Internet to assist students with problem solv- 
ing. The last two class sessions involve reporting of the 
Term Project results by each student. Major Assignment in 
this course is the Student Term Project. 
Topics covered in each weekly session are listed in 
Table 1. 
Table 1: Course Topics by Week &ss 
1 1 lntmdvchsnto R0-w Duign and lmprormnt 
3 STUDENT PROJECTS 
The following are cross section of student projects, which 
utilized the software tools described earlier in the paper: 
One student project related to map and model a typical 
semiconductor wafer fabrication operation. Process simula- 
tion in the semiconductor industry is vital when one exam- 
ines the significant capital resources that are used in a typ- 
cal state-of-the-art wafer fabrication facility. Most new 
facilities that are built from the ground up cost in excess of 
$1.5 billion. Individual machines that line the facilities 
walls and aisles typically cost from $500,000 to $2 million 
per unit. Therefore, capitalization decisions are key to the 
success or failure of the business. 
The objective of this project was to determine if, using 
parameters for fabrication - typical processing times, ma- 
chine downtimes, and process yield information - it would 
enable in finding some constraints in the current fabrica- 
tion facility that could be lessened or eliminated through 
process changes. Using the data that was accumulated in 
Excel from internal processes and control mechanism, no 
constraints in the flow of the processes involved in fabrica- 
tion were found when modeled using Arena. Furthermore, 
the simulation calculated process costs that were reasona- 
bly accurate when compared with their actual costs. It ap- 
peared from results of simulation that the company has 
done a good job of optimizing their work processes and 
managing the capital assets that they have been employing 
in the manufacture of silicon integrated circuits. 
Another student project related to Pulsed Laser Welds 
in batteries for implantable medical devices manufacturer. 
Most batteries manufactured by this company are pris- 
matic, single-cell batteries. There are as many as six laser 
welds per cell. Many of the batteries' components are 
highly sensitive to thermal input. The cover to case weld 
generates the greatest thermal risk. The cover to case weld 
joint geometries vary in length, width, height and comer 
radius. A cover design which minimizes the cover to case 
gap is generally chosen for qualification. This helps pro- 
vide a more uniform weld both visually and thermally. The 
purpose of this project was to create a system that would 
allow a user to select a different starting locations of a bat- 
tery cover to case weld, then select different locations in 
the battery that are thermally sensitive and finally to simu- 
late the weld while charting the thermal profile of the pre- 
selected locations. For this project, two of the most com- 
mon battery geometries were modeled and targeted for 
simulation. This simulation system was intended for use 
during the development stages of a battery. It must simply 
demonstrate approximate thermal profiles in key locations 
internal to the battely. This tool would guide development 
engineers when determining material selection and internal 
component placement so that thermal damage from the 
weld zone can he avoided. Microsoft Visio VBA code was 
created to interface between Excel and Visio to provide the 
laser weld simulation. A master shape was created to imi- 
tate a single laser pulse. 
The last student project described here relates to pro- 
duction process associated with a newly introduced con- 
sumer Treadmill product line. This company has had nu- 
merous and significant manufacturing challenges in 
achieving their production commitments. To meet the hl- 
fillment of a demanding forecast, they began an aggressive 
ramp-up in their factory to secure enough work center ca- 
pacity to produce treadmills at a rate of 100 to 125 units 
per day. It quickly became apparent to them that to meet 
the constant and rising sales demand for the new treadmill 
product line, that they could no longer fabricate the com- 
ponents for the treadmill weldments through their tradi- 
1813 
Seppanen and Kumar 
tional, functional process layout. In this project, various 
processing options were explored by modeling alternatives 
using Excel, Visio and Arena software tools for improving 
their current process which could he implemented to dra- 
matically increase their fabrication process throughput, re- 
duce overall cycle time, minimize non-value-added process 
time, and improve process quality. 
4 CONCLUSION 
In summary, authors have presented their experiences in 
integrating computers and software tools in learning design 
and improvement of business processes. Until last year, 
there was no graduate course in University of St. Thomas’s 
books, which provided a hands-on computer based integra- 
tive approaches to modeling and improving business proc- 
esses. The proposed course was meant to fulfill the needs 
of senior undergraduate and beginning graduate students 
and practitioners in technical and managerial fields inter- 
ested in analytical approaches to process modeling and im- 
provement. The basic premise was to provide students 
completing this course with a high level of Excel applica- 
tion knowledge, moderate proficiency in Visio, and basic 
understanding of simulation using Arena and also expose 
them to learning how to interchange data between applica- 
tions using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA). The ul- 
timate objective of the course was to prepare students to 
more effectively solve complex business problems using 
popular software tools by exposing them to a number of 
industrial case studies. As we say, “proof is in pudding”, 
successfully completed industry projects with measurable 
improvement outcomes was the ultimate test of success for 
the course. 
REFERENCES 
Damelio, Robert, 1996. The Basics of Process Mapping. 
Quality Resources, New York. 
Edson, David, 1999, Professional Development with Visio 
2000, Sams, Indianapolis. 
Grabowski, Ralph, 2000, Learn Visio 2000, Wordware 
Publishing, Plano, Texas. 
Grabowski, Ralph, 2000, Learn Visio 2000 for the Ad- 
vanced User, Wordware Publishing, Plano, Texas. 
Kelton, W. David, Sadowski, Randall P., and Sadowski, 
Deborah, A, 2002, Simulation with Arena, Second 
Edition, McGraw Hill, New York, USA. 
Labovitz and Rosansky, The Power OfAlignment. 
Sealander, Jeffrey, and Cross, Kelvin, January, 1999, 
Process Redesign: Is it Worth It?.  Management Ac- 
counting. 
Walkenbach, John, 1999, Microsofi Excel 2000 Bible. 
Walkenbach, John, 1999, Microsoji Excel 2000 Power 
Programming with VBA. 
AUTHORS BIOGRAPHIES 
MARVIN SEPPANEN, Ph.D., P.E. His company, Pro- 
ductive Systems of Winona, Minnesota, an independent 
Industrial Engineering consulting firm specializing in 
simulation modeling and analysis of manufacturing sys- 
tems. He holds his BME, MSIE, and Ph.D. (Operations 
Research) degrees from the University of Minnesota. Be- 
fore starting Productive Systems he was an Associate Pro- 
fessor of Industrial Engineering at General Motors Institute 
and The University of Alabama. He is a Registered Profes- 
sional Engineer; Senior Member and chapter officer, Insti- 
tute of Industrial Engineers; Member, The Society for 
Computer Simulation; Member, Society of Manufacturing 
Engineers; and is certified at the Fellow Level by the 
American Production and Inventory Control Society. He 
teaches simulation using Arena to Manufacturing Systems 
Engineering students at the University of St. Thomas in St. 
Paul, Minnesota. 
SAMEER KUMAR, Ph.D., P.E. is a Professor, Engineer- 
ing and Technology Management at the University of St. 
Thomas, Minnesota with research interests in optimization 
concepts applied to design and operational management of 
production and service systems. 
1814 
