The Evolution of Wireless Mobile Data Communication Technologies and Their 
Market Opportunities 
Allen C. Chen, Ph.D. 
Lucent Technologies, Inc., Whippany, New Jersey, USA (Retired) 
allenchenODrimenetsol.com 
Abstract- The cellular industry has been very successful in 
providing voice services to consumers and business. The next 
big opportuniry for wireless networks will be differentiation 
based on data and multimedia services. Wireless service 
providers face ever-increasing pressure to oRer innovative 
services, new capabilities, and make more efficient use of 
spectrum. In order to meet these needs, existing wireless 
networks have evolved with new technology both in the air 
interlace and the core network. Specifically, the wireless mobile 
data communication technologies have evolved from the circuit 
switched second-generation (2G) networks to 2 . 3 2  and then to 
the third generation (3G) networks and beyond 
[1,2J1,4,5,7,8,9,lOl. The paper describes how the revolution of 
wireless Communications, the wireless mobile data industry, 
evolution of wireless mobile data communication technologies, 
the wireless mobile data market and the falling barriers to 
wireless data proliferation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Wireless communication and computer technologies have 
dramatically changed our world over the past twenty years. 
Yet, in the past five years, the world has experienced equally 
dramatic change due to the explosion of the Internet. 
Standing at the center of the convergence of 
telecommunications and computer technologies is the 
wireless mobile data industry. The rapid and efficient 
deployment of new wireless data and Internet services has 
emerged as a critical priority for communication equipment 
manufacturers. Network components that enable wireless 
data services are fundamental to the next-generation network 
infrastructure. Wireless data services are expected to see the 
same explosive growth in demand that Internet services and 
wireless voice services have been seen in the recent years. 
Most operators have deployed second-generation (2G) 
systems, which include IS-136 (TDMA), GSM, and IS-95- 
AIB CDMA networks. The explosion of Internet usage has 
had a tremendous impact on the demand for advanced 
wireless data communication services. However, the data 
rates of 2G circuit-switched wireless communications are 
relatively slow. Therefore, the mobile system providers and 
carriers have developed 2.5‘2 and third generation (3G) 
systems that are packet-based and increase the data 
communication speed up to 384 Kbps at vehicular speed and 
2 Mbps indoor. Most operators, if not already used, are 
planning to use the 2.5G and/or 3G systems to take 
advantages of their higher voice and data capacity. The 
concept of 3G wireless technologies represents a shift from 
voice-centric services to multimedia-oriented (voice, data, 
fax, video) services. According to the projection of Lehman 
Brothers, 50% of current voice services subscribers are 
expected to use wireless data services by 2007. This 
document presents how the wireless mobile data 
communication technologies have evolved and the potential 
market opportunities for the wireless mobile data services. 
2. REVOLUTION OF WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATIONS 
Twenty years ago, commercial uses for wireless data 
communications were largely confined to private microwave 
data networks and specialized mobile radio systems used for 
dispatch services, technological advances, such as 
digitalization, data compression and smaller devices, and 
critical regulatory decisions to license new spectrums for 
cellular telephony, personal communication services (PCS) 
and other new applications have greatly increased the 
availability of wireless communications while reducing costs 
to consumers. The result has been dramatic growth in the 
market for wireless communications devices. For example, 
wireless telephone users in the US. have increased from just 
over 2 million to over I I O  million in the past ten years. In 
less than six years, cellular and PCS services in the People’s 
Republic of China have increased from 2 million to 72 
million users. 
Wireless voice penetration rates are yet beginning to slow 
down as they reach SO% and higher in many markets around 
the world. The price per minute of voice service continues to 
decline, and while minutes of use are increasing, revenue 
growth from voice services will likely he slow over the next 
several years [6]. In this environment, data services will 
become increasingly important to drive revenue growth. In 
this increasingly competitive wireless marketplace, network 
technology that is low cost and high performance will enable 
operators to bring new features and services to their 
consumers creating competitive and time-to-market 
advantages. 
Wireless mobile data was essentially a niche market largely 
confined to vertical applications within large companies just 
a few years ago. For example, Federal Express, UF’S and 
IBM built successful early private wireless data networks to 
allow their field service personnel to operate more 
efficiently. In recent years, wireless technology has become 
popular with services such as two-way paging, Short 
Message Services (SMS) and I-mode. Demand for wireless 
services such as instant messaging, weather reports, stock 
quote tracking, airline schedules, and other telemetly 
applications has driven market growth. The growth and 
content richness of these services has been limited by the low 
data rate of 2G wireless technologies such as Cellular Digital 
0-7803-7474-6/02/$17.00 82002 IEEE 3428 
Packet Data (CDPD) and SMS, which offers only about IO 
Kbps-IZKbps data rates. 
With the explosion of Internet usage, corporate intranets and 
the convergence of the computing and communication 
industries today, wireless data communication, including 
mobile commerce, is clearly and rapidly developing into the 
next big wireless opportunities. The increased data rate 
requirements to deliver rich multimedia products and 
services will drive network operators that want to increase 
their competitive positions to make the necessary investment 
in 2.5G and, eventually, 3G infrastmctures. 
3. THE WIRELESS MOBILE DATA INDUSTRY 
The wireless data industry, composed of hardware 
developers, software developers, system integrators, and 
carriers, is defined by unique technologies, apparatus types 
and devices, network infrastructures, new Internet linkages 
and specialized contents. Wireless data hardware developers 
create the devices used to communicate. Software firms, 
including both wireless middleware specialists and new 
entrants from the computing world, make the data useful. 
System integrators help pull these pieces together for clients, 
especially in complex vertical market applications where a 
single “shrink-wrapped solution is not available. Such 
applications often involve accessing and linking company 
databases with wireless devices for specialized field service 
applications. The carriers develop the network infrastructure 
and transmit data to the users. 
At this time, most carriers have deployed second generation 
(2G) wireless systems, which include GSM, TDMA, and IS- 
95-AiB CDMA networks. Demand for higher voice capacity 
and data rates will drive carriers to upgrade their systems to 
third generation (3G) networks. 3G data networks are based 
on bandwidth efficient mobile Internet Protocol (IP) 
technology. Both GSM and CDMA technologies are 
designed to enable a somewhat efficient migration from 
current generation networks to eventual 3G networks. These 
intermediate technologies are General Packet Radio Systems 
(GRPS) for GSM carriers, referred to as ZSG, and cdma2000 
IxRTT and cdma2000 lxEV for CDMA carriers. 
4. EVOLUTION OF WIRELESS MOBILE DATA 
TECHNOLOGIES 
The core wireless mobile data technologies are TDMA, GSM 
and CDMA. The volume of data traffic per cell site, or data 
throughput drives operational costs and capital investment, 
Table 1 summarizes the wireless mobile data technologies 
and their services, data capability and deployment status. 
Table I-Summary of Evolution of the Wireless Mobile 
Data Technologies 
I I 
CDMA o imilar to EDGE bu 0 dcploymentplr 
DMA ith ZMpbs indm 
3429 
GSM and IS-136 (TOMA) 
The most mature digital cellular standard, GSM networks 
offered circuit-switched data services well in advance of 
other networks. A service called high-speed circuit-switched 
data service (HSCSD), which combines two to four out Of 
eight time slots in each frame to provide service from 28.8 
Kbps to 56 Kbps. It requires minimal new infrastructure for 
the carriers. But most GSM carriers are putting their bets on 
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), a 2.5G technology 
that is an intermediate step to efficiently transport high-speed 
data over the current GSM and TDMA-based wireless 
network infrastructures. GPRS signaling and data traffic do 
not travel through the GSM network. Instead, the GSM 
network is only used for table look up, in the Location 
Register databases to obtain GPRS user profile data. GPRS 
may combine up to 8 time slots in each time interval for IP- 
based packet data speeds up to a maximum theoretical rate of 
160 Kbps. However, a typical GPRS device may not use all 
8-time slots. One supported configuration is four time slots 
that provides 80 Kbps maximum, 56 Kbps typical for the 
downlink and one time slot, 20 Kbps maximum, 14.4 Kbps 
typical for the uplink. GPRS supports both X.25 and IP 
networking and can be implemented on the GSM 
infrastructures quite straight forward. It takes advantage of 
existing 200 KHz radio channels and does not require new 
radio spectrum. 
The main new infrastructure elements for GPRS are the 
Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) and the Serving 
GPRS Support Node (SGSN). The GGSN interfaces to 
external PDNs and maintains routing information that is 
necessary to tunnel the Protocol Data Units to the SGSNs 
that service particular mobile stations. Other functions 
include network and subscriber screening and address 
mapping. The SGSN delivers packets to mobile stations 
within its service area. It sends queries to Home Location 
Registers to obtain profile data of GPRS subscribers and 
detect new GPRS mobile stations in a given service area, and 
processes registration of new mobile subscribers and keeps a 
record of their location inside a given service area. 
The Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE) is the 
phase after GPRS and is considered as a 3G technology, 
introduces new methods at the physical layer, including a 
new form of modulation, 8 PSK and different ways of 
encoding data to protect against errors. EDGE will deliver 
data rates up to 500 Kbps using the same GPRS 
infrastructure. Practical throughputs may he only half of the 
maximum rate due to possible interferences and sharing 
among multiple users. 
The Universal Wireless Communications Consortium 
(UWCC), an organization that represents IS-I36 carriers and 
vendors worldwide, has decided to embrace EDGE for IS- 
136 networks. The most difficult part of doing so is that IS- 
136 networks use 30 KHz radio channels. Deploying EDGE 
will require new radios in base stations to support the 200 
KHz data channels. The GGSN and SGSN will effectively 
be the same for both GSM and IS-I36 networks. The users 
of EDGE data will eventually be able to roam between GSM 
and IS-I36 networks around the world. GSM networks will 
also converge with IS-I36 networks for voice related 
functions. 
The 3G version of GSM, Wideband CDMA or WCDMA, is 
based on CDMA technology. This version of CDMA 
deviates from the American standards, although it uses the 
same spread spectrum principles. WCDMA adds the ability 
to handle 2Mhps data rates indoors. WCDMA is the mobile 
service platform selected by the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) for 
wideband radio access to support third generation (3G) 
multimedia services. 
The air link of a WCDMA svstem makes use of 5 MHz 
channels, which are different from GSMs 200KHz channels. 
However, the data networking for WCDMA is based on 
GPRSEDGE infrastructure protocols, such as the GPRS 
tunneling protocol. This will greatly facilitate the 
development of new wireless wideband multimedia 
applications. WCDMA can be integrated with the existing 
GSM core network cost-effectively and can fully support 
both circuit-switched and packet-switched communications 
such as landline telephone, Internet access and video 
conferencing. 
There is a strong momentum in the growth of CDMA 
network deployment and subscribers. The CDMA data 
services are offered by a number of carriers. Currently, these 
camers use circuit-switched CDMA technology operating at 
14.4 Kbps. It requires a handset that specifically supports 
data, similarly to GSM. One may connect the phone to a 
laptop. The phone operates like a modem, allowing one to 
establish dial-up connections to the Internet. QuickNet 
Connect is another service for CDMA networks that 
eliminates conventional modem connections. This service 
allows quick connections to the Internet. 
The current CDMA service is either based on IS-95A or IS- 
95B. IS-95B is a refinement of IS-95A that allows up to 
eight channels to be combined for packet-data rates as high 
as 64 Kbps. CDMA evolves into 3G technologies using a 
standard called cdma2000 that comes in two phases: IxRTT 
and 3xRTT. The Ix and 3x refer to number of 1.25 MHz 
radio carrier channels used while RTT stands for radio- 
transmission technology. 
cdma2000 IxRTT improves over IS-95-AEi in power 
control, new modulation on the reverse channels, and data 
encoding methods that result in significantly higher capacity 
for the same amount of spectrum. The maximum data rate is 
144 Kbps at vehicular speed. It can be deployed by adding 
channel cards to existing cdmaOne (LS-95-AIB) base stations 
and offers both forward and backward compatibility with 
3430 
cdmaOne. The cdma2000 handsets will be backward 
compatible with cdmaOne networks and cdmaOne handsets 
will be forward compatible with cdma2000 networks. 
Forward and backward compatibility reduces time-to-market 
for 3G deployments and allows operators the benefits of the 
CDMA evolution including Internet access, increased data 
speeds, increased capacity, and a network based on the 
world’s only commercially deployed CDMA system. 
cdma2000 Ix can also be overlaid on existing GSM system 
to offer data capabilities today and protect existing network 
investments. 
Qualcomm also offers the industry a wireless data solution: 
High Data Rate (HDR), which has been standardized as 
cdma2000 1xEV. HDR is compatible with cdma2000 
lxRTT networks, enabling existing cdmaOne operators to 
obtain higher capacities and superior performance by 
optimizing voice and data spectrum separately, serving both 
voice and data applications from the same network. HDR 
can overlay an existing wireless network or work as a stand 
along system. cdma2000 1xEV-DO offers a high speed (up 
to 2 Mbps for indoor applications) , spectrally efficient, cost- 
effective wireless data solution. 
The 3xRTT implementation of CDMA requires a 5 MHz 
spectrum for both forward and reverse links in a full-blown 
system. Cdma2000 3xRTT may be used in the 2G CDMA 
channels because it uses the same 1.25 MHz bandwidth. In 
other words, it can be deployed in existing spectrum to 
double voice capacity, and requires only a modest investment 
in infrastructure. It can provide IP-based packet-data rates of 
up to 384 Kbps outdoors and 2 Mbps indoors. 
5. THE WIRELESS MOBILE DATA MARKET 
Current revenue forecasts for the wireless data market predict 
strong industry growth. The Gartner Group says the 
opportunity for wireless data communications in the US.  is 
huge with 25.3 million of the 112.1 million U.S. workforces 
having a mobile job requirement. In China, there are 
approximately 72 million cellular and PCS phones and this 
reportedly represents a 6% penetration of the potential 
market. Current estimates of the potential of the wireless 
data industry range as high as 37.7 billion in revenues for the 
year 2002 for wireless Internet applications alone (Killen & 
Associates). To achieve these lofty growth rates, the 
capabilities of wireless devices must extend beyond voice 
only t o  deliver high-speed and robust data. 
Qualcomm forecasts that demand for wireless data trafiic per 
wireless data user will increase from 4-5 megabytes per 
month today to over 200 megabytes per month in the next 
five years [6] .  Their forecast is based not only on an increase 
in data volumes but also on improved usability, higher data 
rates, and lower service cost. Rich media applications 
typical of today’s wireline usage are not yet widely available 
for wireless users hut will quickly become common on 
wireless devices in the coming years. Just as the increase in 
available data transfer speeds (from 9.6 Kbps to 56 Kbps for 
dial up, 128 Kbps for ISDN and ZOO+ Kbps to 3 Mbps for 
DSL and cable) increased the usability of wireline access and 
data volumes, new technologies and rich media applications 
are going to fuel a similar explosion in wireless data 
Wireless data rates are poised to follow the same rapid 
increase experienced by wireline in the 1990s. With the 
deployment of CDMA technology, the network cost to 
deliver data traffic will fall from several dollars per 
megabyte using current 2G technologies to less than $0.07 
for cdma2000 IxRTT [6] .  
The wireless data industry began its development through so- 
called vertical applications within specific industries, such as 
dispatching, fleet management and point-of-sale. Horizontal 
applications, which as the name implies cut across different 
industries, include so-called “road warrior” devices such as 
PDAs, smart phones, handheld computers, two-way pagers 
and universal wireless data RF modules. The lists below 
provide an overview of the types of application categories 
that make up the wires data market opportunities. 
Horizontal Market Cateeories 
Information services 
Messaging and electronic mail 
Mobile workers 
Vehicle location and mapping 
Facsimile. 
Vertical Market Applications 
Customer Service: air travel, automobile rental, etc. 
Field Service: dispatching, parts ordering, 
preventive maintenance, etc. 
Courier: delivery services 
Point-of-Sale: store checkout, etc. 
Public Safety: law enforcement, fingerprints, 
vehicle tracking, etc. 
Distribution: news transmission, newspaper sales 
tracking, etc. 
Financial: brokerage, market data and pricing, etc. 
Telemetry (remote monitoring): meter monitoring, 
alarm systems, etc. 
Identification: inventory control, security, etc. 
6. THE FALLING BARRIERS TO WIRELESS DATA 
PROLIFERATION 
To date, the wireless data market bas grown slowly due to a 
number of barriers to consumer adoption. The Cahners IN- 
STAT Group believes that the market is finally on the brink 
of strong growth as these barriers, listed below, are being 
rapidly surmounted: 
Development cost 
Inability to cost-justify its use 
343 1 
~ 
. . . 
. . 
Low data rates 
Lack of service availability 
Security 
Reliability 
Lack of awareness of the technology 
Lack of standards 
The technology is too new and two risky. 
Training 
Lack of desired features and functions in products. 
7. THE CURRENT STATE OF THE 
TELECOMMNUNICATION INDUSTRY 
In 1996, the explosive growth of the industry began when the 
US. government started to deregulate the local telephone 
industry. The number of small telecom companies increased 
from a few dozen in 1996 to over 300 at the peak. The rise 
of the Internet followed deregulation creating new 
opportunities for services such as Internet access and 
Website hosting. Thousands of Internet service providers 
(ISPs) sprang up requiring support from telecom companies 
for data, voice and video traffic. This demand started a 
flurry of infrastructure building that was willingly fueled by 
Wall Street and venture capitals. 
The increase in short term supply led to some predictable 
responses. Long distance calling costs fell more than 13% 
since 1996. E-commerce companies failed to i i~lfi l l  their 
earliest expectations. Wireless companies started offering 
very cheap calling plans putting more pricing pressure on 
traditional phone and long-distance companies. The party 
came to an abrupt end in 2000. 
The requirement for new capital shifted from revenue growth 
to profit and smaller carriers, turning out of cash in the 
middle of their build-outs, couldn’t meet the criteria. John 
Windhausen Jr., President of the Association for Local 
Telecommunications Services estimates that 100 carriers, or 
33% of the total, have failed since December 2000. Of the 
36 publicly held carriers, at least 6 have filed for bankruptcy 
protection. Merrill Lynch analyst Ken Hoexter predicts that 
only about a dozen of the carriers will remain in two years. 
Ron Binz of the Competition Policy Institute predicts that the 
effect of these ripples will be that ”Consumers will lose the 
choices, innovation and lower prices that competition can 
bring.” 
On top of this generally gloomy picture, the world cell phone 
market appears to be slowing. According to 
ResearchPostal.com, growth in the business market has 
declined from 14% from 1999 to 2000 to a 6% rate for 2001 
and 2002. It is significant to note, however, that the 
softening of demand is, in part, attributed to the delay of 
long-promised data services. According to Charles Golvin, 
an analyst at Forrester Research, “Data services have not 
taken off because Web-enabled phones have been in 
relatively short supply, and the content that is available over 
the wireless Web just is not sufficiently compelling.’’ 
The key point of the dynamics taking place in the 
telecommunications industry today as those dynamics affect 
the opportunities is that the wireless segment remaios an 
outstanding performer. AT&T Wireless, Verizon Wireless, 
Sprint PCS and Cingular all reported strong wireless 
subscriber growth during the first part of 2001 and, 
according to the Yankee Group, the market is not expected to 
be saturated for another 4 to 5 years. David Bishop, a 
Yankee Group analyst, says, “We have had a very good 
couple of years. The means business gets harder.” 
In a market in turmoil, the companies committed to preparing 
for the future can take advantage of the survival cutbacks by 
weaker competitors. In the telecommunication market, the 
announcements by Sprint PCS and Verizon Wireless in 2001 
provided good examples of why current market conditions 
bode well for products offered by some of the wire1es.c data 
system vendors. 
According to a recent article in Forbes Magazine issued on 
April 30, 2001, Sprint CEO William Esrey “wants to gain 
ground in the next phase of the wireless revolution. Sprint 
planned to spend $1.5 billion on its wireless network, 
including $800 million for a nationwide 3G (third 
generation) services for 2002. “Others are pulling back on 
3G, but we are pushing ahead,” Esrey boasts. In the same 
article, Jack Welch was reported to have told 500 GE 
managers in January, 2001: “Now, with the economy 
tightening, with people cutting back, do not let yourself cut 
back for a second on your digitization efforts. This is the 
time to widen the gap.” 
Verizon Wireless also announced plans to spend more than 
$300 million in 2002 in the New York metro region to 
enhance its digital wireless network. According to Verizon, 
this move is a response to the strong demand for its wireless 
services and is part of a $4 billion commitment to improve its 
network across the United States in 2001. Part of Verizon 
Wireless’ network improvements includes upgrade to 3G 
wireless technologies. With customer demand for lower 
prices and more features delivered faster, the demand for 
wireless data systems based on the latest wireless technology 
and manufactured by high quality yet low cost factories in 
places like Asia will remain high as the carriers fight for the 
loyalty of both business and individual customers. 
8. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents how each of the three core wireless 
mobile data communication technologies, GSM, CDMA and 
IS-I36 (TDMA) has evolved from the second generation 
(2G) circuit-switched networks to the packet-switched based 
2.5G and 3G networks to meet the data rates required for 
providing multimedia services. It also describes the potential 
market opportunities for the wireless mobile data. 
3432 
9. REFERENCES 
[ I ]  Holley, K. and Costello, T., “The Evolution of GSM 
Data Towards UMTS”, February, 1998. 
[2] “The TDMA Operator Path to GSMA Successful 
Transition to GSM & Evolution of TDMA”, 
Ericsson, September, 2001. 
[3] “General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)”, White 
Paper, Trillium Digital Systems, Inc., May, 1999 
[4] “Third Generation (3G) Wireless”, White 
Paper, Trillium Digital Systems, Inc., March, 2000. 
[SI “IxEV: The Wireless Internet Future”, 
Qualcomm Incorporated, 2001. 
[6] “The Economics of Wireless Mobile Data”, White 
Paper, Qualcomm Incorporated, March, 2001 
[7] Berezdivin, R., et. al., “Next-Generation Wireless 
Communications Concepts and Technologies”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March, 2002. 
pp. 108-116. 
[8] Bi, Q. et. al., “Wireless Mobile Communications at the 
Start of the 21“ Century,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, January, 2001, pp. 110-1 16. 
[9] “OFDM for Mobile Data Communications”, Flarion 
Technologies, 2001. 
[ IO]  Lu, Willie W., “Fourth-Generation Mobile Initiatives 
and Technologies”, Siemens-Infineon, 2001. 
3433 
