STUDIES OF DC CONDUCTOR CORONA IN A 
SMALL CORONA CAGE 
G. C. Sibilant Non - IEEE Member,  N. M. Ijumba Non  - IEEE Member, A. C. Britten Non  - IEEE Member  
Abstract - The complex nature of corona phenomena, 
combined with the number of factors influencing these 
effects, make experimental studies indispensable for 
evaluating the corona performance of transmission lines. 
Different methods, ranging from tests in laboratory 
cages to  measurements on operational transmission 
lines, may be used for obtaining the necessary data. This 
paper gives a n ,  introduction fo the design of a small 
corona cage as  well a s  presenting test results obtained 
from the cage. These tests involved changing the surface 
conditions of conductors by coating them with silicon, in 
order  to  determine their corona performance under  the 
effects of wind. I t  is concluded that wind in a corona 
cage does not play a big par t  in corona loss for a clean 
conductor. I t  is recommended that further tests be 
carried out with a stronger wind source. 
Index Terms - Corona, Corona Cage, Corona 
Current,  Electric Field, High Voltage Direct Current  
(HVDC), Silicon Coating, Surface Gradient 
1. INTRODUCTlON 
Theoretical considerations are necessary to provide the 
basic understanding of corona phenomena occurring on 
transmission line conductors and of the resulting corona 
effects. Experimental studies are essential, however, for 
determining the corona .performance characteristics of 
practical AC and DC transmission line configurations. 
The aim of this paper is to give an introduction to the 
design of a small corona cage. The paper will discuss the 
effect of wind on DC corona performance. The results on 
which the discussion is based were obtained from tests done 
at the Corona Cage at the University of Durban - Westville. 
The DC corona cage developed at the University of Durban 
Westville will be an important tool in local corona studies. 
11. TEST METHODS 
A. Test Objectives 
Many institutions around the world undertake corona test 
studies. The main corona test methods employed are as 
follows: 
G. C. Sibilant is with Technology Services International a division of 
Eskoin Enterprises, South Africa (email: Cary.Sibilant~,eskom.coza). 
N. M. ljumba is the head of the Engineering Faculty at the University of 
Durban Westville. South Africa (email: Nijumba@pixie.udw.ac.za). 
A. C. Britten is a Corporate Consultant with Technology Services 
International (TSI) a division of Eskom Enterprises, South Africa (email: 
T~any.Brinen~,eskam.co.la) 
Laboratory Corona Cages 
Outdoor Corona Cages 
. Tests Lines 
Operational AC and DC Transmission Lines 
When undertaking corona studies, one of two objectives 
should be accomplished. [I] .  These objectives are: 
1) To gain a better understanding of the physical 
mechanisms involved in corona discharges, as well as the 
resulting corona effects. 
2) To generate experimental data that can. be used to 
measure excitation functions to develop prediction methods 
for the corona performance oftransmission lines [ I ] .  
B. Laboratory Test Cages 
Studies of corona on cylindrical conductors have been 
mostly made in a configuration commonly known as a 
corona “cage”. Most early corona studies were carried out in 
corona cages. This configuration consists mainly of a test 
conductor placed concentrically inside another metallic 
cylinder with a much larger radius. The outer cylinder is 
oflen made of some wire mesh. 
Applying sufficient voltage between the conductor and 
the cage generates high conductor surface electric fields or 
gradients. The main benefit of the cage setup is that the 
conductor surface electric field distribution can be 
determined quickly and accurately. These cages have also 
been used to study the basic physics of corona discharges on 
cylindrical conductors at AC as well as DC voltages. 
For a cage of finite length, the electric field distribution 
in the longitudinal direction is uniform over the central 
section of the conductor and becomes non-uniform towards 
both ends. By adding a guard section of the cage at both 
ends, a central section of the cage may be selected to obtain 
a fairly uniform electric field distribution along the length of 
the ,conductor. The central section is used for corona 
measurements by connecting it to ground through 
appropriate measuring impedance. The two guard end. 
sections are connected directly to ground. 
An important criterion for the design of any cage is to 
have an adequate margin between the breakdown and 
corona onset voltages. For the largest conductor to be tested 
the cage diameter should be small enough to obtain corona 
at a sufficiently low voltage. At the same time the air gap 
clearance between the cage and the conductor should be 
large enough so that the breakdown voltage is higher than 
0-7803-7459-~002/517.00 ‘ 2002 IEEE - 2202 - 
the onset voltage. A margin of at least 50% between these 
voltages permits studies to be carried out at different 
conductor surface gradients above corona onset. Laboratory 
cage tests are mostly used to determine the specific corona 
performance (corona losses, audible noise and radio noise) 
of a particular conductor, whereas test lines and operating 
lines are used for the determination of corona losses of a 
particular transmission line configuration. 
111. CORONA CAGE DESIGN 
Previous studies done by the author have shown that a 
corona cage with a diameter of 1.5 m can be used to model 
DC corona effects on single conductors from 0. I cm up to 
about 4.5 cm in diameter [2]. 
The cage length is 2 m, which is made up of a I m inner 
ring and two 0.5 m outer “guard” rings. A cage with these 
dimensions has been constructed. All calculations were 
done assuming sea-level conditions and a supply voltage of 
200 kV DC. 
A. Materials used in the Construction of the Cage 
, The corona cage support structure was constructed out of 
50 by 50 mm, steel tubing. This support structure is 5 m 
long, 3 m wide and 2 m high. It has been designed to 
accommodate single conductors only. 
The cage itself was made up of expanded wire mesh, 
which was attached to steel hoops made out o f  50 mm by 2 
mm, flat bars. The wire mesh ensured that the cage would 
be relatively lightweight. 
Special insulators were designed for the cage. These were 
used to attach the center ring to the two outer “guard” rings. 
These insulators were made from Vesconite. The inner ring 
is connected to the two outer rings, mechanically, but not 
electrically. 
A steel plate was used to  act as the endpoints.where the 
conductor insulators would be connected to the support 
structure. Various nuts and bolts were also used to attach the 
outer rings to the support structure. 
B. The Completed Corona Cage 
Once the cage was complete, initial electrical testing was 
then carried out to ensure that the cage would meet the 
minimum requirements, which are mentioned on page one 
of this paper. These tests proved successful and the cage 
was then commissioned. A photograph of the completed 
cage is shown in fig. I. 
IV. CORONA CURRENT MEASUREMENTS 
Corona loss which, is a direct result of corona current, is 
one of the contributors to losses incurred by a conductor on 
a transmission line. It becomes clear that if these losses 
could somehow be determined before the line was 
constructed and ,  thereby minimized it would lead to 
significant savings during line operation. 
Therefore, it makes sense to have a tool to test for corona 
effects’and losses on conductors before these lines are 
constructed. A corona cage is an excellent tool for 
determining the corona performance of conductors’ as it is 
relatively easy to determine the corona losses incurred in a 
cage. For DC corona losses in a cage the power loss is equal 
to  the voltage times the current measured on the inner ring. 
Fig. 1. Completed Corona Cage 
A. Test Procedures 
The conductor that was to be tested was set-up and 
tensioned within the corona cage. The voltage from the 
output of the DC supply was then increased. Measurements 
were then taken with an ammeter that connected the inner 
ring to ground. A fan, which was used to measure the 
influence of wind, was then switched on from a side 
position and the current recorded, finally the fan was moved 
to a frontal position and once again the current was 
measured. This was repeated for the other conductors. 
Finally the conductors were coated and the tests repeated. 
The conductors that were tested had the following 
diameters, 1.00-cm, 1.36-cm and 1.76-cm. They were tested 
under the following conditions: 
I .  Laboratory air-conditioning off 
2. Clean surface condition 
Point one above is important as some fluctuations, in 
measurements were noticed when the laboratory air- 
conditioning was on and when it was off 
B. Effect of Wind on Corona Current  
Figure 2 shows the effects of wind on a 1.00 cm 
conductor strung up in the cage. As can be seen the results 
do not show much of a difference when the fan is blowing 
from the side or the front to when it is off. Figures 3 and 4 
correspond to the 1.36 cm conductor and I .76 cm conductor 
respectively. These graphs also indicate that the effect of 
wind in the cage is minimal for the type of conductor tested 
and wind speeds used. 
- 2203 - 
50 
. . . .  
. . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. . . .  
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
1.00 cm No Coating No Fan 
-*- 1.00 cm Nocoating Side Fan . ~ . ~ i ~ , d  V J ~ , ,  .... 1.00 cm NO Coating Front Fan 
Fig. 2. Results of 1.00 cm uncoated conductor i~ Jb . . . . . .  . .  
. .  . : ,  . . .  
20. . . . . . .  -. . - ...... . ...... 
. . .  
I 
.~ 10 
. . ~ .  . 
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
I .36 cm No Coaling No Fan 
1.36 cm No Coaling Side Fan 
1.36 c m  NO Coaling Front Fan 
~ . ~ i ~ l d  kVIcln --- 
Fig. 3. Results of 1.36 cm uncoated conductor 
............. . . .  .~ .. 
14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
1.76 cm No Coating No Fan 
I 76 em No Coating Side Fan 
E-Field k V h  
-+- 
... 1.76 em No CoatingFmnl Fan 
Fig. 4. Results of 1.76 cm uncoated conductor 
These results confirm the results obtained by Khalifa in 
his tests done. He concluded that wind had no real effect on 
increasing corona loss io a laboratory situation [ 3 ] .  The 
conductors were then coated with silicon and the tests 
repeated. 
_C. I .76 cm Fully Coated No Fan 
-*- 1.76cmFullyCoatedSideFan 
I .16 cm Fully Coated Front Fan 
E . F ~ ~ [ ~ _ ~ V J ~ , , ,  
...... 
Fig. 7. Results of 1.76 cm coated conductor 
Figures 5 ,  6 and 7 show the effects of wind on a silicon- 
coated conductor. For the 1.00 cm conductor, it seems as 
though wind does not play a significant role in increasing 
corona current measured. For the 1.36 cm .diameter 
conductor as well as for the 1 .I6 cm diameter conductor it 
. . . .  . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
. ... . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . .  
. . ,  . . 
. . . . .  
15 20 25 30 35 40 
--- I .a0 cm Fully Coated Side Fan 
. . *  l.OOcm FullyCaared~mnrFan 
I .W Cm Fully Coat4  NO Fan E-Field kV/cm 
Fig. 5. Results of 1.00 cm coated conductor 
. . .  .... 
. . . . .  .. ... 
14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
--C- 1-36 cm Fully Coated No Fan ~ . ~ i ~ l , j  k"lcm 
-*- 1.36cmFully CoatedSideFan 
1.36 cm Fully Coated Front Fan 
Fig. 6. Results of 1.36 cm coated conductor 
. . . . . . .  
- 2204 - 
does seem as though wind has the effect of increasing the 
corona current measured in the cage. Based on these results 
it is fair to say that the effect of wind in a corona cage is 
more pronounced’ for larger diameter silicon coated 
conductors. 
It also shows that the effect of wind blowing parallel to 
the line (fan in front position) has more of an effect in 
increasing the corona current than wind blowing 
perpendicularly to the line (fan in side position). ‘Although 
the effect is minimal. 
C. Effect of Silicon Coating on Corona Current 
Since the parallel component of wind seems to have the 
largest influence on corona current. I will now present 
graphs. which will show the effect of the silicon coating on 
the conductor for this specific component of the w.ind. 
As can be seen in figures 8, 9 and IO, the silicon coating 
actually increases the amount of corona current measured 
when the fan is blowing parallel to the conductor. 
5 
ro 
p. 
E 
4 4  
0 
.- 
: 3  - 
2 1  
J 
E 
U 2  
- 
75 20 25 30 35 40 45 
A I .36 cm Front Fan No Coating t.field k”pm 
-*- 
* 
1.36 cm Front Fun HalfCaated 
1.36 cm Front Fan Fully Coated 
Fig. 8. Effect of coating on 1.00 cm conductor.- front 
fan 
-. . . , . 
16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
A 1.76 cm Front Fan no coating 
-*- 1.76 cm Front Fan Half coated . .  
1.76 cm Front Fan fully coated 
~ - ~ i ~ l d  k”/cm 
Fig. 10. Effect of coating on 1.76 cm conductor - front 
fan 
The effect of the insulative coating increases the corona 
current. This is surprising. Since we know that the corona 
current measured is a function of electric field, and the 
solution to .the problem of co-axial cylinders with two 
dielectrics [4] show that if the dielectric strength of the 
coating is higher than that of air, that we will have a reduced 
electric field gradient. This should imply a lower current. 
The cause of the coating increasing the current is not 
understood clearly as yet. One hypothesis is that 
microscopic air bubbles exist within the coating which, 
could lead to discharges taking place within the coating, 
when the electric field strength across the,coating is high 
enough. 
When taking these results into consideration it, has to be 
noted that the electric field surface gradient.imppsed upon 
the conductors within the cage are above the normal 
operating conditions of transmission line conductors and can 
be compared to severe corona conditions on a transmission 
line. 
. ,  
V. CONCLUSIONS 
. 5  
I .  Laboratory cages are tools for determining the AC and 
DC corona performance of particular conductors. 
A large enough margin exists between corona onset 
voltage and breakdown voltage for the corona cage 
designed and constructed at the University of Durban- 
Westville to be used for testing for corona phenomenon 
on conductors. 
The effect of wind on corona current on clean stranded 
conductors in the cage is minimal. 
The effect of wind is increased for larger conductors 
that are coated compared to smaller diameter 
conductors that are also coated. 
b 
4 4  
2 
$ 3  
B 
62 
v1 
2. 
t 
m 
E \ 
3. 
4. 15 20 25 . 30 35 40 45 50 - 1.00 cm Front Fan No Coring --- 1.00 c m  Front Fan HvllCoated 
I .U0 cm Fiont Fun Fully Coated 
~ . t j ~ [ d  k”fc,,, 
Fig. 9. Effect of coating on 1.36 cm conductor - front 
fan 
- 2205 - 
5 .  The effect of the silicon coating is such that it increases 
the corona currents measured in the presence and in the 
absence of wind. 
VI. APPENDIX 
Solution of Field Between Coaxial Cylinders with Two 
Dielectrics by Direct Integration of Laplace's Equation. 
Figure I 1  below is a representation of coaxial cylinders with 
two dielectrics. 
Fig. 11. Coaxial cylinders with two dielectrics 
a = conductor radius 
b = a + thickness of coating 
c = radius of cage 
E ,  = permitivity of silicon 
E ~ =  permitivity of air 
The inner potential at a, is Vo and the outer potential at b is 
0 v. 
Laplaces equation in. cylindrical coordinates is as follows: 
As stated in chapter four, due to the symmetry of the coaxial 
configuration the problem reduces to a one-dimensional 
problem. Equation 6.1 therefore becomes: 
Now multiplying by r on both sides and integrating we get: 
Integrating again we have: 
Q, = C , I n r + C ,  (4) 
This solution is valid in the first dielectric region (E,).  where 
a < r < b. The same equations can be used for the second 
dielectric region (E>). This resultant equation is as follows: 
Q2 = C , I n r + C ,  ( 5 )  
This solution is valid region 2 where b < r < c. 
Now applying the boundary conditions: 
A: a, =vo a t r = a  
B: Q2 = o  atr 'c  
These are two equations required to solve equations 4 and 5 
simultaneously. Since we have four unknowns (C,, ... C,) in 
these two equations we will need another two equations to  
compliment A and B. 
Continuity conditions apply at the boundary between the 
two dielectric media. This says that the potential and normal 
component of electric flux density must be continuous 
across the charge-free boundary. Therefore we have the 
following: 
C: (Dl =@, a t r = b  
D therefore implies that &,Cl = E2C2 at r = b 
Now substituting A into 4 we get: 
Vo = C,lna +C2 
This implies that: 
- C ~ p X L ! m  ( 0  
Now substituting B into 5 we get: 
0 = CJnr + C4 
this implies that: 
C, = - CJnr (ii) 
Now substituting C into 4 and 5 we get: 
C,lnb + C2 = C,lnb + C4 
This gives us: 
C1 = (Cllnb + C1 - C,Ylnb (iii) 
Substituting D into D.4 and D.5 we get: 
ElCl = E &  
c1=ES& (iv) 
C3 = (C,lnb + C2 - CJlnb 
3 C,  = (C;lnb + C4 - C2)/inb 
Manipulating (iii) and equating to (iv): 
so: 
(C31nb + C, - C2)/lnb = E~C;IE, 
- 2206 - 
MakingCi the subject ofthe formula: 
Substituting (i) and (ii) into the above equation: 
- C, I n c  - (v, - C ,  111 0) c, = 
- 1) 
After some algebraic manipulation we get: 
Once we have obtained C3 the other constants C l ,  C2 and 
C4 are quite easy to get, they are as follows. 
c, = 
Inb 2 - 1  + I n c - h a  2 (I I I 
From these constants, equations 4 and 5 can be easily solved 
using the dimensions of the cage, conductor and coating as 
well as the source voltage. 
VII. REFERENCES 
Book: 
[ I ]  Maruvada PS. Corona Performance of High - Vokage 
Transmission Lines. P Sarma Research Studies Press 
LTD, 2000, pg. 238. 
Engineering Conference, (SAUPEC). Cape Town 
2001. 
[3] Khalifa MM, Morris RM. A Laboratory Study of the 
Effects of Wind on DC Corona. IEEE Transactions on 
Power Apparatus and Systems, VOL. PAS-SO, No. 3 .  
March 1967, pg 290 ~ 298. 
VI11. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[5] “ROBIN 30000 Ohms/Volt Multi - tester, model OM 
SOOT, instruction manual. 
[6] “Bipolar HVDC transmission system study between f 
600 kV and f 1200 kV - Corona Studies, Phase 2” 
Electrical Power Research Institute (EPRI) 1982. 
IX. BIOGRAPHIES 
G C  Sibilant holds a BSc degree in 
Mathematics and Appl. Mathematics, as 
well as a BSc degree in Electrical 
Engineering from the University of Cape 
Town. He is presently working for Eskom 
- TSI. while studvine towards his MSc in 
_ I  
Electrical Engineering at the University of 
Durban Westville. 
AC Britten is Eskom’s Corporate 
Consultant in High Voltage Engineering. 
He works as a Technical Specialist in the 
TSI Division of Eskom Enterprises. He 
also undertakes’ and directs studies and 
research into HVDC field effects, AC 
corona, insulation and insulation 
co-ordination, power system electro - . 
magnetic compatibility and lightning. He 
also has a close working collaboration with EPRI and 
CIGRE. 
NM l jumba has a PhD in Electrical 
Engineering from the University of 
Strathclyde, in UK. For the past 25 years 
he has been involved in teaching, research 
and consultancy, in power systems and 
high voltage engineering. He has 
a . industrial experience in design and 
manufacture of electrical equipment, and 
industrial systems designs. He is currently involved, in 
research Droerams of the HVDC Center at UDW. He is a 
[4] Ram0 S, Whinnery JR, Van Duzer T. ’‘ Fields and 
Waves in Communications Electronics”. John Wiley 
and Sons, INC, 1994 pp. 40 -42. 
Papers from Conference Proceedings (Published): 
[2] Sibilant GC, ljumba NM, Britten AC, Jimoh AA. 
“Studies of DC Conductor Corona in a Small Corona 
Cage”. I I”’ South African Universities Power 
Registered Professional Engineer in South Africa. UK, 
Kenya and Tanzania. 
- 2207 - 
