PrOceedingS of the Second Joint EMBWMES Conference 
Houston, TX, USA *October 23-26.2002 
IN VITRO DYNAMIC STRAIN ANALYSIS ON PORCINE MITRAL VALVE 
Z.M. He1, L. Baijens2, S. Wanant', P. Shah', S. He1, B. Sugimoto', M. S. Sacks3, A. P. Yoganathan' 
'Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology & Emory University,GA, USA 
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, Netherlands 
'Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
Abslrocl-Dual camera stereo photogrammetry was used to 
quantify the deformation of the central region of the anterior 
leaflet of the mitral valve operating in a flow loop under the 
physiological and pathological condition. Stretches and strains 
were measured and analyzed. The principal stretches demon- 
strated a rapid rise early in leaflet closure, followed by a pla- 
teau, suggesting that the collagen fibers "locked" in place. 
There is a big difference between the major principal stretch 
and minor principal stretch. Similar to in-vitro tissue mechan- 
ics studies, the transmitral pressure-areal strain relationship 
during loading and unloading clearly demonstrated hysteresis. 
Further, this relationship demonstrated a dramatic stiffening 
attributed to collagen fiber locking. When the data of 3 papil- 
lary muscle positions were compared, the leaflet in the slack 
papillary position showed the highest areal strain rate. The 
valve exhibited a strongly anisotropic behavior. Papillary mus- 
cle position had a small effect on strain measured in the region. 
Kqworh-Porcine mitral valve, Marker technique, Strain 
measurement, Collagen orientation distribution 
INTRODUCTION 
The mitral valve (MV) is a complex unit composed of 
one annulus, two major leaflets, chordae tendinae, two pap- 
illary muscles (PMs) and the underlying left ventricular 
myocardium. MV leaflets are the most important compo- 
nents in the MV complex. They undergo a considerable 
stretching resulting in large stresses as the valve closes. 
These stresses may cause structural failure of biological 
prosthetic valves. Hence, the analysis of dynamic stress- 
strain behavior of the MV leaflet is clearly necessary for a 
complete understanding of MV leaflet function, leaflet fail- 
ure mechanisms and improving prosthetic MV design. 
Most previous studies are on the uniaxial or biaxial 
tests measuring the mechanical properties of leaflet material. 
However all these tests did not really reflect the physiologi- 
cal loading environment in human heart. Conrad et al. [I] 
measured the strains on the MV anterior leaflet in an in vitro 
physiological flow flop. He found that the strains are time 
and regionally dependent. But it did not cover the period of 
MV opening. Further, no study bas until now been reported 
on effect of papillary muscle (PM) positions on the MV 
leaflet strains. Therefore, it is the objective of this study to 
understand the strains on MV leaflet at physiological and 
pathological conditions. 
METHODS 
Fresh (nonchemically treated) porcine MV obtained 
from a local abattoir was used. It was then sewn onto a pla- 
nar D-shaped annulus and mounted in the Georgia Tech left 
Resistance 
LV Simulator 
Data Acquisition System 
Fig. 1 Flow loop 
heart simulator (Fig. I) .  Sixteen small graphite markers 
(diameter -250pm) were affixed to the central region of the 
anterior leaflet in a 4 x 4 array. The pulsatile flow loop were 
controlled at heart rate of 70 beatsimin, peak left ventricular 
pressure 120-140mmHg, cardiac outputs 2.5, 5.0 and 6.5 
Limin. P M s  were adjusted to the taut, normal and slack 
positions, respectively. A data acquisition system recorded 
the flow and pressures. Two high speed cameras [Kodak 
Ektapto 1000 imager, Eastman Kodak Company, San 
Diego, CA] were positioned in front of the valve, approxi- 
mately 30' apart, recording the valve motion at a rate of 250 
frames per second over the valve closing and opening. 
Camera resolution was 239 by 192 pixels for the image. 
Dual camera stereo photogrammetry technique was 
used to quantify motion of a porcine MV leaflet. Direct lin- 
ear transform methods [Z] were used for the 3-D spatial 
reconstruction of the anterior leaflet's central region from 
the recorded coplanar 2-D images. A 16 nodal biquadratic 
finite element was used to perform the surface fit. Tissue 
deformations were measured within central region of the 
anterior leaflet. The stretches and strains were calculated 
under 3 cardiac outputs and 3 PM positions. First frame of 
valve closing was taken as the reference state in calculation 
of strain. Totally 11 mitral valves were tested. 
RESULTS 
Top graph of Fig. 2 is the graph of the major and minor 
principal stretches of the central region of MV anterior leaf- 
let at cardiac output of 5.0 Limin and normal PM position. 
The principal stretches demonstrated a rapid rise early in 
This sNdy is supported by National Insthtes ofHealth 
0-7803-7612-9/02/$17.00 0 2002 IEEE 1244 
i ! l l l  1.7 1.6 ~ I 
I ,  I i i  i 
$ 1 . 4 ~  ‘ I I I\ 1 
/ I  I ! ! I  \ I  p 1.2 - 
E l.? , /  I , , 8 1  ! I !  l .0 ~L/ 
U 1.5 
P 
. . .  / ! I /  0.9 1 
_.I. 
. - . _ . - I  
.- 
-40, , . . , , , 
1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 
Areal stmi0 
Fig. 2 Characteristics ofanterior leaflet over valve closing and opening 
leaflet closure, followed by a plateau, suggesting that the 
collagen fibers “locked” in place. So-called “lock” meant 
collagen fibers had been uncrimped and began to stretch in 
its elasticity. At last the principal stretches decreased to the 
original state when the valve opened completely. There was 
a big difference between the major and minor principal 
stretch plateau values. Ratios of major principal stretch to 
minor principal stretch ranged from 1.13 to 1.61 for the 
valves. A small-angle light scattering (SALS) test [3] on a 
MV anterior leaflet demonstrated that the collagen fibers 
traveled mainly along the circumferential direction in the 
central region of the anterior leaflet. 
Bottom graph of Fig. 2 is the transmitral pressure-areal 
strain relationship during leaflet loading and unloading. It 
can he considered to he stress-strain behavior of leaflet to 
some extent. MV leaflet demonstrated large elasticity in 
pre-transition and high sti&ess in post-transition. Similar to 
in-vitro tissue mechanics studies, these characteristics 
clearly demonstrated hysteresis. The slope of two traces in 
valve closing and opening, once again, demonstrated a dra- 
matic stiffening attributed to collagen fiber locking. 
Fig. 3 is the normalized data of strain rate. When the 
data of 3 PM positions were compared, the leaflet in the 
slack PM position showed the highest areal strain rate. The 
slack valve reached the plateau phase of areal strain slightly 
faster than the valve in the other two PM positions. But 
there is no significant effect of PM position on peak areal 
strain during valve closure. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The results of this study reveal that the collagen fiber 
architecture of MV anterior leaflet plays an important role 
in the response to dynamic loading. The leaflet showed 
large elasticity at low loading, which allows leaflet to move 
1 
PM porlllon emcl on areal strain rate at 5.OUmin 
I t 4  * a 1.2 t 
Fig. 3 Papillary muscle position effect on areal strain rate 
in a self-adaptive way and fully cover the mitral valve ori- 
fice and coapt adequately. While the rigidity caused by col- 
lagen fiber locking allowed the leaflet to maintain the fixed 
framed shape and strength to withstand the high transvalvu- 
lar pressure. This characteristic makes mitral valve effec- 
tively function in the heart. 
The valve showed a strongly anisotropic properly by 
major and minor principal stretches. The major principal 
stretch was mainly in the radial direction while the minor 
principal stretch in circumferential. The collagen fibers 
travel mainly along circumferential direction in the central 
region. They extended within a limited range in circuder- 
entia1 direction by uncrimping fibers. While in radial direc- 
tion, there are less fiber structure and other intra-fiber mate- 
rial crosslink with fiber bundle, thus they are highly elastic- 
ity. Also, the larger radial strains could be explained by 
large rotations of the highly aligned, circumferential- 
oriented collagen fibers iwthe fibrosa with a net structure. 
The ratio of two principal stretches is considered as an indi- 
cator to the degree of anisotropy. This ratio could he as high 
as 1.6. This big difference in principal stretches between 
radial and circumferential directions reveals the significance 
of the underlying microstructure of the leaflet. 
The hysteresis of leaflet material is one aspect of the 
connective tissue characteristics. Uniaxial and biaxial tests 
on the aortic cusp also demonstrated the similar property in 
other papers. Our finding is consistent with others, and re- 
markable in the high strain rate. It may he caused by loading 
and unloading process. 
So far as PM positions were concerned, the leaflet in 
slack PM position showed the highest areal strain rate. The 
chordae tendinae were tight when the PMs were set in taut 
position. Accordingly the valve closed slowly, owing to 
tethering of tight chordae tendinae. PM displacement may 
not affect the strain in central leaflet, but may predomi- 
nantly determine the strain around the chordal insertion. 
REFERENCES 
[I] C.P. Conrad, H. Sugimoto, S. He, Z. He, M.S. Sacks, A.P. Yaganathan. 
Measurement of dynamic strain in the mitral valve. Proceedings of ASME 
Bioengineering Conference, 2001,Bed-vo1.50 :pp.145-146 
[2] D.B. Smith, M.S. Sacks, D.A. Vow, M. Thorntan. Surface geometric 
analysis of anatomic s m c h ~ c s  using biquintic finite element interpolation. 
Annals of Biomedical Engineering. 2M0, vo1.28:pp.598-611 
[3] M.S. Sacks, D.S. Smith and E.D. Hiester. A SALS device far planar 
connective tissue microstmchral analysis. Annals of Biomedical Engineer- 
ing, 1997,~01.25:pp.678-689 
1245 
