ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATIONS 
FOR NAVAL APPLICATIONS 
Lt Cdr Amit Bhargava 
Naval EMC Centre, Mumbai 
Abstract: Digital communication has 
proliferated in a big way in the recent years. The 
advantages of digital communication are improved 
efficiency, better transmission accuracy, better 
noise immunity, requirement of lesser bandwidth, 
transmissionheception equipment. Digital 
communication in a shipboard application is used 
for transmission of voice, data and picture between 
ships in an operational environment where 
accuracy, secrecy and immunity to 
noisehnterference is essential. The advent of latest 
equipment capable of advanced signal processing 
techniques will result in prolific use of digital 
communication in shipboard applications. 
secrecy, and standardisation of 
The paper aims at bringing out various 
aspects of digital communication vis-a-vis the 
dense electromagnetic environment that exists on 
a Naval plafform and their compatibility. The use 
and applicability of source coding, digital 
modulatiy techniques, error control coding and 
data security in mitigating the electromagnetic 
interference in a ship borne environmen? are 
discussed. The various problems of co- 
ChanneVadjacent channel interference and the 
effect of random/burst noise on a digital 
communication system are also brought out. 
Achieving immunity of digital communication to 
interference by use of various spread spectrum 
techniques is also discussed. 
Introduction 
Most tactical communication in Naval 
applications are provided by HF, V/UHF and 
Satellite links. HF links are used for long haul 
communication between ship-to-ship or ship-to- 
shore to . provide Beyond-Line-of-Sight (BLOS) 
ranges. WUHF links are used for line of sight 
communication with limited ranges. The service 
requirement of video transmission is only 
supported by V/UHF and Satellite links owing to 
higher data rates. The factors affecting a digital 
communication system for HF and V/UHF links are 
brought out in the paper due to their prolific use in 
the shipboard communications. 
The Effects and Causes of EM1 on 
a Digital Link 
The effect of EM1 on a digital 
communication channel is to degrade the link 
quality. The bit error rate becomes more than 
permissible levels and appears as a degraded 
performance of the service being catered i.e. voice, 
data, facsimile or video transmission. [or example 
typical requirements of BER can be 10- for speech 
and for data transfer. It assumes a greater 
significance in the military shipboard environment 
where the degraded performance may lead to 
disruption of Communication, Command and 
Control network jeopardizing mission success. The 
various reasons for performance degradation of a 
digital communication link due to EM1 in a ship 
borne environment are: - 
(a) High ambient noise level. A 
very high level of ambient noise level 
exists due to presence of various types of 
equipment onboard. Noise originates from 
various electrical machinery, fluorescent 
lighting, circuit breakers, relays etc. which 
have a high level in HF and VHF range. 
(b) EM1 from Co-located emitters. 
The ship has a large no. of 
functional sources radiating from MF to X 
band. The problem is further aggravated 
due to the requirement of simultaneous 
use of all systems in an operational 
scenario. The effect of various radars on 
the communication is limited by optimizing 
the placement of the antennas on the ship 
and also due to the fact that they are 
separated widely in frequency of operation. 
However, due to the "feed through" effect 
the high power radiations from the radar 
may enter the communication receiver to 
reduce the sensitivity and saturate the 
front end pre-amplifier and mixer stages. 
Interference is more pronounced from the 
radiations in the same band from the other 
co-located equipment and is of primary 
concern to the EMC engineers since it 
gives rise to co-channel and adjacent 
channel interference problems. 
130 Proceedings of INCEMIC 2001 - 2002 
(c) Poorly designed transmitters 
Transmitter emission is one of the 
most important EM1 source, considering 
the number of transmitters in a ship. The 
radiated frequency spectrum of a 
transmitter should be bandwidth and 
power limited. It has been found that a 
large no. of transmitters onboard have 
significant levels of harmonics and 
spurious in their emission. Over- 
modulation, poor tuning and overdriving of 
the amplifier stages are the main reasons 
for this. These have been found to 
interfere severely with the co-located 
receivers. The transmitter harmonic and 
non-harmonic emission should also be 
minimum and should be atleast -80 dBc as 
per the MIL STD specifications. 
(d) Poorly designed receivers. 
The receiver performance is 
degraded due to poor front-end selectivity. 
The band pass firters at-@ frequency 
response of the RF front end amplifier is 
not efficient and is unable to sufficiently 
reject the out of band signals. The 
receiver response to intermodulation 
products, cross modulation and spurious 
signals should be within the limits given in 
MIL STD specifications, more so for the 
modern highly susceptible receivers. 
(e) Hull generated noise. The ship 
borne environment also has a high level of 
broadband and intermodulation noise 
generated due to the presence of non- 
linear junctions on the top deck. This noise 
further raises the high level of ambient 
noise in the intended frequency range of 
operation, which masks the reception of 
low-level signals. 
(f) Leakage. High leakage 
occurs loose coaxial cable joints or wave 
guide joints especi?lly in case of high 
power transmitters. 
Achieving EMC 
EMC of a digital communication is'vital for 
completion of mission. It can be ensured by 
achieving EMC in design, installation and 
operation of an equipment. The various features of 
a digital communication link, which provide a 
certain degree of immunity from EM1 and used 
extensively in a ship borne environment are 
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs: 
Proceedings of INCEMIC 2001 - 2002 
Modulation 
Modulation scheme plays a very vital role 
in the performance of digital communication 
circuits. For ship borne applications M-ary PSK or 
FSK modulation schemes are used in which the 
carrier amplitude is constant and is relatively 
immune to noise. The error rate as a function of 
the Bit energy to noise power density ratio is given 
in Fig. 1. It can be seen that an error rate of 1 0-5 is 
obtained for EdN, = 9.6 dB for PSK and at WNo 
= 12.6 dB for FSK. Thus, PSK modulation is 
preferred since it performs 3 dB better than FSK. In 
the bandwidth limited radio communication, the 
spectrum efficiency is significantly increased by 
introducing higher order PSK modulation methods. 
Fig. 1 - Error rate as a function 
Ht energy to Noise Power 
Density Ratio 
Digital communication system provides 
flexible trade-off between data rate, power and 
bandwidth availability to achieve a specified link 
quality, which is measured by the bit error rate 
(BER). The bit error rate depends on the received 
signal power to noise ratio and the 
modulation/demodulation method used. 
Spectrum Management 
When a particular communication system 
is to operate in a dense electromagnetic 
environment having radars and other 
communication. systems, frequency assignment 
becomes very important. The electromagnetic 
Compatibility analysis must consider the frequency 
separation required between two pairs of 
equipment and optimum channel assignment for 
each equipment for a given set of frequency 
separation. The signal to interference ratio (SA) is 
dependent on the antenna coupled interaction 
between systems and the selectivity characteristics 
131 . 
i 
of the receivers. This S/I is compared with a . 
predetermined interference threshold level (S/l)th 
which the receiver can tolerate whilst frequency 
assignment. Frequency management is essential 
to mitigate problems occurring due to co-channel 
and adjacent channel interference. 
Coding 
Coding methods provide coding gaiv which 
indicates the reduction in required S/N to achieve a 
specified BER compared with an uncoded one with 
the same modulation method. The forward error ' 
correction (FEC) codes are preferred to ARQ 
method of error correction since they provide a 
higher transmission rate. Redundancy coding can 
be applied to guard against signal elements lost to 
noise/interference. Hamming codes are effective 
against gaussian noise, Fire codes are used ' 
against impulse noise. Convolutional Codes are 
used in ship borne radio communications in 
presence of interference which is time varying and 
impulsive. In such cases, low code rate(<lM) 
convolutional .code with a constraint length 7, is 
used since it can tolerate a large symbol error rate 
and still deliver a low bit-error rate at the decoder 
output. 
Bit interleaving is used in channels where 
the errors occur randomly due to noisehnterference 
bursts. The interleaving available in the PSK 
modes forces bit errors generated by noise bursts 
to be dispersed within the received data stream. 
Such dispersed errors are easier for the 
convolutional coding to detect and correct. This 
performance .enhancement increases as the 
interleaving time increases. However, a longer 
interleaving time also means a longer -throughput 
delay - even though the data rate does not change. 
Spread Spectrum Techniques 
Spread spectrum techniques are used for 
interference rejection, anti jamming capability and 
information secrecy purposes. Spread Spectrum is 
a means of- transmission in which the signal 
occupies a bandwidth in excess of the minimum 
necessary to send the information, the band 
spread is accorpplished by means of a code which 
is independent of data, and a synchronized 
reception with the code at the receiver is used for 
de-spreading and subsequent- data recovery. The 
interference rejection capability .of a spread 
spectrum system is brought out as follows: 
Let 
Pt =BW Ni 
Where 
PI - Total pow I of interfering 
source 
BW = Effectl! bandwidth of 
interfering signal 
N, = Spectrum de 13ity of interfering 
signal (watts/Hz) 
If the BW of the interfering source is I 
bandwidth of information signal, then 
S/N = Ed(N,+ Ni) 
If, NI is made lesser and lesser by 
increasing the bandwidth of the spread spectrum 
signal then the ratio of bit energy to interference is 
high, EMC is achieved in the presence of EMI. 
The reduction in the interference level is related to 
the processing gain, which is a parameter of the 
spread given to the information signal in 
timeArequency domain. 
For shipboard radio communication 
applications modulation based Direct Sequence, 
Frequency Hopping and Time Hopping spread 
spectrum techniques are used. The available 
frequency bandhime is divided into various slots 
and hopping is done in accordance with a pseudo 
random (PN) sequence. Coherent auto correlation 
receivers are used for reception. The performance 
of the spread spectrum system is measured in 
terms of interference margin. It indicates that how 
well the system will operate in presence of 
interference. Typical spread spectrum system 
operates with an interference margin of greater 
thdn 30 dB. 
Conclusion 
Thus it can be seen that EMC of a digital 
communication link depends on the proper design 
of equipment and choice of link parameters. It is 
essential that the equipment that are procured for 
communication services should comply with MIL 
STD specifications. These standards guarantee 
incorporation of certain built in measure at the 
design/production stage to ensure EMC during 
operations. It is also mandatory that standard EMC 
techniques of Grounding, Bonding, Shielding and 
Filtering to be strictly. adhered to whilst installation 
and periodic maintenance of the equipment. 
In addition, optimization of communicatidn 
link, to be ensured using adaptive processing 
techniques. Applications of advanced digital signal 
. 
, 
132 Proceedings of INCEMIC 2001 - 2002 
processing like providing optimum performance of 
propagation medium, sensing of BER and [3] Edward C. Jordan, Reference Data for 
controlling transmission power via a radio link to - Engineers: Radio, Electronics, Computer, and 
optimize the trade-off between desired Communications, 7th Edition, Howard W. Sams & 
performance and interference, control of antenna 
array elements in amplitude and phase to reduce 
interference may be explored. 
References IEEE Communications Magazine - 
Company. 
[4] Bernard Sklar, A Structured overview of Digital 
Communication - a Tutorial Review - Part I & 11, 
[l]  Reinaldo Perez, Handbook of Electromagnetic 
Compatibility, Academic Press, 1995 - 
[2] Naval Shipboard Communication System, 
Prentice Hall PTR, 1995 
[5] J Das, Signal Processing for Electromagnetic 
Interference and Compatibility - A review and a 
case for ss Technique. 
Proceedings of INCEMIC 2001 - 2002 133 
