ART 02 
Two-Handed Direct Interaction with ARToolKit 
Stephan Veigl, Andreas Kaltenbach, Florian Ledennann, Gerhard Reitniayr, Dieter Schmalstieg 
Vienna University o j  Technology, Airstria 
Je95263421e9526343}~titclent. titivien.ac.nt, ~ledelmctnn~iei tn~ay~~.~chmul,~t ie~}~i ins .  tuwien.ctc.ctt 
Abstract 
A mobile aiigrnented reality systeni for 3 0  iriteraclion 
reqnires an emjl to iise, interaclive inpiit device. In unr 
work on the Shtdierstube project, we had long-lerin 
experience wirh two-hmided direct inaiiipiilatioii 
inlerjiuces based on trackedprops. However, for a siobile 
setrip, props fire no longer appropriate os they 
peiniunentb‘ occzipj~ the riser’s hrinds crnd preveiil the 
user from perfonriing eveiydq tmkr siich cm opening 
doors. Instead, we resorted to the coninion tool which is 
very intiritive to iise and can be applied for  nearly fill 
interactions: oiir hands. A big advantage of hand based 
interaction is rhe intiiitive use of gestiires siich m 
pointing, grabbing or stretching. 
1. Iutroductiou aud Related Work 
There is a certain tradition iu virhml reality systems of 
using glove based input for direct iuanipulatiou in 3D. 
The most popular implementation is based on light- 
weight pinch gloves, that provide a 3D cursor moved 
relative to the hand, and allows higgeriog actions by 
phch gestures. The stream of input eveot can easily be 
inteiyreted for direct object tuwipidatiou, but the issue of 
accessiug system control functions remaius. Our previous 
user interface designs always incorporated an augmented 
panel offering system and application control fuuctions, 
that could be accessed with a 3D or 2D manipulator (e. g., 
stylus). Inspired by the movie “Final Fantasy”, we chose 
to impletneu~t a wist-moiu~ted augmented reality patiel 
uiade from a simple 2D touch pad. 
There are inmy different works related to two-handed 
chect iuteractiou using gloves and/or additional iupiit 
devices. The state of these works rauges from first 
prototypes to commercial products like the PINCH 
Gloves by Fakespace [2]. Our development is similar in 
spirit to the pinch gloves used in Tinmith-Metro [3], 
however these could ody  be tracked within a limited set 
of hand positions. 
2. Interaction Setup 
The interaction setup is composed of the followiug two 
inah coiupouents: 
1. A helmet with optical stereo see-through head mounted 
display (Ghsstron), single Fkewire camera (Firefly) for 
ARToolKit tracking [4], and inertial tracker (hitertrax2) 
for improved trackiug accuracy (see Fig. 1). Note that the 
h e h e t  camera will pick up any object fitted with markers 
- the gloves / wist  pad devices as well as any other 
markers used to uupleinent for example a card-based 
tangible interface. This leaves a lot of keedom iu the 
application design 
Figure 1. The helmet equipped with a miniature 
Flrewire camera for optical tracking and an inertial 
sensor. 
2. Gloves and wrist-worn touch panel, fitted with 
ARToolKit markers which will be described in detail iu 
the following sub sections (see Fig. 2). 
Figure 2. Gloves and touch pad used together. A 
naked finger Is needed to operate the pad. 
2.1. Gloves 
We use robust finger-flee bicycle gloves. Only the thmub 
is fully covered with two layers of cotton that have a 
pressure seusitive foil embedded at the h e r  side tip of 
the thumb. The pressure sensor acts as a button. Due to 
the relatively fixed offset froin the back of the hand to the 
thumb tip when thumb and iudex finger are pressed 
together, the 3D CIUSOI can easily be calculated. Four 
fingers are left free to manipulate physical objects atid to 
operate the touch panel that does not respond to skiu 
covered in cloth. 
The pressine seusors we use are environmentally sealed 
with an overall thicktiess of less than 1 millheter. Due to 
there extreme flexibility and thitmess, the thumb 
inoveiuent is not restricted in atiy way by the sensors. We 
1 
ART 02 
do not think that open contacts can be ai1 alternative to a 
closed sensor. Eveu ifit would be possible to coustnict au 
eveu thinner sensor, open colitacts are nuoch to sensitive 
to failures or false cuclent. We cover the sensor with an 
additional layer of cotton for both, as an extra mechanical 
protection and for optical reasons. 
A finger-free bicycle glove has been shorn as the best 
compromise between user comfort and a robust and stable 
base striichlt’e. It is light weight and comfortable to wear, 
even for longer periods of time. Moreover it provides a 
stable fiatne to mount presswe seiisors and tracking 
devices, or as we did, ARToolKit markers. 
Three ARToolKit markers have been mounted in a rigid 
sttuchue attached to the back of the glove, so that at least 
one marker can always be picked up by the camera 
independent of the hand rotation. 
To make the handling and maintenance easier, the gloves 
are build modular (see Fig. 3). This means that we use 
detachable markers and cables. While we foimd that 
markers are rarely removed, it is convenient to put on the 
disconnected glove and plug in the cable later. For this 
reason a small light weight lockable plug system has been 
chosen for the glove. It is important tbat the plug can he 
fixed so that it won’t disconnect by accident. 
U*. 
Figure 3. individual parts of the Glove 
2.2. Touch Panel 
The touch panel is mounted to the wist  with an elastic 
band, and also has a marker attached. While the gtapliical 
overlay of the panel is only presented when it is in the 
user’s field of view, the pauel operation itself does not 
rely on the tracking of the pauel marker, and can be done 
while looking at sometbing else (see Fig. 4). 
Figure 4. Touch panel with augmented user interface. 
3. Experiences and Future Work 
The sehip is operated by eiubeddiug appropriate drivers 
and parameter infomation into OpenTracker [5 ] ,  ow 
device management framework that inteifaces to the 
Stiidierstiibe [l] application platfoiiu. 
Some experimental work went into making the wbole 
setup durable, so it can sustain everyday work iu the lab, 
aud demonstrations to the public. This meaus it1 particular 
that the device can be put on mud off many times. We 
found that particular care must be taken of durable cable 
mounting. We successfully veiified our hnplemeutatiou 
in a “stress test” at a public science fair with 1500 
participants, and found it durable and easy to use (see Fig. 
5 ) .  During this test, we found that nuany usets prefer to 
hold the touch pad in their hand, while the glove handling 
itself seems veiy inhutive to the users. 
a) b) 
Figure 6. a) Demonstratlon of the mobile augmented 
reality system at a local science fair. b) A Participant 
is introduced to the use of the mobile setup. 
A possible future extension is creating a wireless radio- 
operated touch panel that can be attached to oue’s belt 
when uot in use. 
Acknowledgements. This work was sponsored by the 
Austrian Science Fund I;W% under contracts no. P14470- 
INF and START Y193, and Vienna University of 
Technology by an infrastructure lab grants (“MARDIS”). 
4. References 
[ l ]  D. Schalstieg, A. Fuhmann, G. Hesina, Zs. 
Szalavaii, L. M. Encarnapiio, M. Gervautz, W. 
Purgathofer: The Shdierstube Augmented Reality 
Project, PRESENCE 1 l(1): 32-54 
[2] Fakespace, “PINCH Gloves”, URL - 
htto://www.fakesoacelabs.com/uroducts/uinch,h~l, 2001 
[3] Piekarski W. and Thomas B. “Tininith-Merro: NeMz 
Outdoor lechiiiqires for Creafing City Models with an 
Angnienfed Realiry Wearable Conipi~ter”, Iu Roc. ISWC 
2001, Zitrich, Switzerland, Oct. 2001 
[4] Billinghurst M m d  H. Kato, “Collaborative Mixed 
Reality”, Proc ISMR’99, Yokohama, Japan, 1999 
[ 5 ]  G. Reitmayr, D. Schmalstieg, “An Open Soflwore 
Archifectiire for VirttiaI Reality Iiileraction”, In h o c .  
VRST’OI, B a a ,  Canada, Nov. 15 - 17,2001. 
2 
