       
The ep-collider HERA at DESY, Germany, and the high 
energy physics experiments H1 and ZEUS were upgraded in 
the years 2000-2002. The expected specified luminosity is five 
times higher than before. One of the upgrade projects was to 
build a set of new multi wire proportional chambers (CIP2k) 
providing information to distinguish between events induced 
by the beam background, and ep-interactions on an early stage 
of the trigger.  
  This new first level trigger system provides a trigger 
decision using a total of about 10,000 channels of the chamber 
at a speed of 10.4MHz. The system is realized in large field 
programmable gate arrays (FPGA) in order to comply with 
the timing requirements, which are necessary for a dead time 
free trigger decision within 1.5µs. This is achieved by 
simultaneous event pipelining and readout while preparing the 
trigger decision. The total data throughput rate is 108 GB/s. 
The system is developed in the hardware description language 
Verilog. Special attention is drawn to an integrated error 
correction system in the FPGA, which cannot be realized in 
hard wired electronics. This system is necessary to ensure 
maximum pattern recognition efficiency even at high 
occupancy. 
  The CIP2k trigger system was installed in 2001 in parallel 
to the HERA startup and is now being commissioned in order 
to reach its best performance. The flexible programmable 
hardware clearly is a big advantage here. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
HE electron proton collider HERA in Hamburg, Germany 
was designed for measuring electron proton scattering at 
high center-of-mass energies (320GeV). Compared to fixed 
target experiments the accessible kinematic range is extended 
to high momentum transfer Q2 and very small Bjorken x. The 
HERA ring is about 6.3km long. There are four experiment 
halls, two for the fixed target experiments, Hera B and Hermes, 
and two for the collider experiments H1 and Zeus. Collisions 
of electrons (since 1998 positrons) with protons take place 
every 96ns; the possible collision rate of so called bunch 
crossings (BX) is 10.4MHz.  In the years 1993-2000 an 
integrated luminosity of ~100pb-1 was collected by each of the 
                                                           
University of Zurich, Physics Institute, Winterthurer Strasse 346,  
CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland.  
collider experiments. To allow for collecting significantly more 
data in the future, an upgrade project of the HERA ring has 
been carried out from 2000-2002. The expected luminosity 
after the upgrade is 250pb1/year, five times higher than in 
2000. 
To take advantage of the higher luminosity, the collider 
detectors around the HERA ring were also upgraded. At the H1 
detector several components are modified or redesigned. The 
new central Multi Wire Proportional Chamber (CIP2k, Central 
Inner Proportional Chamber) consists of five cylindrical 
detector layers with cathode pad readout [2], segmented into 
16 sectors in azimuth. The total active length of the detector is 
2.2m, and its inner diameter is 30cm. The size of the pads is 
about 2cm. The total number of readout channels is 10,000 as 
compared to 1,000 channels in the previous CIP chamber [1].  
II. CONCEPT OF THE TRIGGER SYSTEM 
The new CIP2k trigger system is developed to determine a 
fast trigger decision, namely whether a detected event is 
 
Fig. 1: An overview picture of the H1 detector (event display) is seen: typical 
signatures of a physics event (on the left side) should be selected, proton 
induced beam gas collisions should be excluded by the trigger system. 
 
identified as a signature of a good ep-collision near the 
defined central vertex, or whether it indicates a background 
event, typically a proton induced gas or beam pipe collision. 
With the extended luminosity, the expected rate of such 
background events increases up to 500kHz compared to a 
estimated rate of 10Hz for good ep-collisions. The aim of the 
CIP2k trigger is a clear separation of those types of events. 
With the advantages of a proportional chamber, a fast first 
level trigger system can be implemented.   
The CIP2k First Level Trigger System at the H1 
experiment at HERA 
M. Urban, U. Straumann, S. Schmitt and J. Becker, University of Zurich 
T
0-7803-7636-6/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE. 146
  
The expected ratio between good ep-events and background 
events was studied with data taken before the new CIP 
chamber was installed, in order to understand the expected 
situation in the upgraded detector. In Figure 2 the distribution 
of the event-vertex along the beam axis is shown for 
background events and events from ep collisions. 
  
 
Fig. 2: In this figure a simulation of expected ratio between “good” physics 
events and background is shown. 
 
 To separate these event types a completely new trigger logic 
was developed using large FPGAs. 
The CIP2k subsystem has to deliver a trigger decision for 
every bunch crossing to the central trigger control (CTC) 
system within 1.5µs in a dead time free mode. To meet these 
goals the trigger system latency has to be limited to 1µs.  
Since the HERA clock is 10.4MHz, the FPGAs operate at 
41.6MHz, and therefore four computational steps per bunch 
crossing.  
III. TRIGGER ALGORITHM 
To find a trigger decision, a pipelined trigger algorithm was 
developed. The algorithm is divided into three steps: 
1.) Track finding with track recognition. 
2.) Adding of all tracks and creation of a ϕ-sector z-
vertex histogram and summing of ϕ-sector 
histograms. 
3.) Forming a trigger decision. 
Track finding: In the first step, the trigger needs to recognize 
tracks and reconstruct their origin on the beam axis. For this 
purpose all possible hit patterns in the five layers of the readout 
pads of the CIP2k are stored together with their origin. Known 
hit patterns are arranged around a logical environment (weakly 
shaded in Figure 3) of a pad in the central layer. The pad size 
in each layer of the chamber is chosen such that a given track 
pattern always originates from the same position along the 
beam axis, independent of the absolute position of the 
corresponding central pad (projective geometry). Therefore the 
logical track patterns and their origins are the same for each 
local environment of each pad in the central layer, greatly 
simplifying the implementation of the trigger algorithm. 
  
Fig. 3: The projective chamber simplifies the track finding: tracks from the 
same vertex origin cause same track patterns in the local environment of a pad 
in the central layer. 
 
A list of all these track patterns is maintained, where active 
patterns of the given event are flagged by a single bit. The 
array of these flags is called hitlist. 
The hitlist is sorted in 15 groups (bins) of about 16cm width 
according to the origin of the tracks along the beam axis. The 
whole detector is arranged in 16 ϕ−sectors. The pattern 
recognition is implemented separately for each of them. 
 Adding: The next step in the algorithm is to add all active 
track patterns of the hitlist in each bin, and adding the contents 
of all bins with the same z-position of all ϕ-sectors. The result 
of this operation of 15 numbers with a size of 8 bit is the so 
called vertex histogram.  
In a vertex histogram of a good ep-event, most of the 
reconstructed tracks are centered on bins in the middle of the 
histogram (bin 7 of 15 bins). The content of every channel 
corresponds to the number of active track patterns originating 
from this region on the beam axis. 
Trigger decision: Finally, information about the quality of the 
event needs to be extracted from the vertex histogram and 
summarized in a single 16bit word, which is then digested by 
the central trigger system of H1, together with other first level 
trigger information. For analyzing the vertex histogram, several 
methods are currently being investigated. The best 
performance probably will be achieved by cutting on the ratio 
of the background to signal tracks.  
 
IV. HARDWARE COMPONENTS 
The main parts of the new CIP2k system are: 
1.) The active detector, including the front end 
electronics with signal amplifier and discriminator 
electronics in an ASIC [5], and the link system, which 
multiplexes the digital chamber data (900MHz) and 
transmits it to the electronics trailer via optical fibers 
system [4]. 
2.) The trigger system consisting mainly of the trigger 
cards that are used for track finding, and storage of 
0-7803-7636-6/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE. 147
 the raw data while calculating, and the sum cards that 
sum up the histograms and form a trigger decision.  
3.) The data acquisition system that organizes the 
transfer of the data to the storage tapes.  Moreover, 
there is an experiment control system (ECS) that 
controls all components of the system. 
 
Detector and Front End Electronics: The 10,000 channels of 
the CIP2k chamber are read out, amplified, shaped, 
digitalizised, and multiplexed four times in a specially 
designed ASIC (CIPix, [5]).  The CIPix is controlled by an I2C 
bus, including parameters for the analog processing 
(amplification, shaping) and discriminator thresholds. The 
digitized chamber data again are multiplexed (16 times) and 
then send to the optical link system [4]. CIPix and optical 
sender are mounted on a 2 x 6cm highly complex 8layer PCB 
that contains 4 CIPix ASICs in total, and one optical 
transmitter unit with 8 sender diodes. The total throughput of 
the link system is 3.3GBits/s [4]. 
A total of 40 optical fibers consisting of 8 light-guides each 
transfer the information from the detector over a distance of 
40m to the trigger system.  
 
Trigger System:  The implementation of the trigger system 
and data acquisition part of the new CIP2k system is 
concentrated in a total of six VME crates (trigger crates) 
located in the electronics trailer. Four of these are identical and 
contain four trigger cards each, one per ϕ-sector, which are the 
heart of the system. A trigger card contains two FPGAs into 
which the complete trigger algorithm is programmed as well as 
the pipelines for the data acquisition of the raw detector data 
for the respective ϕ-sector. The second type of FPGA based 
card is the sum card, which sums up the histogram information 
of the ϕ -sectors. Five sum cards are used, 4 sum up each four 
ϕ -sectors (pre-sum card), and the fifth sum card sums the 
quarter histograms from the pre-sum cards. This master sum 
card also uses the complete z-vertex histogram to identify the 
event, and brings out the trigger decision. The sum cards are 
placed in another VME crate. An additional crate contains the 
standard H1 trigger and detector control electronics, as well as 
data acquisition and experiment control system computers. 
Trigger and Sum Card: The trigger cards [3] contain two 
Altera APEX 20K400 FPGAs [6] into which the complete 
trigger algorithm and the data accusation pipelines are 
programmed. The 20K400 has 500 user I/O pins available, and 
consists of about 1600 logic array blocks (LAB, often called 
configurable logic blocks, CLB). Each block of 16 LABs (so 
called MegaLABs) shares a common memory space of about 
2000bits; the access of the memory space can be organized in 
many different ways. Each LAB consists of 10 logic elements 
(LE), the smallest logical unit in the APEX. It contains, among 
others, a programmable register and lookup table for the input 
definition. There are 16,640 LEs in a 20K400 and a total of 1 
million of equivalent gates [6]. 
With this huge number of free programmable I/O pins, the 
used FPGAs perfectly meet the requirements of the trigger 
algorithm [3]. A large number of pins are used to dump the 
complete information of a half ϕ-sector into the FPGA. Every 
FPGA uses 95 inputs, each receiving four times multiplexed 
data, 75 channels are used for a half ϕ-sector, and 20 for an 
overlap area between the two FPGAs. The information 
 
Fig. 4: A photo of the Trigger Card is shown. Both FPGAs, the 250 pin 
input connector on the right side and the SCSI connectors on the left side can 
be seen. 
 
extracted form the overlap area is necessary to calculate a 
decision over the entire range of the z-axis. Smaller FPGAs 
would not allow adapting the track finding algorithm in such a 
wide range. Another advantage is the integrated memory to 
store the CIP data while calculating the trigger decision for the 
next 32 bunch crossings (~3µs). One of the FPGAs creates a 
common histogram summed from both FPGAs. Therefore a 
large communication bus between the FPGA is necessary (105 
pins in each FPGA, 15x7bit). FPGAs compete with ASICs and 
DSPs as programmable devices for fast parallel applications. In 
this case, the large number of user pins and the fast 
programmable memory are clear advantages favoring the use 
of FPGAs for the CIP trigger system.  
  To realize the trigger algorithm needed for the CIP2k 
system, nearly 12,000 of the 16,000 LEs are needed for each 
half of a ϕ-sector. Compared to the initial design (4000 LEs) a 
0-7803-7636-6/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE. 148
 lot of functionality has now been added to the system, again 
outlining the advantage of using large FPGAs. The 
programming and configuration of the FPGAs is supported by 
a hardware development software called Quartus [7]. This 
software tool offers a Verilog design entry of the logics and 
contains a fitter and a router to make optimal use of the logics 
in the FPGA.  
In parallel to forming the trigger decision the hit data of 32 
bunch crossings is stored in the pipeline. It is then transferred 
to a VME access point, and can be read out by the CPUs of the 
data acquisition system. 
Data Acquisition System: The data acquisition system of the 
CIP2k trigger system is based on two standard bus systems. 
The widely-used VME (Versatile Module Europe) bus system 
and the pVIC (PCI Vertical Interconnect) bus system. Real 
time CPUs of the type RIO2 8062 with a PowerPC CPU 603 
 
Fig. 5: In this figure the correlation of CIP hit position and drift-chamber 
tracks is shown. The difference between the CIP hit z-position and the 
extrapolated drift-chamber track gives information about the resolution of the 
CIP chamber [9]. 
 
and running the real time operation system LynxOS are 
installed in each trigger crate. They do the initial setup of the 
trigger system and the readout of the data from the FPGA 
pipelines. 
  The synchronous part of the DAQ system with a dead time 
constraint of less than 1.2µs begins with the arrival of a trigger 
decision starting the readout of the pipelines in the FPGAs 
located in the trigger cards. This is done via the VME bus 
using the single cycle D32/A24 mode. It is possible to upgrade 
the FPGA code and switch to block-transfer mode if necessary. 
  A window of 5 bunch crossings is read out to study the 
timing behavior of the trigger system. Each CPU reads the data 
from four ϕ-sectors. One of the CPU collects the data from all 
ϕ-sectors and writes it into a local event buffer. The BMA 
(block mover accelerator) mode of the pVIC bus is used in this 
data transfer. The four CPUs are synchronized using a custom 
protocol on the pVIC bus implemented in the pVIC shadowed 
memory. With the arrival of all data packages at the main CPU 
the synchronous part of the readout is finished and the 
pipelines are ready to be released again, typically 900µs after 
receiving the trigger decision.  
  The asynchronous part of the readout starts with a data 
reduction process on the main CPU. The chamber data stored 
as bit patterns is translated in 16bit wide pad numbers, 
resulting in an effective zero suppression if the occupancy of 
the chamber is less than 10%, which is always true for events 
from ep-collisions. During this process pads that are known to 
be noisy are removed from the data. The data are then sent via 
a VIC link to a MEB (Multi Event Buffer) unit where they are 
stored until the H1 central DAQ collects the data from each 
event via an optical ring [8]. 
V. FIRST RESULTS 
The System is now technically complete; all hardware 
 
Fig. 6: The pipeline position of the CIP trigger decision can be studied as a 
function of the event timing, determined with the central drift chamber. A 
clear correlation is found [9]. 
components are installed in the electronics trailer of the H1 
experiments. The trigger algorithm works dead time free and 
delivers trigger decisions within 1µs and the pipelined data 
match with the results of simulations.  
First performance tests of the system have been performed 
with muons from cosmic rays. Advantages of measurements 
with cosmics are not too small event rates of about 5Hz and 
clean event signatures. The muon tracks are triggered by the 
central drift chamber, requiring two track halves opposite in 
0-7803-7636-6/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE. 149
 azimuth. Figure 5 shows the correlation of CIP hits and drift-
chamber tracks. The difference between the CIP hit z-position 
and the extrapolated drift-chamber track gives a resolution 
information for the CIP chamber. The clear correlation 
observed between CJC tracks and CIP hits is an important test 
of the chamber, fiber link, memory in the FPGAs, and DAQ 
system.   
The pipeline position of the CIP trigger decision can be 
studied as a function of the event timing, determined with the 
central drift chamber. A clear correlation is found. The same 
correlation is seen for the simulated trigger decision, proving 
consistency of the trigger and the readout pipelines. The 
determination of trigger efficiencies and further optimization 
on the trigger performance is still ongoing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. REFERENCES 
[1] H1 Collaboration: The H1 Detector, H1 internal report 
H1-96-01 and Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A. 386, 1997, see 
also www-h1.desy.de/ 
[2] M. Cuje et al.: H1 High Luminosity Upgrade 2000 CIP 
and Level 1 vertex Trigger, H1 internal report H1-1N-
535(01/1998) 
[3] M. Urban, Diploma Thesis, Univ. Heidelberg, 5/2000 and 
presentations for H1 Collaboration, status report CIP2k 
system, see www-h1.desy.de\~urban, 09/2002. 
[4] S. Lüders, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 
Research A, Volume 484 (2002) 515-527 
[5] Documentation on the CIPix: http://www.physi.uni-
heidelberg.de/groups/anp/ucn/readout-electronic_de.html 
[6] Altera, Description of APEX 20k device family, 
http://www.altera.com/literature/ds/apex.pdf 
[7] Altera Int. Notes,  http://www.altera.com/literature/an/,  
09/2002 
[8] J. Becker, presentation on the 8th Topical Seminar on 
Innovative Particle and Radiation Detectors, Siena, 
10/2002; and Diploma Thesis, Univ. Heidelberg, 11/2000 
[9] S. Schmitt, presentation for H1 Collaboration, status report 
CIP2k system, see www-h1.desy.de, 10/2002. 
University of Zurich, Physics Institute, Winterthurer Strasse 
346, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland. 
0-7803-7636-6/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE. 150
