A Testbed for the Experimental Study of a Cylindrical Shape Robot on Rough-Terrain 
M. Foglia', A. Gentile", G.Reina' 
'Dipartimento di lngegneria Meccanica e Gestionale, Politecnico di Ban 
70126 BARI, Italy - Phone +39 080 5962708, Fax +39 080 5962777 
'Dipartimento di lngegneria dell'lnnovazione, Universita di Leccc 
E-mail: mm.foglia@poliba.it; angelo.gentile@unile.it; giulio.reina@unile.it 
Abstract 
In this paper a testbed for the characterization of the 
dynamic behavior of a cylindrical robot in motion on 
deformable soil is described. The mobile robot consists 
in a cylindrical rigid shell which can rolls on rough 
terrain thanks to an internal device. The test-bench was 
designed and optimized to experimentally test the 
interaction between the external shell and the soil with 
different mechanical characteristics. A LabView based 
software to lead and acquire the necessary data for the 
experiments was developed. Pc-based boards with 
general purposes AID 110 ports were used for the 
rotative and linear encoders and the intemal device d.c. 
motor. The goal is to build a big sensor to estimate the 
forces system arising from the interaction between a 
rigid cylindrical shell and rough terrain. Experimental 
results show the testhed can give a good measure of the 
travelling resistance that the mini-vehicle meets on rough 
terrain. 
Keywords: Mobile robots, terramechanics, rough 
terrain, control. 
1. Introduction 
Ground autonomous mini mobile robots have important 
potential applications, such as reconnaissance, patrol, 
planetary exploration and military applications [SI. 
These tasks require high mobility in rough terrains; 
future control and planning method must consider the 
physical characteristics of the mobile robots and of its 
environment to fully utilise the rover's capabilities. 
Wheel-terrain interaction has been shown to play a 
significant role in rough-terrain mobility [6,7]. For 
example, a mobile robot travelling over loose soil should 
behave differently than one travelling over firm clay. 
Fig. 1 Representation of the Spherical Mobile Robot 
There are many kinds of mobile robots that have legs, 
wheels, crawlers, or their combination for locomotion. 
However, more efficient and versatile locomotion 
mechanism adaptable to an upheaved or bumpy path 
must be contrived. 
0-7803-7657-9/02/$17.0002002 IEEE. 163 
Here a new architecture of mobile robot has taken in 
account called Spherical Mobile Robot, SMR [1,2]; it 
consists of a rigid outer spherical shell with an inner 
controlling device, ID. In Fig.1 a rappresentation is 
shown; the inner device can move inside the spherical 
shell thanks to a motorized and controlled wheel and a 
free wheel of guidance; a second electrical motor allows 
the axial rotation of the ID changing the heading of the 
motion. 
I f 
Fig.2 Functional scheme 
In Fig. 2, a functional scheme is illustrated; the ID is 
built in a such way the center of gravity of the robot is 
located below the geometric center of the spherical shell 
so that the mobility of the robot is based on unbalancing 
the inner device. Such a design is very advantageous, 
because the robot can easily restore the stable posture. 
The quasi-stable structure enables the robot to stabilize 
itself and one-point contact with the ground. Further the 
robot has an inherently safe form. 
2. Interaction terrain - rigid wheel 
Here, the case of a smooth rigid cylindrical body 
traveling through deformable terrain is considered. 
A free-body diagram is shown in Fig.3. A vertical load 
W, a horizontal force DP and a torque T are applied to 
the Cylinder; it has angular velocity a, and the wheel 
center possesses a linear velocity, V. The angle from the 
vertical at which the wheel first makes contact with the 
terrain is denoted with 9,. The angle from the vertical at 
which the wheel loses contact with the terrain is denoted 
Oz. Thus, the entire angular wheel-terrain contact region 
is defined by 8,+8,. 
A stress region is created at the wheel-terrain interface; 
at a given point on the interface, the stress can he 
decomposed into a component acting normal to the 
wheel at the wheel-terrain contact point, 6, and a 
component acting parallel to the wheel at the wheel- 
terrain contact point, 7 (Fig.3). 
IEEE ICIT'02, Bangkok, THAILAND 
W 
Fig.3 Diagram of rigid wheel on deformable terrain 
Force balance equations are witten for the system in 
Figure 2. I ,  as: 
W = R  . b .  (r o(9) .cos@. dB + k'r(fl).sin9, de) ( I )  
(2) DP = R - b  .( r(B).cosQ-dQ- [:o(9)-sinQ.dfl) 
T = R' . b -  t r (0 )de  ( 3 )  
The normal and shear stress are described as: 
Rie,-e,i-~lis,.e , "Ai 
r(B) = (cia(@. tang.(l - e  ) (4) 
o(z) = (k, +k, . b)(t] ( 5 )  
where k is the shear deformation modulus, R is the wheel 
radius, i is the wheel slip defined as i=l-(VRcu), b is the 
wheel width, K, e Kz are constants, and n is the sinkage 
coefficient [7,12,14]. The parameters c and 'p are 
representative of the particular terrain and defined 
respectively as, cohesion and internal friction angle. 
3. Motion equations 
For simplicity sake, a planar one direction model is 
considered, so that the outer spherical shell can be 
replaced with an equivalent cylindrical one. This new 
arhitecture of mobile robot is called Cylindrical Mobile 
Robot, CMR. The CMR consists of three main rigid 
bodies: the cylindrical outer shell, the inner device ID e 
the motor wheel group (Fig.4). 
Fig.4 Scheme of the Cylindrical Mobile Robot 
The Lagrangian parameters, chosen for the dynamic 
analysis, are the angle 8 between the radius throu::h a 
fixed point on the cylinder and the vertical direction, and 
the angle a between the same radius and the axis O F  the 
ID (Fig.4). 
The following hypothesis are made: 
- the forces between the wheels and the internal surface 
of the shell, and between the outer surface of the shell 
and soil are included in the motion plane. 
- there is a pure rolling motion between the motor 
wheels and the internal surface of the shell. 
the reactions, exchanged between the 
cylindrical shell and the deformable soil during the 
motion of the vehicle, are reducible to an equivalent 
system forces composed of two forces N and H, 
applied in the ideal point of contact, respectively radial 
and tangential to the cylinder, and of a resistant torque 
C, (Fig.5). This torque contains all dissipative actions 
which take part in the contact between the shell and 
the deformable soil. 
The system has an intrinsic tendency to oscillate, even 
slight irregularities in the terrain cause perturbations that 
are very slowly eliminated. The kinetic energy of the 
cylindrical shell, E,, that of the inner device, E,, that of 
the motor wheel, E,, and the gravity potential energy of 
the ID, U,, are evaluated as: , 
E. =i(m, R'+Ic).6 (6) 
(8) 
(9) 
2 ' [ *  1 I 2 E. =-.I.(o-O)'+-.%. R*B +(o-O)i.h'+2(o-8)-R.kh.cos(o-8) (7) 
E, = i , l ,  . 2  I +I., . R'O +-.q .(;-0)'(R-$ +U(~-eJ.,.R.(R-,).co.(.-e) 
2 2  
U. =p-(l-cas(o-O)).(m, . (R-r )+q-h)  
By applying the Lagrangian equation of motion: 
where: q, = 8, q2 = a and q are the nonconservative 
generalised forces corresponding to the chosen 
coordinates; after some calculations it gets: 
where: 
M(q)q+C(%q)q+h(q)=r (1 1) 
164 IEEE ICIT'OZ, Bangkok, THAILAND 
forces, F, from the proper rolling resistance due to the 
deformability of the soil, C, (Fig.5). Considering the low 
speeds of the vehicle, any aerodynamics resistance is 
neglected. 
Fig.5 Free-body diagram of the Cylindrical Robot 
4. Numerical integrations 
Numerical integration of relation (1 I ) ,  which consists of 
a two nonlinear second order differential equations, was 
condutcted in MathematicaB using the fourth order 
Runghe-Kutta algorithm with a maximum timestep of I 
ms. 
Fig.6 State of pitch angle and of its first derivate 
It was assumed an initial condition with cylinder in state 
of rest, inner device in vertical posture and velocities all 
null; the following parameter set was used: R=80 mm, 
1=18 mm, h= 62 nun, 1&=0,3 Kg, m i l  Kg. A 
representative result is shown in Fig.6-7; the vehicle 
motion presents a starting transient condition during 
which the ID oscillates, followed by a steady condition 
during which the robot rolls with constant velocity and 
ID stabilizes on a constant pitch angle. The initial 
oscillations damping is allowed by the intemal passive 
resistances of the vehicle, modelled acccording to a 
visco-Coulombian model. 
Fig.7 Analytical state of the cylinder rotation angle and 
of its angular speed 
A first analytical model check was conducted using the 
CAE commercial software Working Model 2D. 
The simulation of the vehicle motion matches very good 
the results from the numerical integration, as shown in 
Fig.8. 
. . . , , . . . , . . , , . . . .  
. . . , .  : :  , . . , .  
Fig.8 Virtual state of pitch angle and of the cylinder 
angular speed 
165 IEEE lCIT'02, Bangkok, THAILAND 
I ' #  __ 
Fig.9: Starting Motion Tracking 
5. Steady condition analysis 
In the steady condition pitch angle cp holds on a constant 
value so that, the correspondent motor torque, generated 
from the ID gravity force unbalancing, balances the 
rolling resistance the vehicle meets during its motion, 
due to the interaction with deformable soil C, an to 
extemal forces F (Fig.5). 
Applying the energetic equilibrium and the dynamic 
cardinal equations to the system, it gets the following 
relations: 
E n :  C , = C , + F . r + C , . I  K (12) 
K 
r 
0: M g h s i n p , = H - K + C ,  =--(C,-CO) (13) 
X :  H = F  (14) 
Y :  N = ( M + M , ) . g  (15) 
If the rolling resistance grows up, the system reacts 
increasing the pitch angle p with a consequent larger 
motor torque demanded and a smaller vehicle speed, 
according to the conventional mechanical caracteristic of 
the DC brush-motor used for the traction of the vehicle 
(Fig.10). Naturally rising up the armature voltage of the 
electric motor, rolling resistance being equal, it has an 
increase of vehicle speed, while the pitch angle cp holds 
constant. 
Llll - n : 6 0  - 
10 
e 
.? 2 0  * 
no11 ing Rc.i.tulr. ["I 
16 - : 1'1 
2 12 
Y IO 
4 6  
I 4  
* " 8  
p .  
0 0 . 5  0 .1  0.2 e.4 0.5 0 . 6  
Rolling Re,isculce [nm] 
Fig. IO State ofthe pitch angle and the vehicle angular 
velocity with the rolling resistance, armature 
voltage and intemal friction being constant 
Observing the vehicle working, inner vehicle device 
mass clearly results of great importance. Larger its value, 
larger the vehicle ability to land uneven terrains. Further 
the choice of the electrical motor for the mobile robot 
traction depends on its value, once even fixed the vehicle 
speed range. 
6. Experimental results 
It was released a simplified cylindrical shaped prototype 
and experiments were performed on the Robotics 
Laboratoly terrain characterization testbed, designed for 
the experimental study of its motion on deformable soil. 
6.1. Prototype and testbed 
The built cylindrical prototype is shown in Fig.11; it 
consists of an extemal cylindrical shell, gained from 
commercial tube in PVC 0 160, closed by two tumed 
Plexiglas stoppers, inside of which an inner device can 
move. The ID is equipped with a DC brush-motor of 9 V 
C.C. and 20 W, regulated varying the armature voltage. 
The motion is geared to an axis that holds to the 
extremities two wheels in sofl rubber; a elastic forcing 
system keeps pressed the wheels on the inner wall of the 
cylinder assuring the motion of pure rolling. The inner 
device is integral with an aluminum shaft coinciding 
with the axis of the cylinder and hinged to it in 
correspondence of the Plexiglas stoppers. For regulating 
the ratio hehveeu the mass of the inner device and that 
one of the cylindrical shell, two weights-holder rods 
have been predisposed on the aluminum shaft. 
Experiments were performed on the Robotics Laboratoly 
terrain characterization testbed, designed for the 
experimental study of its motion on deformable soil and 
shown in Fig. 12. It consists of a tank, 1700x300~60 
mm, filled with the particular terrain in exam and of a 
frame, sliding along an undriven horizontal carriage, 
dragged by the prototype in its motion. 
The frame is instrumented with linear and rotary 
encoders to measures the meaningful kinematic 
parameters of the vehicle motion. The current input to 
the electrical motor is estimated by measuring the 
voltage across a current-sense resistor. 
Fig. 1 1  The cylindrical prototype 
166 IEEE ICIT'OZ, Bangkok, THAILAND 
6.2. Experimental results 
Experiments were performed rolling the cylindrical 
prototype with different speeds on the terrain in exam 
and measuring the meaningful kinematic motion 
parameters. 
Observing the motion in steady condition, an indirect 
estimate of the vehicle rolling resistance was possible, 
using the preceding relations here opportunely 
rearranged 
R C,(e) = -C,(e) -(Co(B)+ F(0) .RI = 
(16) 
R .  
=-Cm(@)-Corganic C i )  
where Cor,,, contains all the rolling resistance not due 
to the terrain deformahility. 
IS , 
0 1  0.2 0.1 0.1 U 5  0 6  
Lmear speed [ d s c c l  
Fig.13 vs vehicle constant linear speed 
The first experiments set was performed rolling the 
cylindrical prototype on a wood base to analyze vehicle 
motion on rigid soil (C,=O ["m]). The test made 
possible to estimate from relation (16) the the 
vehicle meets at different constant speeds. The state of 
C,,,,,,, gained interpolating measures, is shown in 
Fig.13. 
Following experiments sets were executed to estimate 
the vehicle rolling resistance proper due to soil 
deformability D I ~  sand, agriculture terrain, red terrain, 
Q peat were analyzed. A representative state of the 
pitch angle and vehicle linear speed are plotted in Fig.14. 
The behavior was expected the starting oscillations 
progressively damp in about 3 seconds around a constant 
value. 
Fig. 14 Experimental results 
21 
9 
I7  
15 
- 
li 13 
B 
2 I, 
B 
8 9  
7 
5 
015 025 031 045 a55 "63 
Lnrz sped [ m i S r r j  
Fig. 15 Rolling resistance vs. constant linear speed 
1 I 
I700 1800 1900 2000 2100 
Wiighl [d 
Fig. 16 Rolling resistance vs. vehicle weight 
The vehicle weight influence on rolling resistance is 
depicted in Fig. 16. The graphs are obtained by dry sand 
and red terrain experiments while vehicle running at 
constant speed. The results agree with the 
terramechanics theory in Ref. [6, 71. 
I67 IEEE ICIT'02, Bangkok, THAILAND 
I I 
L“ru *rid Imirr, 
0.11 0.25 0.35 0.45 0 5 5  
Fig. 17 Rolling resistance coeff. vs. constant linear speed 
A dimensionless coefficient is calculated as reported in 
equation (17) and the experimental graphs are plotted in 
the Fig.17 
(17) 
The obtained numerical results seems fall the usual 
known data range measured for similar materials. 
It is considerable to report that, by measuring the 
cylinder angular speed and linear cylinder speed, the 
calculated wheel slip result neglected in all of 
experiments 
I. Conclusions 
A cylindrical shaped mobile robot is studied and a 
motion analytical model on deformable soil is presented. 
The model check is performed by the experimental study 
of a prototype on the Robotics Laboratory terrain 
characterization testbed. An experimental framework :for 
rolling resistance on deformable soil measure is 
described. The estimation method is based on measuring 
of meaningful kinematic parameters of the vehicle 
motion. The knowledge of the rolling resistance is of 
great importance considering the applications for this 
vehicle, such as reconnaissance, patrol, planetmy 
exploration and military applications. 
Current work in this area is focused on the interpretation 
of the problem with the classical terramechanics 
equations, using innovative experimental measiue 
methods. 
Computer vision methods will he applied in order to 
reduce the influence of traditional transducers and to 
give an estimation of the terrain sinkage. 
References 
M. Foglia, A. Gentile, A Trentadue, “Analisi di 
Comportamento Reale di un Veicolo Rohotizzato 
Cilindrico”, Ani del Congress0 AIMETA ’01, 
Como, 2001. 
A. Hahne, J. Suomela, T. Schonberg, Y. Wang, “A 
spherical Mobile Micro-Robot for scientific 
applications”, ASTRA 96, ESTEC, Noordwijk, 
Netherlands, 1996. 
S. Bhattachatya, S. Agrawal, “Design, Experiments 
and Motion Planning of a Spherical Rolling 
Robot”, Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics & 
Automation, April 2000. 
A. Bicchi, A. Ballucbi, D. Pratichizzo, A. Gorelli, 
“Introducing the Sphericle: an Experimental 
Testbed for Research and Teaching in non- 
holonomy”, Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 1997. 
J.Y. Wong, “Theory of Ground Vehicle”, I.  Wiley 
& S., New York, 1973. 
G. Bekker, “Theory of Land Locomotion”, 
University of Michigan Press, 1956. 
G. Bekker, “Introduction to Terrain-Vehicle 
Systems”, University of Michigan Press, 1969. 
G. Gerbart, R. Goetz, D. Gorsich, “Intelligent 
Mobility for Robotic Vehicles in the Army AAer 
Next”, Proceedings of the SPIE Conference on 
Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology”, Vol. 
3693,pp. 128- 139, 1999. 
K. lagnemma, S. Dubowsky, “Mobile Robot 
Rough-Terrain Control (RTC) for Planetary 
Exploration”, Proceedings of the 26th ASME 
Biennial Mechanisms and Robotics Conference, 
DETC 2000,2000. 
[IO] H. Moore, R. Hutton, R. Scott, C. Spitzer, R. 
Shortbill, “Surface Materials of the Viking Landing 
Sites, Mars”, Joumal of Geophysical Research, 
Vol. 82, n.. 28, 1977. 
[ I l l  Y .  Nohse, K. Hashuguchi, M. Ueno, T. Shikanai, 
H. I n ” ,  F. Koyama, “A Measurement of Basic 
Mechanical Quantities of Off-The-Road Traveling 
Performance”, Journal of Terramechanics, Vol. 28, 
n.4,pp. 359-371, 1991. 
[I21 0. Onafeko, A. Reece, “Soil Stresses and Defor- 
mation Beneath Rigid Wheels”, Journal of 
Terramechanics, Vol. 4, n. 1, pp. 59-80, 1967 
[13] I. Shmulevich, D. Ronai, D. Wolf, “A New Field 
Single Wheel Tester”, Journal of Terramechanics, 
Vol. 33,n. 3 ,  pp. 133.141, 1996. 
[I41 J. Wong, A. Reece, “Prediction of Rigid Wheels 
Performance Based on Analysis of Soil-Wheel 
Stresses, Part I”, Journal of Terramechanics, Vol. 
4, n. 1, pp. 81-98, 1967. 
168 IEEE ICIT’02, Bangkok, THAILAND 
