MP.23 
4:30 pm - 6:OO pm 
A new cylindrically shaped optical data storage medium based on adhesive 
tape - concept and first results 
Kay Schulte-Wieking, Steffen Noehte*, Christoph Dietrich* and Michael Mayer 
European Media Laboratory GmbH, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 31% De69118 Heidelberg, Germany 
*tesa-scribos GmbH, B6 23-29 C, D-68131 Mannheim, Germany 
phone: +49-621-18 12646, fax: +49-621-18 12634 
Scbulte-Wieking@eml.org, Steffen.Noehte@tesa-scribos.de, Christopb.Dietrich@tesa-scribos.de, mmayer@eml.org 
1. Introduction 
Many efforts have successfully been made in recent 
years to increase the storage capacities of optical discs 
from CDDVD to HD-DVD using blue laser diodes. At 
the same time many consumer products bacame smaller 
and consequently small optical and magneto-optical 
discs were brought to market. In our search for new 
materials for optical data storage, we found tesa-film a 
conventional adhesive tape, to be suitable for this 
purpose and in conjunction with a new geometty, OUT 
concept offers big advantages in the development of 
geometrically small write-once memories with a 
capacity of 3-6 GByte: tesa-film is used as a multilayer 
recording material forming a cheap cylindrically shaped 
optical data storage medium [l]. 
2. Concept 
tesa-film mainly consists of a polypropylene film with a 
thickness of 24pm which is streched in two dict ions 
during production by a factor of 50 and therefore is 
called BOPP (biaxial oriented polypropylene). In order 
to use the film as an optical recording material it is 
coated with a polymeric absorbing layer with a 
thickness less than lOOnm Thus it represents a low-cost 
data storage material which can easily be manufactured. 
Absorption during the recording process leads to 
thermally induced processes inside the absorbing layer 
and the BOPP mainly resulting in a local change of the 
refractive index and the formation of a surface relief 
structure. In contrast to recordable discs the bulk 
material is used as the recording material. Investigations 
showed that the maximum depth of these changes is 
about 0.5pm. The recording material is wound onto the 
surface of a cylinder thereby forming a multilayer 
structure with a layer distance of approx. 30pm. 
In addition to the material the new geometry represents 
the second major aspect of our concept. Comparing the 
sizes of recordable surfaces of discs and cylinders the 
advantages of a cylindrical shape are obvious regarding 
small storage media. 
The surfaces are given as: 
b S = t t ( R 2 - ? )  , (1) 
A+ .=2nRh  . (2) 
where r is the inner radius of the disc and R is the outer 
radius of the disc and the cylinder respectively (fig 1.). 
disc cylinder 
Fig. 1: disc and cylinder 
Considered r=2.5mm as the inner disc radius the 
corresponding height hdix;ry~. where &iv equals &Ly~. is 
given as 
bisesyl. = ( R2 - 6.25mm2 ) / 2 R (3) 
Thus with R=15mm a height hd,l.=7.3mm is 
necessary to obtain the same amount of recordabje 
surface. Consequently a cylinder with R=15mm and 
b=15mm offers more than twice the surface than a disc 
of comparable size. Our concept offers some more 
advantages. Rotation speed for writing and reading can 
be set to a constant value due to the constant radius. 
This also applies to a multilayer system because layer 
thicknesses are planned to be small resulting in radius 
differences less than 1%. Regarding small discs, 
rotation speed increases extremely when writindreading 
at the inner radius resulting in larger tilt angles and 
speed droop and therefore leading to jincr well-known 
from unbalanced high-speed systems. Funher on, a 
cylindrical shaped medium as above mentioned enables 
0-7803-7379-0/02/$17.0002002 IEEE 117 
fast random access due to the relatively small height. 
Moreover there is enough space to place the pickup 
inside the cylinder in order to develop a very compact 
drive. With two pickups - one inside and one outside - 
the storage capacity can be doubled. A cylinder with 
R=15mm h=15mm and DVD resolution (3T400nm) 
provides a user storage capacity of 0.761 GB per layer. 
Attention should be paid to the curved surface of the 
storage medium. Form deviations and a non-centric 
adjustment lead to tangential and , s a d i u  tilt angles. 
This leads to larger jitter but layer thicknesses less than 
200pm minimize this negative effect. 
3. Simulations and Results 
For the experimental setup we have chosen a modular 
optical bench system which is superior to a setup with a 
conventional pickup in terms of flexibility and demands 
resulting from the new geometry and the new storage 
medium. As a first step we used a DVD actuator with a 
low numerical aperture writing lens (NAd.4)  and as a 
laser we have chosen a frequency doubled Nd:YAG 
(L532nm). The output power can be set arbitrary from 
0-1OOmW using an acoustooptical modulator (AOM). 
The shape of the focus is of particular importance. 
Therefore simulations regarding parameters of our 
concept have to be made. Lateral shifts of the writing 
lens cause a constant tilt angle. This tilt angle is further 
increased by a decenter caused through a tilt of the 
medium or variations in the cylindrical surface. The 
decenter and tilt caused by rotation are 10pm and 0.2" 
respectively. The decenter due to the shifts of optical 
components is estimated to have a value of 20pm. 
Fig. 2: Point Spread Function (PSF) of focus. R=15mm, 
NA=0.4, b 5 3 2 n m  cover layer thickness=30pm 
a) 9mMe=9.rsa;c=0. decenter=Opm b) 9m.1=9.bd;.1.=0.2", 
decenter=30pm. 
Simulations of the focus for different tilt angles and 
decenter values have been carried out using a N A d . 4  
lens and a cover layer of 30pm. The results for a storage 
medium with a 15mm radius are shown in figure2. 
There are no side lobes and the FWHM is almost 
constant. The FWHM is 701 nm without decenter and 
tilt (fig. 2a) and respectively 695 nm for a tilt angle of 
0.2" and a decenter of 30 pm (fig. 2b). 
In the experimental setup the focus suffers from further 
degradation caused by the optical components in the 
system needed for switching and shaping the laser 
beam. The used laboratory setup includes an AOM and 
another ten optical components placed in front of the 
writing lens which are responsible for additional wave 
front distortion. This is the main reason for a limitation 
of the pit size to 3T=600 nm for the writing and reading 
process. Figure 3 shows the readout signal of 
3T=600 nm pits: The pits were written using a channel 
data rate of 6.25 Mbitls. The signal amplitude reaches a 
level of 13,=0.23*114T. The writing process was carried 
out using a laser intensity of 12mW resulting in a pulse 
energy of less than 0.5n.I. The intensity ratio for longer 
pits is 11&14H z 75%. 
0 4 8 12 
T 
Fig. 3: detector signal of 3T=600nm pits, writing speed 
and reading speed 6.25 Mbitls 
The fxst eye pattern of a 5T ... llT+14T structure 
(3T=800 nm) is shown in figure 4. Laser intensity, 
writindreading speed and intensity ratio for the read out 
are as mentioned above. 3T and 4T have been omitted 
in the writing process as the readout signal is non- 
eaualized. Yet the jitter is less than 10%. 
Using writing lenses with a larger NA the impact on the 
spot quality of decenter and tilt increases. Larger cover 
layers yield to the same effect. Therefore the cover layer 
of the medium is intended to be of a magnitude of about 
30-150pm. Simulations for a lens with a larger 
numerical aperture (NA=0.65) and a wavelength of 
h=658nm and a medium with R=lSmm are shown in 
118 
Fig. 4: First eye-pattern in BOPP, 5T ... llT+14T 
(3T=800nm). NA=0.4, Writingheading speed 
6.25 Mbit/s. Unequalized detector signal, 1,&~>75%. 
pulses < OSnJ, jitter c 10% 
figure 5. Without any tilt and decentering and a cover 
layer of 60pm (fig. 5 a) the side lobes can be barely 
reco,gized and the FWHM is 522nm. The side lobes 
become slightly visible for a decentering of 30pm tilt 
angles of 0.2" and a cover layer of 120pm (fig. 5b). 
Whereas the FWHM has a value of 498 nm 
Fig. 5: Point Spread Function of focus. R = 1 5 m  
NA=0.65, b658nm a) layer-thickness=6Opm 
B,mg=€I.Mi~=O, decenter=Opm b) layer-thickness 
=120pm B,,g=B.Mia,.=0.20, decentei=30pm. 
For smaller radii of the medium similar results can be 
obtained. The spot quality decreases barely down to size 
of a R=5mm medium, which suggest another geometry 
for the medium: a cylindrical medium with a relatively 
small diameter and a height which is a multiple of the 
diameter. To reach a user storage capacity of 1 Gbyte 
per layer a medium with R=7mm and a height of 43mm 
would be sufficient when using DVD resolution 
(3T=400 nm). 
With the low energies needed for writing process the 
concept of the system can be easily expanded to 
multiple layers. Calculating the maximum number of 
recordable and readable layers the following parameters 
have to be taken into account: 
available laserpower 
absorptiodreflection per layer 
reflection at the surface of the medium 
diffraction loss per layer 
influence on the shape of the focus by the cover layers 
losses induced by increased coma in the lower layers 
scattering effects 
Results of such a calculation yield to 4 layers per side 
using laserdiodes with b 6 5 8 n m  which is in good 
agreement with the experimental results. 
4. Outlook 
Due to the successful experiments with a modular 
laboratory setup with a wavelength of b532nm and a 
writing lens with NAzO.4 a system will be set up which 
is similar to a pickup. The wavelength will be b658nm 
and the lens will have a NAd.65. This will 
significantly increase the resolution. Fmher on, 
appropriate signal processing will be implemented. 
Due to the cylindrical shape, especially the small 
z-dimension, some very interesting features can be 
integrated to increase the number of recordableheadable 
layers and are currently under investigation. 
Furthermore the curved surface enables a lens design 
which leads to decreased wavefront aberrations 
compared to flat media resulting in an increased focus 
quality 
5. Conclusion 
We have shown that data storage on a cylindrically 
shaped medium bas many advantages especially 
regarding geometrically small media. Moreover the 
low-cost material used here with its simple shllcture 
provides an oppomnity to develop a cheap write-once 
medium. Due to its compactness and a planned storage 
capacity of 3-6 Gbyte this concept is very interesting 
concerning portable small-sized consumer electronics. 
... 
References: 
[l]: C. Dietrich, S. Noehte, M. Gerspach and K. 
Scbulte-Wieking, ,,An Optical Data Storage device 
Based on Adhesive Tape' - Concept and Theoretical 
Aspects" Poster, ODS 2000, Whistler, Canada 
119 
