0-7803-9404-6/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE 1428
STATISTICAL SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR AUTOMOTIVE SAFETY SYSTEMS
Fredrik Gustafsson
Department of Electrical Engineering
Linko¨ping University, SE-581 83 Linko¨ping, Sweden
Email: fredrik@isy.liu.se
ABSTRACT
The amount of software in general and safety systems in
particular increases rapidly in the automotive industry. The
trend is that functionality is decentralized, so new safety
functions are distributed to common shared computer hard-
ware, sensors and actuators using central data buses. This
paper overviews recent and future safety systems, and high-
lights the big challenges for researchers in the signal pro-
cessing area.
1. INTRODUCTION
Henry Ford revolutionized the automotive industry more than
100 years ago with his new production ideas. We are now
facing another major shift in automotive production, when
an increasing part of the value of the car comes from elec-
tronic systems. The introduction of more automotive safety
systems plays an important role in this shift. For instance,
one expert predicts that the value of software will increase
from 4% in 2003, to 13% in 2010. This of course affects
the engineering community in many ways. The automotive
industry has always been dominated by mechanical engi-
neers, but today we see an increasing need for engineers
specialized in signal processing, automatic control, elec-
tronics, communication and computer hardware.
A key reason for this trend is the rapid development of
safety systems. As the number of vehicles on our public
roads increases, the requirement on safety is also increased.
There has been a tremendous progress in this area over the
last two decades as is evident from accident statistics. For
instance, the number of fatalities in Sweden [12] suddenly
started to drop around 1990. According to this report, the
car fleet becomes safer for each year and the trend is that
the fatality risk in a new car is reduced 5% each year. A
research report by an insurance company [11], partly ac-
knowledges on-board safety systems for this trend change,
and for instance it ranks an electronic stability system (anti-
skid control) as important as safety belts to prevent severe
injuries on skiddy roads. The requirements on the safety
systems will continue to increase in the future, motivating
the continued development on improved versions of existing
and new safety systems. The automotive executives share
this view [23], as summarized in the conclusion “safety is
a basic tenet to the industry now and will continue to be
an ongoing major focus for consumers and manufacturers
alike”. Further, “new technology will be as important as
new models in attracting customers”.
The research community also has to contribute to this
shift, and the purpose of this paper is to point out certain di-
rections in signal processing where research is needed. The
underlying theme is sensor fusion: to utilize existing and af-
fordable sensors as efficiently as possible for as many pur-
poses as possible. We point out certain more or less open
problems in spectral analysis, non-uniform sampling, sys-
tem identification, change detection, diagnosis and fault de-
tection and model-based filtering and prediction to mention
a few.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 overviews
existing and some future control systems, where accurate
information of the own and surrounding vehicles state is
needed. Then, with this as a motivation, the following chal-
lenges are discussed:
Challenge I: Wheel speed analysis, using wheel speed as a
generic multi-purpose sensor, is discussed in Section
3.
Challenge II: Virtual sensors for monitoring and control
systems are discussed in Section 4.
Challenge III: Navigation as dynamic state estimation for
monitoring and control systems is discussed in Sec-
tion 5.
Challenge IV: Situational awareness by target tracking and
road prediction for collision avoidance systems is dis-
cussed in Section 6.
Challenge V: Sensor-near signal processing, for improv-
ing and supplementing the sensor fusion, is discussed
in Section 7.
Section 8 summarizes how sensor fusion may be structured
in the future.
1429
2. AUTOMOTIVE SAFETY SYSTEMS
In this section, we will list and briefly present some different
examples of new functions or systems being developed for
or already in use in modern, high-end vehicles. The idea is
to highlight that a rather small number of actuators and sen-
sors would cover all functions, and any further new function
could thus often be added as a pure software module.
Automotive safety systems can be grouped in many ways.
The traditional way separates active safety (driving safety)
systems that prevent accidents and passive safety (crash pro-
tection) systems that protect humans at an accident.
For passive safety, the signal processing opportunities
are mainly in collision and roll-over detection for firing in-
ternal airbags and seat-belt pre-tensioners. Adaptive airbags
for the passengers can fire at two or more levels. These
systems require quite advanced signal processing and sen-
sors mainly for classifying the passenger size and position.
In the future, also external airbags and bonnet lifting for
pedestrian protection systems [25, 15] may need advanced
situational awareness.
However, the main challenges lie in active safety sys-
tems. These can be grouped into preventive systems (includ-
ing driver information and driver drowsiness monitoring),
dynamic control systems and collision avoidance systems.
Some functions in the latter two categories, sometimes re-
ferred to as advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS, or
just DAS) are summarized in Table 1. We here distinguish
longitudinal control systems mainly used when driving straight
ahead, lateral systems for cornering and maneuvering situa-
tions and rate control systems.
Table 1 illustrates that the main actuators are engine
torque and brakes. The regulations currently say that the
steered wheels must be physically connected to the steering
wheel, thus steering is not currently used as an actuator. If
these regulations change, several of the lateral control func-
tions as yaw and roll control can be improved.
Here we would like to stress the following underlying
statements for this survey:
1. Accurate state information is more important than ad-
vanced control algorithms (many of them are simple
P(I)D controllers). That is, often it is more important
what to feedback than how to feedback.
2. Using sensor fusion techniques, virtual sensors can be
derived that compute information that would be either
too costly or even impossible to measure in practice.
3. Model-based control systems are in their infancy, and
future generations may include model-based filters and
controllers.
The following five sections explain how this can be achieved
by improved signal processing.
3. CHALLENGE I: WHEEL SPEED ANALYSIS
Without doubt, the wheel speed sensor is the potentially
most informative sensor in the car. Today, the wheel speed
is measured in all cars equipped with an anti-locking brak-
ing system (ABS) system on at least one but often all four
wheels. Since the introduction of ABS control, wheel speed
signal has found many other uses. The different potential
applications presented in scientific literature and patents are
discussed in this section.
Angular velocity: Road 
surface and tire characteristics 
overlayed on vehicle velocity
Angular velocity correlation: 
road surface and velocity
Angular velocity model: depends on engine torque, drive 
line, steering angle, friction relations and so on
Angular velocity difference: 
yaw rate
1ω 2
ω
3ω 4ω
L
B
Fig. 1. Wheel speed applications.
First, the angular speeds relate to the vehicle speed at
this tire by the tire radius. The speed content is a low fre-
quency component. The tire dynamics can be modelled by
three springs for torsional and radial forces in the tire rim,
and the radial forces in the tire tread. Table 2 indicates the
three modes. There are also wide-band noise induced from
the road surface and low-frequency disturbance from the
spring-damper system. Further, narrow-band disturbances
as harmonics of the different rotating parts in the drive-line
can sometimes be observed.
Examples of applications of the wheel speed informa-
tion found in the literature (mainly patents) are illustrated in
Figure 1 and include spectral analysis, correlation analysis
and model-based approaches in signal processing.
0-10 10-15 15-30 30-60 60-80 80-100 100–
Speed Mode 1 Noise Mode 2 Noise Mode 3 Noise
Damper Narrow-band noise components
Table 2. Frequency spectrum for the wheel speed signal,
with approximate limits in Hz.
4. CHALLENGE II: VIRTUAL SENSORS
A virtual sensor [19] is here defined as a physical quan-
tity not directly measured, which is computed from existing
sensors. The reason could be to avoid costly sensors, as
in the tire pressure monitoring system in Section 4.2, or to
1430
Actuator Primary sensors
System Brake Acc. Steering Driver Speed IMU DME Brake Vision
Anti-locking Brake Systems (ABS) x – – – x – – x –
Brake Assistance Systems (BAS) x – – – – – – x –
Cruise Control – x – – x – – – –
Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) – x – – x – x – –
Stop and Go x x – – x – x – –
Anti-spin control (v < 20 km/h) x – – – x – – – –
Traction control (v > 20 km/h) – x – – x – – – –
Forward Collision Warning (FCW) – – – x x – x – –
Forward Collision Mitigation (FCM) – – – – x – x – –
Parking aid systems – – – x – – x – x
Forward Collision Avoidance (FCA) x – x – x – x – –
Lane Keeping Aid systems (LKA) – – (x) x x – x – x
Lane Change Aid systems – – – x – – x – x
Adaptive steering – – x – x – – – –
Yaw control x – – – x x – – –
Roll stability control x – – – x x – – –
Roll-over detection (airbag) – – – – x x – – –
Table 1. Advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) grouped by longitudinal control, lateral control and rate control,
respectively. Driver is here considered an actuator controlled by a haptic warning (dashboard lamp, sound, vibration). IMU
means an inertial measurement unit, comprising at least one accelerometer or gyroscope. Distance measuring equipment
(DME) includes radar, lidar and sonar measuring range and angle to objects. Vision includes camera and IR sensors.
compute abstract quantities as tire road friction as in Section
4.1, where practically feasible sensors do not exist.
4.1. Road friction monitoring
A friction information system would be central for all dy-
namic control systems in Table 1, and would provide valu-
able information for the driver. The literature on this sub-
ject is quite rich, see the survey [28], and a multitude of
approaches have been investigated:
• Slip based approaches, utilizing the noticable change
in wheel slip (both lateral and longitudinal) with tire
road friction [17].
• Spectral analysis of wheel speeds, as discussed in Sec-
tion 3.
• Audio-based classification based onmicrophones ’lis-
tening’ to each tire [35].
• Vision-based classification based on surface texture
and reflection properties [9].
• Behavioural approaches analysing the driver behaviour
[9], assuming the driver is aware of the friction and
adapts his driving style. This is of course not an ap-
proach for monitoring, but can be used for initializing
ABS control for instance.
• Sensor-based approacheswhere the sensors are mounted
in the tires’ tread for measuring stress [9].
Despite these efforts, no friction monitoring system exists
on themarket. Friction is a complicated physical phenomenon,
and the variety of tire models and possible combination of
makes and wear has delayed the introduction of large scale
cheap commerical friction estimators substantially. Accu-
rate and robust friction estimation may require multiple ap-
proaches with an over-all information fusion. Basically, all
the approaches listed above can be used to obtain a more
robust estimate.
4.2. Tire pressure monitoring systems (TPMS)
The following quote from the NHTSA press release from
April 7, 2005, indicates the importance of development of
reliable and affordable systems for tire pressure monitoring:
All passenger cars will have tire pressure mon-
itoring systems beginning with the 2006 model
year according to a new motor vehicle safety
standard by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA). The regulation will
require that manufacturers install a system that
can detect when one or more of the vehicle’s
tires are 25 percent or more below the recom-
mended inflation pressure. Phase-in of the new
regulation will begin Sept. 1, 2005. All new
4-wheeled vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or
less must be equipped with the monitoring sys-
tem by the 2008 model year.
Further,
NHTSA estimates that about 120 lives a year
will be saved when all new vehicles are equipped
1431
with the tire pressure monitoring systems. In
addition, consumers should see improved fuel
economy and increased tire life.
See http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/rules/rulings for
more details. The user interface is suggested to be as in
Figure 2.
Today, most TPMS are sensor based [8, 1], using a pres-
sure, temperature and possibly acceleration sensor in each
wheel, each sensor kit equipped with a radio transmitter and
battery. This is perhaps more of a sensor technology chal-
lenge.
However, there are indirect systems as well utilizing the
wheel speeds at a much lower cost. More advance meth-
ods make use of sensor fusion on different scales. First,
wheel speed analysis as described in Section 3 may indi-
cate tire pressure information. Second, model-based sensor
fusion can improve the estimation of relative tire radii sub-
stantially. High-level fusion of different principles may in
the end enable a TPMS that satisfies the NHTSA rules.
Fig. 2. The TPMS warning symbol.
5. CHALLENGE III: DYNAMIC STATE
ESTIMATION
The dynamic control systems in Table 1 need accurate state
information about the vehicle’s position and orientation and
their time derivatives. This is in general a model based fil-
tering problem where the (extended) Kalman filter applies,
where a partial vehicle model is used to improve sensor
measurements and for diagnosis. We will here describe two
non-standard problems.
Examples of application include [18]
• Offset-free velocity and acceleration (longitudinal dy-
namics) for cruise control and collision mitigation [37].
• Offset-free yaw rate and drift-free yaw angle (lateral
dynamics) that can be used for ESP, lane keeping aid
and navigation.
• Offset-free roll angle estimation (roll dynamics) for
use with motorcycles (ABS, anti-spin, headlight con-
trol) or offset-free roll rate for vehicles (air bag cur-
tains and roll-over detection).
• Positioning support and backup for satellite based po-
sitioning as the Global Positioning System (GPS) [13],
see Figure 3. This includes improved dead-reckoning
with small drift.
Sensor cost reduction and model based control system may
necessitate further signal processing advances in this area.
Fig. 3. Positioning without GPS, using the particle filter
based on wheel speed measurements and road map only,
here implemented in a handheld computer.
6. CHALLENGE IV: SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
In particular collision avoidance systems and adaptive cruise
controllers need advanced situational awareness, and short
time prediction of the road and other vehicles’ motion is
crucial for safety related systems. Pre-crash systems, such
as belt pre-tensioners and pedestrain protection systems, need
accurate predictions and an estimate of the type of object of
an imminient collision. Further, future engine control sys-
tems may need a road prediction for optimizing fuel econ-
omy and for automatic gear shifting.
The main sensors needed for situational awareness are
one or a combination of radar [27], laser scanner [29, 15],
lidar ([34] describes a 3D version), IR (including so called
thermopiles [25]) and vision [31].
We split the situational awareness into the following sub-
problems:
• Classical target tracking problems, including Object
recognition and the data association problem, which
are more or less similar problems to what is studied
in the area of air traffic control [4].
• Tracking and prediction of ego-motion (estimation of
host vehicle state).
• Road geometry tracking and prediction.
1432
• Decision algorithms for warning and intervention sys-
tems.
Most publications in this field are concerned with target
tracking and object recognition, describing sensor fusion
with a subset of the sensors listed above: Sensor fusion
of laser scanner and vision in the European Union project
PROTECTOR is described in [21], while [16] also includes
radar for pedestrian protection within the same project. Sen-
sor fusion with focus on pedestrians is also treated in [26].
A Bayesian framework for sensor fusion is described in [6,
7], within the EU project CARSENSE. In the same project,
[24] focuses on low speed situational awareness. Fusion of
radar and IR is described in [32] and [30] fuses laser scan-
ner and vision. Sensor fusion with focus on lateral tracking
is described in [22] based on GPS, vision and radar and in
[3, 2] based on vision and radar.
An ACC system based on inter-vehicle communication
is described in [36]. Sensor requirements for a stop and go
ACC system is discussed in [20, 14, 15].
A straightforward decentralized implementation of fil-
ters for situational awareness might look like the upper struc-
ture in Figure 4. The filters all need motion models for the
road geometry, the ego-motion, the motion of tracked vehi-
cles (often simpler than for ego-motion), and even a separate
model for decision support.
However, road geometry and vehicle movements are highly
correlated, and further dependent on the type of vehicle (mo-
torcycles have fast dynamics, bikes move slowly and close
to the road side, etc.). More specifically, a lateral movement
of tracked vehicles can be due to either a lane change or
road bend, but a yaw change in the host vehicle gives quite
similar sensor signals from the radar, lidar or vision sensor.
Further, a displacement in two consequtive video frames of
the radar bearing measurement from a stationary object may
be used as a virtual yaw velocity sensor. See the left plot in
Figure 5 for and illustration.
This motivates a centralized filtering approach accord-
ing to the centralized filter in Figure 4. Here, the state vec-
tors of the tracked vehicles and the road are merged into one
state vector. In this way, movements of the tracked vehicles
influence the road geometry estimate and vice versa.
The idea in centralized filtering is to merge all states in
the models for road geometry, ego-motion and tracked vehi-
cles into one state vector, cross-utilizing all measurements.
One such model was developed independently in [10] and
[22].
7. CHALLENGE V: SENSOR-NEAR SIGNAL
PROCESSING
A radar system transmits a pulse and thresholds the response
to get a range detection at each scanned bearing. The idea
of “track before detect” in the target tracking literature [5,
FILTERIMU, wheel speeds Vehicle state
FILTERRadar, IR, vision Tracking states
FILTERVision Road states
IMU, wheel speeds Vehicle state
FILTERRadar, IR, vision Tracking states
Vision Road states
Fig. 4. Decentralized versus centralized filtering.
33], is to measure the received signal energy in each range-
bearing(-doppler) cell of the radar. In this way, a 2D (3D)
image is obtained from the received waveform, as illustrated
in the right plot in Figure 5. This can be used for estimating
the spatial size of the object and its reflectance, which fur-
ther is very useful for object classification. One of the few
automotive publications on this approach [25] introduces
the term “occupancy grid” thermopile sensors.
!
3
2
1
2
Fig. 5. Left: Radar as a sensor. Responses from moving ob-
jects are used for tracking and from stationary objects they
can be used as inertial measurements. Right: The “track
before detect” concept, where the received radar energy in
each range-bearing cell is measured, rather than thresholded
(detected).
Further, camera based vision systems may be used as
both a tracking and an inertial sensor. One basic output from
image processing is a list of features. In signal processing
terms, each feature is an implicit non-linear measurement
of the relative position to other moving objects (threats) and
stationary objects. The former is the standard use of cam-
eras in automotive safety systems, but features from station-
1433
ary objects along the road hide an unexplored potential use
as a virtual sensor of velocity and yaw, pitch and roll rate.
8. CONCLUSIONS
Automotive safety systems rely on accurate estimation of
external and internal state variables as well as unobserved
environmental parameters as friction and tire pressure. We
have in this contribution surveyed the main needs for sig-
nal processing development and argued for a sensor fusion
approach where all tasks are considered jointly. First, Sec-
tion 2 summarized a number of safety systems, and it was
pointed out that a limited number of sensors can be suffi-
cient to implement a variety of safety systems. Second, the
active development of improved communication networks
enables new sensor fusion strategies.
Figure 6 extends Figure 4 and summarizes our view on
sensor fusion for future automotive safety systems. All avail-
able sensor information is communicated to the centralized
or distributed sensor fusion algorithm. This includes vision
sensors (camera, radar, lidar, IR), an inertial measurement
unit (IMU) with up to three accelerometers and three gy-
roscopes, satellite navigation, and, most importantly wheel
speeds. The output from the sensor fusion include virtual
sensor signals, navigation information, tracking information
and road geometry for collision avoidance systems.
zyx
      
    
  
,,,,, ψϕθ
6D IMU
Wheel speeds
Vision
SENSOR
FUSION
Sensor-near
algorithms
Integrated
navigation
and tracking
Diagnosis
4321 ,,, ωωωω
zyx


,,,,, ψϕθ
Feature
extraction
Optional posi-
tioning (GPS)
yx,
Optional
sensors
flagszT i ,,,δ
Navigation
information
Tracking
information
Road prediction
iiii vYX ψ,,,
Virtual sensors
Fig. 6. Sensor fusion in future vehicles?
We have pointed out signal processing challenges rang-
ing from low level sensor-near pre-processing to the high-
level algorithms for situational awareness. These are needed
in advanced driver assistance systems for decision support,
feedback control and driver alerts. Model-based control sys-
tems is one particular example, where signal processing de-
sign becomes particularly integratedwith control system de-
sign.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The long-term and extensive collaboration with NIRA Dy-
namics and Volvo Car Corporation is gratefully acknowl-
edged. Dr. U. Forssell, CEO of NIRA and the many former
and current students have substantially contributed to this
work.
Grants from Vinnova’s competence center ISIS and the
IVSS (Intelligent Vehicle Safety Systems) program are also
acknowledged.
10. REFERENCES
[1] National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. An
evaluation of existing tire pressure monitoring sys-
tems. Technical Report DOT HS 809 297, US De-
partment of Transportation, 2001.
[2] A. Amditis, N. Floudas, and A. Polychronopoulos.
Lateral motion tracking of automobiles. In 7th In-
ternational Conference on Information Fusion, Stock-
holm, 2004.
[3] A. Amditis, A. Polychronopoulos, I. Karaseitanidis,
G. Katsoulis, and E. Bekiaris. Multiple sensor colli-
sion avoidance system for automotive applications us-
ing an imm approach for obstacle tracking. In Interna-
tional Symposium on Information Fusion (IFIS), pages
812–817, 2002.
[4] Y. Bar-Shalom and X.R. Li. Estimation and tracking:
principles, techniques, and software. Artech House,
1993.
[5] Y. Boers and J.N. Driessen. Particle filter based detec-
tion for tracking. In IEEE American Control Confer-
ence, volume 6, pages 4393–4397, Arlington, 2001.
[6] C. Coue, T. Fraichard, P. Bessiere, and E. Mazer.
Multi-sensor data fusion using bayesian program-
ming: an automotive application. In IEEE Int. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Switzerland, 2002.
[7] C. Coue, T. Fraichard, P. Bessiere, and E. Mazer.
Using bayesian programming for multi-sensor multi-
target tracking in automotive applications. In IEEE
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Taipai,
Taiwan, 2003.
[8] Apollo Deliverable D7. Intelligent tyre systems – state
of the art and potential technologies. Technical report,
EU-IST-2001-34372, 2003.
[9] U. Eichhorn and J. Roth. Prediction and monitoring of
tyre/road friction. In Proceedings of FISITA, London,
June 1992.
1434
[10] A. Eidehall and F. Gustafsson. Combined road pre-
diction and target tracking in collision avoidance. In
IEEE Intelligent Vehicle Symposium (IV’04), pages
619–624, Parma, Italy, 2004.
[11] Folksam. Hur sa¨ker a¨r bilen? (How safe is the car?).
Technical report, http://www.folksam.se/
resurser/pdf/sakrabilar2005.pdf, 2005.
[12] Swedish Institute for Transport and Communica-
tions Analysis Statistics Sweden. Road traffic in-
juries 2003, official statistics of sweden. Tech-
nical report, http://www.sika-institute.
se/databas/data/ss 2004 6.pdf, 2004.
[13] U. Forssell, P. Hall, S. Ahlqvist, and F. Gustafsson.
Novel map-aided positioning system. In Proc. of
FISITA, number F02-1131, Helsinki, 2002.
[14] R. Fredriksson, Y. Ha˚land, and J. Yang. Evaluation of
a new pedestrain head injury protection system with
a sensor in the bumper and lifting of the bonnet’s
rear part. In Enhanced Safety of Vehicles Conference,
pages 1–11, 2001.
[15] K.C. Fu¨rstenberg, D. Linzmeier, and U. Lages. Pedes-
trian recognition and tracking of vehicles using a vehi-
cle based multilayer laser-scanner. In World Congress
on Intelligent Transport Systems and Services (ITS),
Madrid, 2003.
[16] D.M. Gavrila, M. Kunert, and U. Lages. A multi-
sensor approach for the protection of vulnerable traffic
participants – the protector project. In IEEE Instru-
mentation and Measurement Technology Conference,
Budapest, 2001.
[17] F. Gustafsson. Slip-based estimation of tire – road fric-
tion. Automatica, 33(6):1087–1099, 1997.
[18] F. Gustafsson, S. Ahlqvist, U. Forssell, and N. Pers-
son. Sensor fusion for accurate computation of yaw
rate and absolute velocity. In Society of Automo-
tive Engineers World Congress, number SAE 2001-
01-1064, Detroit, 2001.
[19] F. Gustafsson, M. Drevo¨, U. Forssell, M. Lo¨fgren,
N. Persson, and H. Quicklund. Virtual sensors of
tire pressure and road friction. In Society of Automo-
tive Engineers World Congress, number SAE 2001-
01-0796, Detroit, 2001.
[20] R. Hallouzi, V. Verdult, H. Hellendoorn, and J. Ploeg.
Experimental evaluation of a co-operative driving
setup based on inter-vehicle communication. In
IFAC/EURON Symposium on Intelligent Autonomous
Vehicles (IAV), 2004.
[21] N. Kaempchen, K.C. Fuerstenberg, A.G. Skibicki, and
K.C.J. Dietmayer. Sensor fusion for multiple automo-
tive active safety and comfort applications. In Interna-
tional Forum on Advanced Microsystems for Automo-
tive Applications (AMAA), Berlin, 2004.
[22] A. Klotz, D. Hoetzer, and J. Sparbert. Lane data fu-
sion for driver assistance systems. In 7th International
Conference on Information Fusion, Stockholm, 2004.
[23] KPMG. Global auto executive survey. Automotive mo-
mentum, 1(1), 2005.
[24] J. Langheim and A.J. Buchanan. Carsense – sensing
of car environment at low speed driving. In World
Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems and Ser-
vices (ITS), Turin, 2000.
[25] D. Linzmeier, M. Mekhaiel, J. Dickmann, and K.C.H.
Dietmayer. Pedestrian detection with thermopiles us-
ing an occupancy grid. In World Congress on Intelli-
gent Transport Systems and Services (ITS), Washing-
ton, 2004.
[26] P. Marchal, D. Gavrila, L. Letellier, M-M. Meinecke,
R. Morris, and M. To¨ns. Save-u : Sensor data fu-
sion for improved vulnerable road user detection. Bu-
dapest, 2004.
[27] C. Metz, J. Grubert, J. Heyen, A.F. Jacob, S. Janot,
and E. Fully integrated automotive radar sensor with
versatile resolution. IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 49(12):2560–2566, 2001.
[28] S. Mu¨ller, M. Uchanski, and K. Hedrick. Estimation
of the maximum tire-road friction coefficient. Jour-
nal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control,
125:607–617, 2003.
[29] B. Nitsche and R. Schulz. Automotive applications
for the alasca laserscanner. In International Forum on
Advanced Microsystems for Automotive Applications
(AMAA), Berlin, 2004.
[30] A. Oyaide, V. Willhoeft, C. Shooter, and A. Heenan.
Lane and road detection using video and laserscanner
data. In World Congress on Intelligent Transport Sys-
tems and Services (ITS), Madrid, 2003.
[31] H. Rehbinder and B.K. Ghosh. Pose estimation using
line-based dynamic vision and inertial sensors. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 48(2):186–199,
2003.
[32] M.E. Russell, C.A. Drubin, A.S. Marinilli, W.G.
Woodington, and M.J. DelCheccolo. Integrated au-
tomotive sensors. IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 50(3), 2002.
1435
[33] D.J. Salmond and H. Birch. A particle filter for track
before detect. In IEEE American Control Conference,
volume 6, pages 4393–4397, Arlington, 2001.
[34] R.M. Schwarte. Breakthrough in multichannel
laser-radar technology providing thousands of high-
sensitive lidar receivers on a chip. In International
Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE), volume 5575,
pages 126–136, 2004.
[35] A. Sva¨rdstro¨m. Classification of road surface using
a neural net (in swedish). Technical Report UPTEC
93 056R, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, June
1993.
[36] P. Venhovens, K. Naab, and B. Adiprasito. Stop and
go cruise control. International Journal of Automotive
Technology, 1(2):61–69, 2000.
[37] K. Watanabe, K.C. Cheok, and K. Kobayashi. Ab-
solute speed measurement of automobile from noisy
acceleration and erroneous wheel speed information.
SAE Paper, 75-82, 1992.
