Link Layer Assisted IP Mobility Protocol
Guo-Yuan Mikko Wang, Chunhung Richard Lin
Abstract: As the popularity of IEEE 802.11 rises, many problems
have been arisen that were absent in the traditional wired net-
works. A serious problem has arrived from the movement of mo-
bile nodes - this mobility characteristic will make the data trans-
mission mechanisms differ from before. A general solution to this
problem is Mobile IP. But Mobile IP in itself has problems and will
create a big latency. The roaming nodes will need to complete all
registrations before being able to receive data. The registrations
then become the bottleneck in data transmission. In this paper, it is
proposed that a novel link layer handoff is designed to deliver that
data to a destination before the roaming nodes complete its Mobile
IP registrations. The proposed method is completely independent
of network layer; therefore, no matter Mobile IPv4 or Mobile IPv6
is used, the proposed method can work correctly. No modification
to the existing specification is necessary in Mobile IP.
Index Terms: Bridge, Handoff, IEEE 802.11, Moblie IP, Router,
Wireless.
I. INTRODUCTION
The IEEE 802.1 1-based wireless local area networks (LANs)
are becoming an important part in the networking environment.
A growing number ofwireless LANs have been set up in univer-
sity campus or public buildings as access networks to the Inter-
net. These wireless LANs are consisting ofmobile nodes (MNs)
which access services hosted on servers residing on the wired
network, and access point (AP) that serves as a layer-2 bridge
between wired and wireless network.
With the growing popularity of IEEE 802.11 technology,
many problems have been arisen which were absent in the tra-
ditional wired networks. One of the problems caused by the
MN characteristic - mobility is that it will make data transmis-
sion mechanisms in a traditional wired network fault, requiring
a new approach to solve this problem.
A general solution to the problem of data transmission of the
MN is Mobile IP [ 101, [7]. It provides IP level mobility to allow
MNs to roam across wireless LANs without loss of network-
layer connectivity and disrupting transport sessions. In Mobile
IP, there are home agents (HAs) and foreign agents (FAs) run-
ning on the wired network. These mobile agents (MAs) periodi-
cally broadcast Mobile IP advertisements on the wireless LANs.
Whenever a MN migrates from one subnet to another, it will
receive Mobile IP advertisements from the corresponding FA.
The MN intercepts these advertisements and sends a registra-
tion request to the newly discovered FA. There is an IP-over-IP
tunnel between FA and HA be established after due authentica-
tion. Finally, the MN sent a Binding Update message to the HA.
From this point onwards, the data transferred between MN and
servers can through the bidirectional tunnel. Ifthe MN migrates
G.-Y. M. Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
National Sun Yet-Sen University, Taiwan (email: mikko@net.nsysu.edu.tw).
C. R. Lin is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineenrng, Na-
tional Sun Yet-Sen University, Taiwan (email: lin@cse.nsysu.edu.tw).
to a new foreign subnet, it needs to bind with the FA of the new
foreign subnet, and needs to dismantle the association with the
FA in the previous subnet. This procedure is performed every
time the-MN enters a new wireless IP subnet. The entire process
of switching from one MA to another as a MN moves across
adjacent wireless IP subnets is called Mobile IP handoff.
Before the Mobile IP handoffcompletes, packets destined for
the MN will not be delivered. The MN is essentially discon-
nected with the wired network. This handoff latency may cause
degradation in communication quality, specifically when real-
time applications such as audio or video are used. The faster the
link speed, the more packets will be lost during handoff. In ad-
dition when the TCP is used for data transmission, roam around
wireless networks may diminish the performance due to TCP
retransmission policy. Therefore, it is important to reduce this
handoff latency.
In this paper, it is proposed that a novel link layer handoff is
designed to deliver data to a correct destination before a roam-
ing node completes its Mobile IP handoff. No modification
to the existing specifications is necessary in Mobile IP. Since
the proposed approach is worked in link layer, whatever Mo-
bile IPv4 or Mobile lPv6 is used, the proposed approach still
works correctly. To the best of the authors' knowledge, the pro-
posed approach is the fastest known handoff performance for
such infrastructure-mode wireless LANs.
The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. Section II
summarizes related work. Section III introduces the Fast Link
Layer Handoff (FLLH) and an enhanced version of the FLLH
to eliminate the problem caused by message delays. The re-
sults of experiments with UDP and TCP packet transmissions to
evaluate performance enhancement are presented in Section IV.
In Section V the influence ofTCP retransmission policy and a
buffer agent designed are discussed. Finally, Section VI evalu-
ates the research and the conclusions are presented.
II. RELATED WORK
The delay caused by the Mobile IP handoff can be divided
into two elements; firstly the movement detection and secondly
the registrations.
Micro-Mobility [2]: A network that is divided into a hier-
archical structure and location management is handled locally
while the MN enters into a smaller area at a lower hierarchical
level. This approach is intended to reduce the round trip time
registrations and the handoff delay when there is a large dis-
tance between the visited network and the home network of the
MN.
Cellular IP [16]: It is a technique to use proprietary con-
trol messages for location management. The messages will be
routed in a regional area therefore speeding up the registrations
and reducing the handoff delay.
The above solutions to reduce the handoff delay are focused
1-4244-OOO-7/05/$20.00 02005 IEEE. 1114
on registration signaling delay and have no discussions about
movement detection.
NeighborCasting [14]: This mechanism is based on utilizing
of collected information. During the handoff, each MN inforns
the new MA about the previous MA, helping it to build a map
of its neighbors. When a notification from the link layer is re-
ceived, each MA utilizes the neighbor map to forward the data
to all the neighboring MAs. In stable state, this mechanism can
make MN continuously receiving data from wired network be-
fore the registration completed. This mechanism requires mod-
ifications to Mobile IP to support the discovery of neighbor-
ing MAs. Although the movement detection and registration
have few influences to handoff in this mechanism, it wasting the
wired bandwidth in order to multicast data to the neighbors and
violates the standard ofIEEE 802. 11-based infrastructure-mode
to make wireless interface card communicate with the previous
MA during the handoff. This mechanism also assumes the avail-
ability ofa notification mechanism from link layer to the Mobile
IP software about the impending handoff, but it is incompatible
for the existing wireless interface card.
Fast Handoff [17]: This proposal is based on link layer and
uses a bridge and AP to reduce the handoff delay of the Mobile
IP allowing for a better performance. In addition, this approach
also has problems, including the lack of ability to oversee the
entire network, restricting it to a simple LAN network which can
not be enlarged to an Extended LAN environment. The change
in the message transmission of a bridge causes many differences
when compared to the traditional bridge, because of this it may
not be used on an existing bridge directly.
Low-Latency Handoff [13]: This proposal combines link
layer and network layer. It uses a software probing mechanism
to reduce the latency of movement detection and adds caching
agent into each wireless subnet to replay Mobile IP advertise-
ment. It sets some policies in HUT dynamic Mobile IP soft-
ware implementation [5] to accelerate the registration request
sent from MN to reduce the latency of registrations. The hand-
off latency in this approach can reduce to 100 ms. Although
it gives low handoff latency, there are some problems exist-
ing. The caching agent needs to broadcast a dummy Ethernet
frame periodically to trick switches and bridges. The period-
ically broadcast may affect the traffic in the network. All the
MNs and caching agents have been required to know a well-
known MAC address to make this approach work. The policies
used to accelerate the registration are not completely compatible
with Mobile IP standard.
Therefore a novel approach is needed to eliminate the prob-
lems mentioned before, which is compatible with existing net-
work devices to be able work correctly in an infrastructure-mode
wireless network and has no modifications to the existing spec-
ifications in Mobile IP.
III. FAST LINK LAYER HANDOFF
A. Preliminary
The function ofthe Mobile IP has been implemented in many
commercial products. It may be impractical to change any spec-
ifications of the Mobile IP as the result of doing this may mean
an extensive change in the backbone ofthe networks. Therefore
it is essential not to alter any characteristics of the Mobile IP. In
the proposal, the approach that is used is based on link layer to
reduce the handoff delay which is compatible with the existing
Mobile IP specifications. A software probing mechanism is used
to detect the link-layer handoffand trigger a control message. A
dedicated router and bridge with a control message can reduce
the handoff delay successfully. The control message will notify
the router and bridge to change the forvarding path, making the
roaming node receive the data before the Mobile IP registrations
are completed.
B. Fast Link Layer Handoff
B. I Movement detection
In an IEEE 802.1 1-based infrastructure-mode wireless LANs,
the movement of MN can be detected after its wireless inter-
face card compares the difference between the signal strengths
of the two APs and initiates a link-layer handoff. In all known
IEEE 802.1 1 cards, this link-layer handofflogic is built into the
firmware of the wireless interface card, and does not generate
any interrupts to notify the system. Although the wireless inter-
face cards do not provide any information to notify the system
about link-layer handoff happened, there is a hardware control
functionality that allows software to probe the identity ofthe AP
with which a wireless interface card is currently associated.
The proposed approach uses the software probing algorithm
in the Fig. 2 of [13] to detect the movement of MN. The de-
signed control message will be sent when the associated AP
changed. If vendors support to generate an interrupt when the
associated AP changed in the future, the cost of this software
probing mechanism can be removed completely.
B.2 Fast data forwarding
The handoff delay is a serious consequence in real-time ap-
plication and will degrade the transmission quality. So the pro-
posed method endeavors to reduce this handoff delay and make
sure data packets can be delivered to the correct communication
range before the MN completes its Mobile IP registration.
Bridge and L2-Module are used to change the transmission
path of the data frame before the Mobile IP registration is com-
plete. This can reduce the handoff delay to prevent the loss of
many packets allowing the data packets to be continually re-
ceived by the receiver. This approach requires the following
changes to be made in an existing network.
MN: When the MN detects its migration by the software
probing, a control message will be sent - the routing update mes-
sage (RUM). The MN will put its own MAC address in the mes-
sage then it has the same source and destination MAC address
in the Ethemet header.
Bridge: When the bridge receives a RUM, it will forward the
data frame to all the ports exclusive ofthe received port and then
rely on the MAC address in this frame to update its FDB table.
Other forwarding procedures remain unchanged. The algorithm
in Algorithm I is used to describe this method1.
L2-Module: This module is worked as a bridge and added
into router to create a fast forwarding data path. The different is
'The bridge also needs to use Distributed Spanning Tree Algorithm [I1 to
prevent the loop-path situation.
1115
Algorithm 1. The operations of the bridge.
80
B | 3 | 2 |
70 .. ..
Table 1. FDB table in enhanced FLLH.
60
-
so
40
it only forwards the frame which destination matches the entry 40
in FDB table, if it passes all other frames to upper layer. The 30
algorithm in Algorithm 2 is used to describe this method. 5 1
C. Enhanced Fast Link Layer Handoff
Regardless of a wired or wireless network, the data transmis-
sion has a message delay problem. Therefore, this problem may
also affect the RUM. In the Fast Handoff method [17], if the
message delay problem occurs in any control message, it will
result in the data frame continuing to deliver to an incorrect des-
tination until the Mobile IP registration is completed. This will
lead to the Fast Handoff method becoming useless.
In the proposed approach, the MN will add a Sequence Num-
ber (SN) into every RUM. This SN will increment every time
the MN sends out the RUM. As the bridge and L2-Module can
only process the data frame of link layer, so the SN is to be
placed into the type field of Ethernet header. If the bridge and
L2-Module receive a RUM, it will compare whether the SN in
the control message is larger than the SN in its FDB table or not.
If it is larger, the entry in FDB table will be updated in addition
to discarding the control message2.
The FDB table is used by enhanced FLLH similar to Table
1, if the bridge and L2-Module receive a RUM from A and its
SN is 3, this means that a message delay has occurred and the
control message will be discarded. The SN must be larger than
4, then the FDB table can be updated by the control message.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, the performance of the FLLH is analyzed
in an experimental network environment as shown in Fig. 1.
Mobile-IP releases for FreeBSD 4.9 of Secure Mobile Network-
ing project developed by PSU [12] are used as a Mobile IP soft-
2The type field only has two bytes, so it has an opportunity for wrapped SN.
Therefore, if the SN in RUM is smaller and far from the one in FDB table, e.g.
3 in RUM and 65530 in FDB table, the FDB table still will be updated.
10 10 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Link-layer HandoffNumber
Fig. 2. Link-layer Handoff Latencies.
ware suite. The driver used for the Orinoco wireless interface
card is a modified version. The modification is to provide the
software probing functionality to retrieve the ID of the current
AP. The HA, AP1 and FA, AP2 are multi-function stations and
work as a Mobile Agent and Access Point at the same time. The
L2-Module is added into router. The wired LAN portion was
constructed with l0OBase-T and the wireless LAN portion was
constructed with 802.1 l b.
A. Link-layer HandoffExperiment
The link-layer handoff is controlled by the wireless interface
card itself From the empirical analysis by Mishra et. al [9], it
shows that link-layer handoff latency has large variation. This
handoff duration is between 30 to 550 ms due to the particular
AP and wireless interface card are used. In this experiment, the
beginning and the end of link-layer handoff latency are marked
by reception of the last packet on the old subnet and the first
packet on the new subnet. The Fig. 2 illustrates the link-layer
handoff time measurements. It can be observed that the differ-
ent values ranging from 30 to 90 ms with no apparent distri-
bution. However, most of the link-layer handoffs are observed
to be completed in the range from 40 to 50 ms. The average
value of the link-layer handoff in our testing bed is 46.72 ms.
Thus, the control message usually can be triggered after 50-60
ms from the link-layer handoff begins if the Threshold of soft-
ware probing [13] sets to two.
1116
When the bridge receives a frame from port x, it determines the physical addresses of its
source, i , and of its destination, j. If j is a multicast address, the frame is then forwarded
through all other ports except the port x.
If the pair [i, x l does not exist in the FDB table, it is added.
If [j, x ] is in the FDB table and j != x then
the frame is discarded
else if i = j then (this means the received frame is routing update message)
it is forwarded to all ports except x and update the FDB table
else if there is a pair [ ji y] in the cache then
the frame is forwarded through port y
else
it is forwarded to all ports except x
When the L2-Module receives a frame from port x, it determines the physical addresses
of its source, i, and of its destination, j.
Ifi j then (this means the received frame is routing update message)
it is forwarded to all ports except x and update the FDB table
If there is a pair [ j, y] in the cache then
the frame is forwarded through port y
else
it is passed to upper layer
Algorithm 2. The operations of the L2-Module.
CN 140.117.176.34
LD AP *,
AP 2,F)
S2 Router, Bridge S Route
140.117.175x 140.117176.x Bndg
CN
140.117.176.36;
1A AMD K6-2 450MHz Realtek 8139c(wired) 'FreeBSD 4.9
Accton EW-3201(wireless)
-A AMD K6-2 450MHz Realtek 8139c(w-ired) FreeBSD 4.9
_Accton EW-3201(wireless)
IA,YL C3 IGHz VIA VT6103(PoTlI) FeeBSD 49
ge D-Link DFE-530TX(Port2) ree
AMD K6-2 450MHz Realtek S139c RedHat Linux 9.0
Intel Pentium-3 500MHz Orinoco 802.1 lb Silver FreeBSD 4.9
Fig. 1. Experiment Network.
30 - EB. UDP Transmission Experiment
25
- 20
s:
v.
1
Ic 10
The Corresponding Node (CN) is made to transmit 64 bytes
of UDP packets to the MN at 50 ms intervals to measure the
handoff period, the results are shown in Fig. 3. The Fig. 3(a)
shows the case where only the Mobile IP is used and it can be
seen that 2.4 seconds of disruption occurs during handoff and
47 packets are lost. It can also be seen that the transmission
times ofthe 20th, 98th and the 184th packets in the same figure
are larger than those of the other packets. This is thought to
have been caused by retransmission on the wireless link. After
Mobile IP registration is completed, the transmission times of
the first packet (87th) received by the MN is 3 ms more than the
other packets. This is caused by updating of the routing table.
Fig. 3(b) shows the case where the FLLH has been used. In
this figure, it can be seen that the FLLH takes about 60 ms to es-
tablish a new forwarding path and causes only one packet to be
lost. Although the FLLH still causes a packet to be lost, it can
forward UDP packets to the correct destination before Mobile
IP registration complete. About I ms is added to the transmis-
sion time due to the processing in the L2-Module. The results
show that the proposed method can make the data continue to
be received by the roaming MN before completing its Mobile IP
registration process and reduce the influence caused by handoff
effectively. The real-time applications such as audio and video
(e.g., QuickTime Player [I]) usually have a buffer to eliminate
the lag. If the proposed method is used and the player keeps few
buffers, then the lag can be eliminated completely.
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 2
Packet No.
(a) Mobile IP only.
DO
2 *0 ..
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Packet No.
(b) Mobile IP with FLLH.
Fig. 3. UDP Packet Transmission Experiment.
C. TCP Transmission Experiment
To be able to evaluate the TCP transmission experiment the
CN was used as the File Server and the MN was used to down-
load a 15 mega byte file from the CN through a File Transfer
1117
........
.... ........................... .... .... .... .. .
M: il Mobil ........ n osplte
... .. , ...
... ...~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~......,,,,,, . ..... 7 .
.,....... .............
,......
.........
.....................
........................
Moil .P R.itr compl.te
.......... ... .........
1. 1,
4LuLd"
3469000000 r I I
3468500000
3468000000
= 34675QO000C
3467000000
3466500000
3466000000
2908500000
2908000000
2987500000
2987000000
z£i
ni
6 7 0 9 10 I11 12 13
Time (s)
(a) Mobile IP only (retransmit twice).
......... .......... ........... ............
M. bl- wdf Peio ....
- s -
-MobieIPandSenodMobile]:}Z b { co~'mpletc
.
.. .. ............
2986500000'
8 10 12 14
Tine (s)
(b) Mobile IP only (retransmit thri
1453000000
1452500000 .
14500000
1451000000 . .;.
14505000..00_.
1450 5000000
1449500000
7 S 9
Time (s)
(c) Mobile IP with FLLI
Fig. 4. TCP Packet Transmission
Protocol (FTP). The sender follows Ren
ceiver uses the delayed ACK. On the rec(
16K bytes (the default setting). During th
handoff is made by moving the MN fro:
range of AP, to AP2. The evaluation of
Fig. 4.
The cases where only the Mobile IP is i
4(a) and 4(b), it can be seen that the 3.3.
disruption occurs respectively. Fig. 4(c)
the FLLH method is used and 1.02 secc
curs. In the following section the reason:
be discussed. In the before mentioned s
that if the connection is bi-directional (e.E
larger communication disruption compar
one (e.g., UDP). In Table 2, the static I
base of the measurement and then it iscc
situations in Fig. 4. From this table, it is
off degrades the transmission performanc
comparison shows that the proposed me
eliminate the harm caused by the handoff
.y---
Static MN 573.10 26.8 100%
Fig. 4(a) 514.41 29.86 89.76%
Fig. 4(b) 453.64 33.86 79.16%
Fig. 4(c) 549.39 27.96 95.86%
Table 2. Transmission performance comparison.
V. DISCUSSION
A. TCP retransmission
lPRegisir$el
A ig The TCP retransmission policy is responsible for retransmit-
ting lost packets to guarantee the reliability of the transmission
data. But it will degrade the throughput if the handoff has oc-
..............................curred. Fig. 4(a) shows that packet loss occurs at the 7.4th sec-
............ ond when theMN started to move. The Mobile IP handoff is
completed by the 10.1 st second; however theMN is not able to
16 18 receive packets again until the 10.75th second. Therefore there
-ee times). is a space 0.65 seconds of silent time which is caused by TCP
retransmission.
toide IP Regis0ation _e44ete - In Fig. 4(b), the throughput degradation is more serious. The
z packet loss occurs at the 9.1st second and the Mobile IP hand-
<................ off is completed at the 12.4th second, however it is not until the
16.56th second that the MN continues to receive packets again.
The silent time duration is 7.46 seconds. The TCP retransmis-
. .... .............
sion causes the extra 4.16 seconds of silent time which is much
larger than the condition in Fig. 4(a). The condition in Fig. 4(a)
,0 11 Ii2 is evaluated in a very low loading network environment (only the
necessary connections exist). The experiment network environ-
ment in Fig. 4(b) has some other data transmissions and is close
to the real network environment; therefore it will be discussed
Experiment. below.
In a typical TCP implementation, the lower and upper bound
of the retransmission timer are1 second and 64 seconds, re-
spectively [15]. The retransmission timer was set to1 second
o TCP [3] and the re- (the minimum value) at the 9.1st second. The retransmission
eiver side the buffer is timer expires during the MN handoff then approximately I sec-
e file transmission the ond later (at the 10.15th second) the lost packet was then re-
m the communication transmitted. At this time, the retransmission timer is multiplied
the results is shown in by an element of the array for the exponential backoff{1, 2,
4, ..., 64}, and is set to 2. At the 12.2nd second, the packet is
used are shown in Fig. retransmitted for the second time and the retransmission timer
5 and 7.56 seconds of is set to 4, therefore the third retransmission is invoked at the
shows the case where 16.3rd second. It can be seen in the Fig. 4(b), that the packet
)nds of disruption oc- is retransmitted three times. Since the Mobile IP handoff mayfor this difference will occupy 3 seconds, retransmission could occur 2 to 3 times, so
tatement, it is known that the interruption of the data transmission due to handoffmay
g., TCP) it will cause a be between 3 to 7 seconds.
e to the unidirectional The fast forwarding data path is established in 60 ms when the
MIN is used to be the proposed method is used as shown in Fig. 4(c). Since the mini-
mpared with the three mum value of the TCP retransmission timer is1 second, so the
,
known that the hand- packet will be retransmitted at the 8.96th second. The duration
w
e and the result of the of time that data transmission is interrupted does not depend on
thod can substantially the Mobile IP handoff, and its maximum value is always1 sec-
ond. Even in a network with Large Extended LANs, the FLLH
1118
UFAIMMM
29xsoowon
.... ........ .................... ...............
Complete
..............
.............. ............ .............
0
ist 2nd
.I ..............
........
E
0ze)1
CT1
6
handoff period only increased with the number of network seg-
ments which the RUM went through. This proves that the lost
packet is being retransmitted for the first time and will reduce
the degradation of transmission performance substantially, only
if the moving speed of the MN is less than the transmission rate
of electric signal.
When noting that multiple packets could be lost during hand-
off, Reno TCP terminates the fast retransmit as soon as one
packet is lost and subsequent packets lost causes a slow start
making it more difficult to reduce the influence of interruptions
in data transmission [6]. In this case of multiple packets lost
during handoff, the NewReno TCP [4] or the SACK option [8]
will effectively improve the situation.
B. Buffer Agent
To achieve seamless handoff, the packet lost of bidirectional
connection (e.g., TCP) should be eliminated. Some proposals
suggest using a network device to buffer the connection data,
but with no further discussions on how many packets should be
cached. In this paper, a network device called Buffer Agent (BA)
is proposed to solve the problem and is described as follows.
(i) BA should be added to each network segment intended to
provide wireless communication.
(ii) BA is not necessarily an independent network device. It
could be bound with MA or any other devices on the
WLANs.
(iii) All frames sending out fromBA after receiving a RUMwill
use the MAC address in the RUM as their destination.
(iv) There is a reference table in BA to record each IP address
and its corresponding MAC address.
(v) Since a bidirectional connection could be identified by its
socket pairs, BA will buffer only one packet for each direc-
tion ofthe connection. After receiving a RUM, BA will
(I) Check its reference table to find the corresponding IP
address of the MAC address in RUM.
(2) Search in the buffer for the packet with the IP address
as its destination.
(3) Send the packet to the IP address.
(vi) BA will also cache the latest ICMP router advertisement
and send it out upon receiving a RUM. The recipient of
the ICMP router advertisement will then change its default
router setting and then be able to send packets out.
Considering an example in Fig. 1, BA1 and BA2 are added
to S1 and S2 respectively. After MN detects AP2 and sends
a RUM, the RUM will be received by BA2. BA2 will then re-
spond by sending the latest ICMP router advertisement it cached
to MN. The RUM will also be received by BA1. BA1 will then
respond by sending all the buffered packets with destination ad-
dress same with MN's IP address to MN. Since the RUM has
changed the forwarding data path of all routers and bridges, the
packets responded from BA1 can reach MN without any prob-
lem. Therefore, no packet lost will occur in this method.
Since there is no packet lost, TCP retransmission policy will
not start. The factors causing performance degradation such as
slow start will also be eliminated. The transmission time in Ta-
ble 2 can reduce to 26.89 seconds and achieve a high perfor-
mance ratio as 99.67%.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper the Fast Link Layer Handoff method which is
completely independent of network layer has been discussed;
therefore, no matter Mobile IPv4 or Mobile IPv6 is used, the
proposed method can work correctly. A software probing mech-
anism is used to detect the link-layer handoff and trigger a
control message. A routing update message (RUM) is used to
change the forwarding path in a bridge and router. These can
help the data be delivered to the correct destination before all
Mobile IP registrations are completed. This method can be
used in either a simple wireless network or the network with
Large Extended LANs. The enhanced version can further solve
the problem within the message delay. By using the proposed
method, the packet transmission interruption due to Mobile IP is
reduced to the same time as a FLLH handoff. The TCP retrans-
mission times can be reduced only once. Furthermore, a buffer
agent designed can eliminate the packet lost of bidirectional
connection completely. Therefore the communication quality
can be kept at a reasonable level. Even real-time applications
can also work under an acceptable situation.
REFERENCES
[1] Apple Computer, Inc., http://www.apple.com/quicktime/
[2] A.T. Campbell and J. Gomez, "IP Micro-Mobility Protocols," ACM SIG-
MOBILE Mobile Computer and Communication Review (MC2R), Vol. 4,
No. 4, pp. 45-54, October 2001.
[31 K. Fall and S. Floyd, "Simulation-based Comparison of Tahoe, Reno and
SACK TCP,"? Computer Communication Review, Vol. 26, pp.5-21, July
1996.
[4] S. Floyd and T. Henderson, "The New Reno Modification to TCP's Fast
Recovery Algorithm," RFC2582, IETF, April 1999.
[5] D. Forsberg, J. Malinen, T. Weckstrom and M. Tiusanen, "Distributing
mobility agents hierarchically under frequent location updates," in Proc.
6th IEEE Int. Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems Applications, San
Diego, CA, Feb. 1999, pp. 159-168.
[6] J. Hoe, "Improving the Start-up Behavior of a Congestion Control Scheme
for TCP," in ACMSIGCOMM96, August 1996.
[7] D. Johnson, C. Perkins and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in IPv6,"
RFC3775, IETF, June 2004.
[8] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd and A. Romanow, "TCP Selective Ac-
knowledgment Options," RFC2018, IETF, October 1996.
[9] A. Mishra, M. Shin and W. Arbaugh, "An Empirical Analysis of the IEEE
802.11 MAC Layer Handoff Process," ACMSIGCOMM Computer Com-
munication Review, Vol. 33, Issue 2, April 2003.
[10] C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support for IPv4," RFC3344, IETF, August 2002.
[11] R. Perlman, "An algorithm for distributed computation of a spanning tree
in an extended LANN," ACM SIGCOMM Computer and Communication
Review, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 44-53, September 1985.
[12] "PSU Secure Mobile Networking project,"
http://www.cs.pdx.edu/research/SMN/
[13] S. Sharma, N. Zhu and T. Chiueh, "Low-Latency Mobile IP for
Infrastructure-Mode Wireless LANs,'" IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communication, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp.643-652, May 2004.
[14] E. Shim and R. Gitlin, "NeighborCasting: A fast handoff mechanism in
wireless IP using neighboring foreign agent information,' presented at the
New York Metro Area Networking Workshop, New York, 2001.
[15] W.R. Stevens, TCP/IPRllustrated, Volume 1. Addison Wesley, 1994.
[16] A. G. Valk6, "Cellular IP: A New Approach to Intemet Host Mobility,"
ACMSIGCOMM Computer and Communication Review, Vol. 29, No. 1,
pp. 50-65, January 1999.
[17] H. Yokota, A. Idoue, T. Hasegawa and T. Kato, "Link Layer Assisted Mo-
bile IP Fast Handoff Method over Wireless LAN Networks," in MOBI-
COM'02.
1119
