 1
Development and Improvement of Compressor 
Performance Prognostics for US Navy Gas Turbine 
Engines12 
 
John Scharschan, Daniel Caguiat 
Naval Surface Warfare Center, Carderock Division 
1569 Constitution Avenue 
Philadelphia, PA 19112 
caguiatde@nswccd.navy.mil, scharschanjw@nswccd.navy.mil 
(215) 897-7820, (215) 897-8702 
 
                                                          
1 0-7803-8870-4/05/$20.00© 2005 IEEE 
 
2 11.0704 
Abstract—In December 2003, Naval Surface Warfare 
Center Gas Turbine Emerging Technologies section 
conducted land-based fouling testing on a Rolls 
Royce/Allison 501-K17 Gas Turbine engine.  The purpose 
of this testing was to collect data to improve a previously 
developed compressor health prognostics algorithm. For the 
purpose of Phase I of this testing, fouling was accomplished 
by injecting salt into the gas turbine inlet air stream.  Phase 
II of this testing will consist of fouling the middle and back 
regions of the compressor.  Influence coefficients can then 
be developed for each of these regions indicating how a 
given region affects overall performance.  Typically, in a 
marine environment, fouling of the front stages occurs due 
to ingested salt while fouling in middle and rear regions 
occurs from a combination of ingested salt and oil seal 
leakage. 
In order to monitor engine performance, it was necessary to 
add several sensors to the existing test cell. In addition, 
hardware was added to both ingest and monitor the 
concentration of salt in gas turbine inlet air.   
Preliminary results from Phase I indicate that front stage 
compressor fouling causes a clear increase in inlet static 
pressure.  This is due to the mass flow restriction through 
the compressor.  Additional results are currently being 
summarized and data is being utilized to improve the 501-
K17 compressor performance algorithm previously noted. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ..................................................... 1 
2. OBJECTIVES .......................................................... 2 
3. METHODOLOGY.................................................... 2 
4. RESULTS................................................................ 3 
5. CONCLUSIONS....................................................... 6 
6. REFERENCES......................................................... 7 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the year 2000, the Gas Turbine Emerging Technologies 
Section of the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Carderock 
Division (NSWCCD) had previously conducted salt-
injection fouling testing on a Rolls Royce/Allison 501-K17 
gas turbine.  Three of these engines provide electrical power 
to the U.S. Navy’s Ticonderoga (CG-47) class ships.  The 
purpose of this testing was to determine which sensors 
could be used to accurately monitor and quantify 
compressor performance and fuel consumption onboard 
ship.  From this data, a Compressor Wash Prognostics 
(CWP) algorithm was developed which was intended to 
predict the optimal time to shutdown the engine for an 
offline wash.  After the ingestion of approximately 0.07 
pounds of salt, the engine was shut down and an internal 
wash was performed.  Figures 1 through 3 show compressor 
efficiency, specific fuel consumption and turbine inlet 
temperature (TIT) versus load before and after the detergent 
wash was performed.  Since compressor discharge total 
pressure was not available at the time of this test, efficiency 
was calculated based upon static pressures. 
 2
 
Figure 1 
 
 
Figure 2  
 
Figure 3 
In order to detect performance trends on a land-based test 
facility over a short period of time, the testing was 
accelerated by spraying salt solution into the engine inlet at 
much higher concentrations than would be seen in a typical 
shipboard environment.  In addition, larger salt-water 
droplets were used, which increased the probability of blade 
impingement for a given droplet, thereby further 
accelerating the test.  This accelerated test method, while 
allowing for visualization of long term sensor trends as 
compressor performance degrades, did not allow for the 
determination of actual rates of change for a given sensor 
that would be typically seen in a ship environment. 
For the accelerated fouling test, it was assumed that fouling 
would occur due to ingested salt.  Although this is most 
likely a reasonable assumption given the sea-salt 
environment of a marine gas turbine application, there are 
other sources of fouling, such as oil seal leakage, which 
could affect the middle or latter stages of the compressor. 
2. OBJECTIVES 
The objective of this testing was to improve the predictive 
capability of the CWP algorithm by providing additional 
data sets upon which the algorithm could be trained. 
This is to be accomplished in a two-fold manner: 
Phase I: Inlet salt ingestion testing was conducted with finer 
salt-water droplets in order to simulate a wider range of 
inlet fouling possibilities which can occur onboard ship. 
Phase II: Middle and rear-stage compressor fouling will be 
simulated. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
Salt Injection and Measuring Equipment 
In order to conduct inlet fouling with finer droplets, 
ultrasonic nebulizers were installed several feet above the 
gas turbine inlet to allow for adequate mixing.  Figure 4, 
below, shows the nebulizer piping arrangement, which was 
located approximately 13 feet above the actual engine inlet. 
 These nebulizers injected salt-water droplets with a mass 
median diameter of less than 10 micron, whereas during 
Phase I fouling testing, droplets on the order of 30 micron 
were used.  In addition, a hydrogen flame photometer was 
used to measure salt concentration of air as it entered the 
gas turbine inlet plenum.  The average salt concentration 
used was 0.06 parts per million.  According to the military 
specification for U.S. Navy marine gas turbine engines 1, 
the average salt used for simulating a sea-salt environment 
is anywhere from 0.003 to 0.03 parts per million.  This 
means that for this accelerated test, the average salt 
concentration used was anywhere from 2-20 times the 
amount used for real-time simulation.  In addition, the 2-4 
micron droplet size used for this test is toward the lower end 
of the range specified for real-time simulation since the 
specification recommends that equal percentages of the 
particles fall into the ranges of less than 4 micron, 4-13 
micron, and greater than 13 micron. 
 3
 
Figure 4 
 
Additional Instrumentation Installed 
Currently, the land-based test cell used for this testing has 
only a limited number of sensors for monitoring 
performance.  These include sensors for measuring speed, 
engine load, turbine inlet temperature, and fuel flow. 
In addition to these existing sensors, the following sensors 
were added (Note, states 2 and 3 refer to the compressor 
inlet and discharge, respectively.  Also, Ps, Pt, and T refer 
to static pressure, total pressure, and temperature, 
respectively): 
(1) Pt2 probe (see Figure 5). 
(2) Ps2 pressure ring (see Figure 6) 
(3) T2 probe. (See Figure 7) 
(4) Combination Pt3, Ps3 probe (see Figure 8) 
(5) T3 Probe 
 
Figure 5 
  
 
Figure 6 
 
 
Figure 7 
 
Figure 8 
4. RESULTS 
For this test, approximately 0.52 pounds of salt were 
ingested as opposed to 0.07 lbs of salt for the initial fouling 
test conducted in 2000.  This amount of salt was selected, 
based on typical shipboard inlet conditions 1, to simulate 
what might occur after 500 hours of operation.  Current 
 4
shipboard maintenance specifies that the gas turbine should 
be washed after every 500 hours of operation.  If the 
shipboard filtration system allowed a downstream salt 
concentration of 0.01 parts per million with an average 
droplet size of 2-4 micron, this test would likely represent 
the change in parameters.  However, since there are a 
number of variables that affect droplet size and 
concentration, this land-based to shipboard comparison 
cannot be made. This test does show, however, that 
regardless of droplet size, the same trends will eventually be 
seen including an increase in turbine inlet temperature, 
decrease in compressor efficiency, and increase in specific 
fuel consumption. After completion of the fouling process, 
the gas turbine was shut down and an internal wash was 
completed.  Figures 9 through 11 show results from data 
taken for turbine inlet temperature, compressor efficiency, 
and specific fuel consumption before and after the detergent 
wash.
 
 
 
Figure 9 
 5
 
Figure 10 
 
Figure 11
 
 Table 1, below, shows the change in each of the measured 
parameters per 1/100 lb of salt ingested for both large and 
small droplets.  As shown, the ratio of the change in each 
parameter for fouling with large droplets is between 50 and 
100 times that of fouling with small droplets.  This 
correlates well with previous work performed in the area of 
inertial impaction, which indicates that the probability of a 
droplet impinging on a blade varies with the square of 
droplet size2.  
 
Although the gas turbine filters are designed to allow only 
smaller particles, typically less than 8 micron, to pass-
through, these filters can clog, thereby allowing by-pass 
doors to open and salt-air to flow directly into the gas 
 6
turbine inlet.  Therefore, on a ship where the filtration is not 
functioning properly or where salt-air is leaking past the 
filtration system entirely due to imperfections in the 
ductwork, it is possible for larger droplets to be ingested.  In 
this case, fouling would occur much more rapidly, as 
displayed in the fouling test conducted in 2000. 
Table 1 
SFC Comp Eff TIT
700 HP 0.52% -1.33% 1.04%
1400 HP 0.64% -1.44% 1.38%
2000 HP 0.83% -1.39% 1.25%
Average 0.67% -1.39% 1.22%
SFC Comp Eff TIT
1000 HP 0.01% -0.01% 0.01%
2000 HP 0.01% -0.02% 0.01%
3400 HP 0.01% -0.02% 0.01%
Average 0.01% -0.02% 0.01%
Ratio 52 83 127
30 Micron MMD
3 Micron MMD
% parameter change per 1/100 lb salt
 
In addition, based upon previous work performed in the 
area of gas turbine compressor performance 3, one of the 
most pronounced parameter changes can be observed in 
inlet depression.  This is defined as the decrease in inlet 
static pressure due to the mass flow through the gas turbine. 
 Thus, as fouling occurs, mass flow is restricted, and a 
corresponding decrease in inlet depression can be observed. 
In order to verify this capability on the 501-K17 gas turbine, 
the previously mentioned inlet static pressure ring was 
installed on the inlet bellmouth assembly as shown in Figure 
6.   
Figure 12 shows the inlet depression versus engine load 
before and after detergent wash was performed.  As shown, 
this parameter exhibits a noticeable change for the amount 
of salt ingested.  Table 2 shows the percent variation of 
each of the calculated parameters for steady state gas 
turbine operation.  Clearly, the change in inlet depression 
seen as a result of fouling is greater than the typical 
variation seen during steady state operation.  Changes in 
SFC, compressor efficiency, and to a lesser extent, TIT are 
not as pronounced as inlet depression, and may be difficult 
to detect onboard a ship where filtration is working 
acceptably.  Therefore, a beneficial modification to the 
CWP algorithm might be to incorporate inlet depression as 
a feature.    
 
  
 
Figure 12   
Table 2 
SFC TIT Compressor Efficiency Inlet Depression
0.55% 0.05% 0.41% 0.03%  
This, coupled with changes in TIT, and to some degree, 
efficiency, might serve as an indicator of even slight 
compressor fouling whereas SFC increase could be used as 
an indicator of a potential filter problems.  
5. CONCLUSIONS  
The data collected during Phase I of this test simulates a 
shipboard salt environment in which filtration is working 
properly whereas previous testing was performed with 
larger droplets which could possibly be seen when filters 
clog and/or leakage is present in the shipboard ductwork. 
This data is intended to allow the existing CWP algorithm 
to be trained for both small and large droplets and to more 
accurately predict the optimal time-to-wash in either regime. 
 Results from Phase I indicate that even when smaller 
droplets are ingested, SFC, TIT, and compressor efficiency 
will all eventually yield detectable trends, albeit at 
drastically reduced rates.   
 Under steady state operation, SFC, compressor efficiency, 
and to a lesser extent, TIT all exhibit variations on the order 
of the change which might be seen as a result of fouling.  
Therefore, it would be a great improvement to the algorithm 
if inlet depression, which shows a much greater change as a 
result of fouling, is added as a key feature. 
Phase II testing will be conducted in order to allow the 
algorithm to differentiate between inlet fouling and latter 
stage fouling which might be caused by oil seal leakage.  
This will allow latter stage fouling to be subtracted from the 
time-to-wash prediction such that the algorithm only 
account for inlet fouling, the effects of which can be 
mitigated by washing. 
 7
6. REFERENCES  
(1) MIL-E-17341C, Military Specification: Engines, Gas 
Turbine, Propulsion and Auxiliary Naval Shipboard, 
Section 4.3.2.3 
(2) J. Baker, Analysis of the sensitivity of Multi-Stage 
Axial Compressors to Fouling at Various Stages, 
Naval Post Graduate School, Sept. 2002 
(3) Weinert, E.P., Carlton, G.A., Salt-Water Problems in 
Marine Gas Turbines, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers 65-GTP-18, 1965 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
Daniel Caguiat obtained a bachelor’s degree in Mechanical 
Engineering from Drexel University in 1999 and a Master’s 
Degree in Mechanical Engineering/Robotics from 
University of Pennsylvania in 2004.  He has worked for 
Naval Surface Warfare Center, Carderock Division since 
1997.  His main areas of work have included gas turbine 
compressor performance, coatings, and online water wash 
systems as well as lube oil and fuel oil analysis systems. 
John Scharschan obtained a Bachelor’s Degree in Marine 
Engineering from United States Merchant Marine Academy 
in 1983 and is currently pursuing a Master’s Degree in 
Computer Engineering from Villanova University.  He has 
worked for NAVSEA Philadelphia for over 20 years.  His 
main areas of work currently pertain to gas turbine 
condition-based maintenance. 
 
 
