2004 IEEElPES Transmission & Distribution Conference & Exposition: Latin America 
USE OF CONTROLLED SWITCHINTG 
SYSTEMS IN P O W R  SYSTEM TO 
MITIGATE SWITCHING TRANSIENTS. 
EXPERIENCE 
TRENDS AND BENEFITS - BRAZILIAN 
Paul0 C. Fernandez (*), Paul0 C. V. Esmeraldo, Jorge Amon Filho, Cesar Ribeiro Zani. 
Abstract- Switching transients in power systems have always 
been a matter of concern in studies of power equipment 
insulation coordination. However, considering the new 
institutional, environmental and economic existing constraints in 
most of the power systems all arround the world, and, still, with 
the growing of the use of sensitive loads - from home digital 
clocks to fully automated industrial production lines, in the last 
few years -, these power system transients coutd become, more 
and more, a big issue. 
This paper aims to present some aspects regarding relevant 
switching transients in power systems and the means to mitigate 
them. It will present the classical means of mitigation, such as 
circuit breakers with pre-insertion resistors, etc. However, the 
main focus will be on controIled switching systems (CSS), since it 
is becoming more and more an atractive way, technically and 
economicaliy speaking, to mitigate such switching transients and 
to improve power quality QQ), in order to cope with the new 
power system requirements and constraints. 
In the case of Brazilian interconnected power system, supply 
is usualIy provided by long ERV transmission lines, not only to 
connect far hydroelectric power plants to the main load centres, 
but also to interconnect power systems of different regions. Due 
to the long distances between load centers and generation plants, 
several transmission lines and substations of 550kV up to 800 kV 
had to be built in the country, soon after these voltage levels 
started to be used by utilities in other parts of the world. And, as 
a consequence of such peculiar characteristics of the Brazilian 
power system, there is the need of many voltage control 
equipment, such as shunt capacitor banks and reactors. Still, the 
switching of long EHV transmission lines and power 
transformers in such system has become a special issue. 
Examples of switching transients problems occurred in the 
Brazilian interconnected power system and how they can be 
mitigated will also be presented. 
Whenever possible, it is also presented available data 
considering cost reduction regarding power equipment, due to 
the use of such controlled switching systems. The cost reduction 
is possible, mainly, by reducing insulation levels of large 
capacitor banks, eliminating circuit-breakers auxiliary 
chambers, reducing transmission lines costs, due to a possible 
compaction and reducing arresters rating.. 
(*) Paulo Cesar Fernandez, FURNAS Centrais Elktricas S.A. - R.Real 
Grandem, 219, Bloco E, sala 106, Botafogo, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brad, CEP: 
22.283-900. Tel: (+5521) 25284289, Fax: (+5521) 2528-5804, 
email :paulocf@fumas.com.br 
1 
Indm Terms- power systems - switching transients - 
controlled switching - power quality - cost reduction. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
razilian power supply is usually provided by long EHV 
transmission h e s  due to the power system characteristics 
in this country, not only to connect far hydroelectric 
power plants to the main load centers, but also to interconnect 
power systems of different regions. Due to the long distances 
between load centers and generation plants, several 
transmission lines and substations of 550kV up to 800 kV had 
to be built in the country, soon after these voltage levels 
started to be used by utilities in other parts of the world. 
It will be presented some aspects regarding switching 
transients in Brazilian power system, in the context of 
insulation coordination and also power quatity. It will be seen 
the means to mitigate them, such as circuit breakers with pre- 
insertion resistors, controlled switching systems (CSS), 
current limiter reactors and zinc-oxide arresters. 
It will also be made a performance comparison among the 
devices used to reduce switching transient over voltages and 
over currents, emphasizing which is the best solution for each 
case presented. 
But special attention is given to the nowadays available 
technique used to mitigate these switching transients in power 
systems, i.e., controlled switching systems (CSS) using 
synchronizing devices. 
To illustrate, some examples of costs reduction, regardmg 
power equipment, due to the use of controlled switching, 
mainly reducing insulation levels of large capacitor banks, 
circuit-breakers auxiliary chambers elimination, arresters 
rating reduction and transmission lines costs, due to a possible 
compaction will be shown, 
The paper deals with the main characteristics, the typical 
voltage and current waveshapes and amplitudes o f  switching 
transients, basically in the following four situations of interest 
in power systems: 
B 
-switching on of large power system capacitor banks; 
-long EHV transmission lines energization and automatic 
reclosing; 
-power transformers energization; 
0-7803-8775-9/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 85 
-shunt reactors de-energization. 
TI. COMMENTS ON CONTROLLED SWITCHING 
Controlled switching, as a technical solution for switching- 
surge limitation, is not a new idea. This possibility and its 
benefits had already been investigated almost 30 years ago, 
particularly for no-load line and capacitor banks switching on. 
However, satisfactory technological solutions to put in 
practice the idea of synchronous-switching could only be 
developed in more recent times, thanks to the evolution of 
high-voltage circuit breaker designs and to the development of 
micro-electronic devices applied to power systems. The 
experiences acquired with the use of synchronous-switching in 
power systems have shown that this technique can be very 
eEcient to control switching transients, having thus become a 
powerful means at the disposition of utilities to help them 
meet both stringent insulation coordination requirements and 
power quality improvement. 
The basic idea of controlled switching devices is to comand 
precisely the mechanical closing or opening of circuit breaker 
contacts at optimal instants or angles, regarding power 
ffequency voltage and current respectively. In this way, 
switching transients could be greatly reduced, eliminating 
stresses within system equipment and also improving power 
quality supply levels. Such device consists basically of a zero 
detection module, a delay-time calculation module and the 
power module, which receives the comand from the second 
described module and send a power signal to the breaker close 
coil or open coil. 
It is relevant to say that, for closing switching performance, 
the statistical characteristics of breaker contacts scatter and the 
behaviour of dielectric strength between closing contacts 
(withstand voltage decay) are very important parameters. 
These two characteristics will determine the maximum making 
voltage between breaker contacts, specially in compensated 
transmission lines reclosing application and, thus, the 
mitigation Ievel of switching transients. 
ID. TRANSMISSION LINES SWITCHING 
The energization and automatic reclosing of EHV 
transmission lines can cause high transient overvoltages. As 
mentioned before, this has always been a matter of concern in 
studies of insulation coordination. Going ahead in nowadays 
challenges, and taking into account the power quality issues, 
ihese transient overvoltages may contribute to sensitive load 
supply interruption. This could occur if the technique used to 
reduce and control switching transient overvoltages does not 
limit the overvoltage values in acceptable levels, regarding the 
protection operation of the substation equipment or of other 
lines connected to the sending end point of the switched 
transmission line. This could happen specially in unusual 
system configurations, as during restoration procedures. 
To meet modern challenges in transmission systems, 
compacted line designs have been indicated as a solution for 
the ever-increasing need to transmit great amounts of power, 
since a reduced number of transmission lines is required 
(which also means less right-of-way). Comparing to 
conventional lines, the compact ones warrant a considerable 
~ 
86 
2 
power transmission increase and also, in some contexts, a 
series compensation reduction. The conventional and compact 
tower differ basically in the phase-to-phase distance. For 
compact towers it can be 50% shorter, according to insulation 
coordination criteria, which leads to a lower line surge 
impedance and, consequently, a higher surge impedance 
loading (SL). Since the phases in compacted lines are closer, 
the insulation faiIure risk increases, hence effective 
overvoltages control devices must be used. 
To avoid such problems, some switching overvoltage 
reduction techniques are widely used, such as metal-oxide 
arresters (MOA) and/or breakers with closing resistors (FIR). 
The usual closing resistor and insertion time values are around 
400 Ohms per pole and g to 12 milliseconds, respectively. 
T h i s  closing resistor values correspond approximately to the 
surge impedance of EHV transmission lines. 
More recently CSS and ZnO arresters became available to 
be used together. As the initial amplitude of voltage wave 
propagation at the instant of line energization, due to the 
closing of the circuit-breaker contacts, depends on the voltage 
across these contacts, the switching transient overvoltage can 
be effectively limited by means of the control of the instant the 
breakers close in each phase, regarding the instantaneous 
values of system voltage and residual line voltage (due to line 
trapped charge), in case of reclosing. 
The closing resistor is still the most used conventional way 
for reducing the transient overvoltages in this case. Although 
controIled switching seems to be a comparable solution, for 
tine switching overvoltage control it has not been applied 
widely up till now, since development in this area is very 
recent. The controlled switching basic characteristics (circuit- 
breaker and synchronizer scatters) must assure, at least, the 
same results obtained with the PIR, regarding switching 
transient overvoltage mitigation. 
A performance comparison among these transient 
overvoltage reduction techniques can be done using the results 
of a TNA study, where it was simuiated the circuit showed in 
Fig. 1. The simulated conditions consisted of the following 
operations : 
- line energization; 
- tripolar high speed line reclosing; 
- monopolar high speed line reclosing 
1 
Fig. 1 .  Schematic one-line diagram of the studied system 
Table I shows the maximum values obtained for several 
system configurations Three different ways of overvoltage 
control were tested: only surge arresters (MOA); MOA plus 
pre-insertion resistors (PIR) and MOA plus synchronizers or 
controlled switching system (CSS). 
Another performance comparison amongst these transient 
overvoltage reduction techniques was done using the results of 
statistical digital simulations with the aid of the Alternative 
Transients Program (ATP) for two different tower designs, 
i.e., conventional and compact ones. 
The simulations were based on the same statistic criteria of 
TNA study, to the same system described in Figure 1. The 
circuit-breaker main requirements are the rate-of-decay of the 
withstand voltage of the contact gap for closing operations 
(dddt I CB ) and the scatter (01 ) of the mechanical closing 
time, defined in terms of a standard deviation of a Gaussian 
distribution. The requirements for the controller performance 
itself can be generalized in terms of the standard deviation 
(12) of the scatter of the real switching instant, determined by 
the controller, in relation to the optimum instant, which would 
eliminate the switching stresses 161. Controlled switching 
requirements values normally used are presented below: 
- dddt  I CB > dddt of the power fiequency voltage at zero 
- 01 = 0.5 ms (typical value according the nowadays circuit 
- [12 = 0.6 ms (for no-load line auto-reclose [4]); 
- U2 = 0.15 ms (for no-load line energization [4]). 
crossing (allowing to close at zero voltage); 
breakers technology [3]); 
3 
A resume of the statistical ATP results is presented in 
Figure 2. The results are related to the middle of the line, 
where the highest overvoltage levels occur, since overvoltages 
at both ends of the line are limited by the MOA plus 
compensation provided by shunt reactor. 
From the results showed in Table 1 and Figure 2, it is 
possible to observe the effectiveness of the application of 
closing resistors or CSS, regarding the control or limitation of 
phase-to-ground switching overvoltages. These devices 
effectively control transient overvoltages and keep the energy 
absorption levels of arresters far below their capacity. It can 
also be seen, by the results obtained, that this effectiveness of 
PIR and of CSS in controlling transient overvoltages are quite 
comparable, with a small advantage for closing resistors, 
which are more efficient, mainly in automatic reclosing. The 
advantages of CSS in this comparison is the cost reduction of 
line breakers, by elimination of some components as auxiliary 
chambers, and an improvement of this equipment reliability, 
since many utilities often report problems with pre-insertion 
resistor mechanisms during the operational life of E W  circuit 
breakers. 
TABLE I 
Switching overvottages during EHV line energization and auto-reclosing ofFig. 1. - 
IV. CAPACITOR BANKS ENERGIZATION 
Closing switching of large capacitor banks in power 
systems may generate transient overvoltages and large inrush 
currents. Specifically in back-to-back configurations - where 
a capacitor bank is energized very near, electrically speaking, 
of other capacitor banks already energized - the transient 
inrush currents have a component of high frequency (up 10 
kHz) which damps in about one or two cycles. These 
switching transients may cause local stresses to the 
substation’s equipment andor remote effects at the far end of 
transmission lines connected to the mentioned substation. 
During the switching off of capacitor banks, transients are not 
a problem normally. In this case the maximum overvoltage 
Ievels are quite well controlled by surge arresters and TRV 
(Transient Recovery Voltage) has a low slope. Also, the 
currents are not of great amplitudes and, thus, they do not 
represent a big issue. 
Regarding local substation equipment stresses due to the 
transients generated during the switching on of capacitor 
banks, there may be mechanical and dieletric damages with 
capacitor bank cells or its circuit breaker, strong erosion of 
circuit breaker contacts, transient potential rise of the 
substation grounding mat and transient noise affecting control 
and protection systems. Remote effects may be overvoltages 
at the far end of radial connected transmission lines andor 
overvoltages in secondary of transformers at the far end of 
these lines. These overvoltages depend on the amplification 
factors, applied over the voltage traveling waves injected into 
these lines by the capacitor bank switching, or possible 
resonances within this system. 
Brazilian power system has experienced some of these 
related problems due to large capacitor banks switching. 
Some of them, and their consequences, will be described 
87 
4 
which is being energized. Thus, the first sinusoidal flux peak 
would be much lower ban it could be if no closing resistors 
were used, since the flux wave is obtained by integrating the 
voltage signal applied to the windings. This reduced flux peak 
added to residual flux will not allow sirong saturations of 
transformer iron core. The usual values of closing resistors 
and insertion times used to switch on power transformers of 
230 kV up to 800 kV are 400 to 800 Ohms per pole and 8 to 
I2 milIiseconds respectively. 
Nowadays we already can foreseen the use of CSS to 
reduce inrush currents when a power transformer is energized. 
The ideal situation is achieved when the residual flux in its 
iron core is well-known previouslly the energization 
switching. As the sinusoidal flux caused by the applied 
system voltage is superimposed upon the residual flux, the 
optimal instant of breaker closing can be achieve using the 
controlled switching, in order to add initially a sinusoidal flux 
with an opposite signal with respect to the residual flux. In 
this case, there will not be saturation, or it will be very weak, 
resulting in very low amphtudes of magnetizing currents 
during the fast cycles (inrush currents), which is the desired 
result. 
However, it is generally very difficult to determine the 
values or even the signals of residual fluxes, specially on 
transformers which have delta connections, normally with 
tertiary windings. For practical purposes, there is a general 
rule that can be applied, establishing the optimum closing 
instant around + 90 or -90 degrees, regarding the applied 
system voltage to the transformer winding. 
In the Brazilian interconnected system it was already 
observed transformers trip out afterwards energization of other 
transformers. One of these events ocurred in 1997 during the 
execution of special field tests to obtain the real saturation 
curve of a 3451230 kV - 225 MVA power transformer. During 
these field tests, the 345 kV side breaker was closed at the 
system voltage wave zero-crossing level. Doing so at the 
appropriate moment, the sinusoidal flux was added to the 
known residual flux, previously set in the transformer iron- 
core. Thus, the total flux reached the leveI of 1.7 pu. This 
strong saturation of the transformer iron core had created a 
possible condition in order to produce transferred saturation 
(sympathetic interaction) amongst transformers, and it 
happenned in this case. Due to the transferred saturation, 
during the execution of such saturation curve measurements, it 
was registered undesired trip of two nearby SVC transfomers, 
right afterwards the tested transformer breaker was closed by 
tbe controlled switching device commanded by the Furnas’ 
on-site laboratory. This ocurred due to primary neutral 
overcurrent protection operation. If the parallel transformers’ 
protection had operated also, there would have been 
interruption of a great amount of loads supplied by these set of 
345/230 kV - 225 MVA transformers at this substation. 
hereafter. 
One of such examples, which is worth to mention, is the 
case of a capacitor island of 4 x 200 MVAr1345 kV sited at the 
far end of Itaipu power plant transmission system. It is 
foreseen that this island will have ten capacitor banks in near 
future, resulting in 2,000 MVAr of shunt capacitive 
compensation. In such case, the transient overvoltages were 
not significant, being the interest concentrated only in 
mitigating the transient overcurrents effects, since they indeed 
were causing equipment damage (erosion of breaker contacts 
and damage of many capacitor cells). These problems were 
resulting in equipment operating availability reduction 
(capacitor banks and their breakers) and system operation 
reliability reduction. 
It has been also experienced problems related to strong 
flashovers between grounded parts of equipment structures in 
another substation of Brazilian interconnected system, when 
existing capacitor banks at the substation were energized in 
some back-to-back configurations. This was caused by 
transient potential rise of the substation grounding mat during 
these capacitor banks energization. In this case the use of CSS 
could eliminate the problem. 
Sometimes, in order to reduce transient innrush currents 
when energizing a large power system capacitor bank it is 
used a current limiter reactor in series with capacitor bank. 
Although t h i s  alternative is one of lowest costs, it does not 
control transient overvoltages, besides it might have problems 
regarding resonances with power fkquency current or voltage 
harmonics, which could flow into the capacitor bank. An 
advantage of this technique is to provide also short-circuit 
current reduction in the capacitor bank bay. This sometimes 
may be helpful in reducing the influence area of sensitive load 
disturbance. The common criterium to determine this area is 
to fmd the places in power system where a short-circuit 
aplication reduces the voltage under certain limits, for instance 
below O S  or 0.7 pu levels. 
V. POWER TRANSFORMERS ENERGIZATION 
Power transformer energization inrush currents can reach 
up 10 or 20 times the nominal current, reaching values near 
the magnitude of short-circuit currents. This phenomenum 
can affect greatly the power quaIity in the power system, since 
there may be protection system misoperation - of the switched 
transformer itself or of other transformers sited electrically 
near it (sympathetic interaction). The undesidered outage of 
power transformer due to this phenomenum can interrupt the 
supply of appreciable amounts of loads. The presence of high 
intush currents fowing into the power system may cause also 
unacceptable voltage variations, regarding the sensitive loads 
supplied. 
The usual mean to mitigate switching transients of power 
transformers is the use of closing resistors in their circuit 
breakers. More recently, the use of CSS is also becoming 
available. 
The idea with the use of closing resistor is to reduce the 
instantaneous voltage values, during the first half-cycle of 
system voltage wave, applied to windings of the transformer 
VI. SHUNTREACTORS 
The switching off operation of shunt reactors generates 
transient overvoltages due to current chopping and reignition. 
The fvst one is created by the chopping of the reactor 
88 
inductive current before its natural zero crossing. This occurs 
in all inductive loads switching off, in more or less degrees of 
severity. The last one is created when recovery voltage 
between breaker contacts exceeds the dielectric strength ofthe 
gap. The problem in this case is the rate of rise of recovery 
voltage, that may damage the windings insulation . 
Synchronous opening of shunt reactor banks reduce almost 
to zero the probability of reignitions, by setting the mechanical 
opening instant of each breaker pole a little after the current 
zero crossing, in order to increase arcing time. This allows 
sufficient mechanical separation between breaker contacts at 
the instant the electric arc is extinguished, providing the 
breaker dieletric cold characteristc value will be high enough 
to guarantee there will not have reignitions, although longer 
arcing times increase chopping overvoltages. 
This application is widely used in Furnas electric power 
system shunt reactors. There are shunt reactors of 150 
MVArl525 kV and 330 MVAr/765 kV which circuit breakers 
are openned by means of synchronizers since 7 years ago, with 
excellent results. In this case it was observed only a small 
overvoltage due to current chopping of the longer arcing times 
(about 1.1 to 1.2 pu of operating voltage). Before using this 
technique it was experienced shunt reactor insulation damage 
in Fumas power electric system due to reignition overvoltages. 
It resulted in equipment explosion, fault protection operation 
and unavailability of transmission lines. This occurrence 
affected strongly the power system reliability. 
VIl. EQUrPMENT COST REDUCTION DUE TO 
CONTROLLED SWITCHING 
Regarding capacitor banks, the cost reduction that can be 
obtained using controlled switching can be illustrated with the 
capacitor island mentioned in item 4. Considering the final 
island configuration (10 capacitor banks), the elimination of 
auxiliary chambers in circuit breakers and the capacitor banks 
being specified with a higher electric field inside capacitor 
cells, permit a total reduction cost of about 8 million dollars of 
such equipment, besides allowing an increase of equipment 
availability and system reliability. 
Regarding compacted transmission lines, besides several 
other advantages, line compaction brings also great benefits, 
in terms of cost reduction, since it permits a lower 
transmission cost per MW. This is possible since compacted 
lines have a higher SIL, allowing the transmission of the same 
amount of electric power with a lower number of circuits, 
although the compacted line cost itself is greater than the cost 
of a conventional one. It is expected that, with the technology 
evolution, the CSS effectiveness on controlling switching over 
voltages in transmission lines will increase, allowing the use 
5 
of even more compacted towers' geometry. 
In such compacted lines, the shunt reactors and metal-oxide 
arresters (MOA), and eventually CSS, would act controlling 
the phase-to-ground transient over voltages, as it could be seen 
in the given exampIes of Fig. 2. Since the phase-to-ground 
transient overvoltages are limited on both ends of the 
transmission line due to the application of MOA and CSS, the 
highest phase-to-ground transient overvoltage levels may 
occur in the middle of the line. In this case, the phase-to- 
ground overvoltages c m  be reduced by using MOA also in the 
middle of the line, as they are used on both ends of it. 
But, in the case of CSS application in transmission lines, it 
is also possible to think that it may be able to control phase-to- 
phase transient overvoltages too. This last aspect, indeed, 
would be the ,,key" aspect to have the line compaction more 
feasible. 
Of c o m e  we have to consider such costs in the context of 
each transmission system, which means that several 
parameters, besides those already considered above, would 
have to be taken into account in order to evaluate properly the 
cost reduction. Such parameters include the transmission 
amount of power, the electrical distance between phases 
considering corona effects, the voltage control requirements, 
environmental constraints to build up more transmission lines, 
right-of-way constraints-costs, etc. 
Just to give an idea regarding general costs, considering an 
integration system which have to be build up to deliver power 
fiom a new hydro powerplant into an already existing 
transmission network, using a 500 kV transmission system, in 
the less optimist perspective, using 4 parallel circuits of 
compacted lines configuration would correspond to 5 circuits 
of the conventional 500 kV transmission line used in the past. 
This, in the transmission altemative as a whole, would save 
,6 per unit of construction costs of one line, 30% to 40% less 
of right-of-way costs, and much less environmental 
interference. 
However, it is important to point out that, even if the 
perfomance of CSS in transmission lines allows more and 
more controI over switching transient over voltages, making it 
feasible to use higher degrees of line compaction, the corona 
effect will settle a physical limit to this compaction, due to the 
increasing of electrical field related to the approximation of 
line phases. 
89 
Percent (%) Voltage Above Percent ph) Voltage Above Percent (%)Voltage Above 
Energization conventional 
I '  
Reclosing conventional 
6 
Percent (9'0) Voltage Above 
Fig. 2. ATP Statistical Overvoltages Results (I  p.u. = 408kV peak phase-to-ground) - (1) With PIR (2) Synchronous Closing (3) Only MOA 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The use of switching transients mitigation techniques in 
power systems helps to improve power quality in general 
sense. Also can be stated that the controlled switching devices 
(CSS) are becoming more and more available to perform such 
role, besides allowing significant equipment cost reduction. 
It is also relevant to point out that analyses of this nature 
(over switching transients mitigation) have always been a 
matter of concern in studies of equipment insulation 
coordination. Howerver, it is necessary nowadays to go ahead 
and take power quality issues also into account, since these 
power system switching transients may affect sensitive load 
supply. 
It was seen that the application of CSS can afford a more 
wide use of compacted lines in power systems. In terms of 
capacitor banks the use of controlled switching pennits to 
avoid equipment damage, voltage oscillation and sensitive 
load dishlrbance. Regarding power transformers enagization, 
it is possible to avoid, mainly, the occurrence of sympathetic 
interaction and its undesired consequences. To shunt reactor 
switching off, there are benefits in terms of avoiding 
equipment damage due to re-ignition elimination. 
M. REFERENCES 
[I] CIGRE Task Force 13.00.01 - "Controlled switching: a state of the art 
survey.", Part 1: Electra NR 163, pp65-96, December 1995, Part 2: 
ElechaNR ltX,pp3941,February 1996. 
[2] CIGRE Task Force 13.00.01 - "Report on contmlled switching", SC13- 
94 (TF 13.00.1) IWD6, published in ELECTRA. 
[3] Fmehlich k, Hoelzl C., Carvalho A.C., Hofiauer W. - "Transmission 
line controlled switching", Canadian Electrical Association, Vancouver, 
March 1995. 
Carvalho A.C., Hofbauer W., Hogg P., Froehlich K. - "Controlled 
switching as a reliable means to reduce stresses on the circuit-breaker 
and to the network", to be presented at CIGRE SC 13 Colloquium, 27-28 
September 1995, Flonauopolis, Brazil. 
[4] 
90 
