W-CORE: A Wavelet-Based 
CompressionReconstruction Technique 
Ziad Saem-El-Dahr and Evangelia Micheli-Tzanakou’ 
Biomedical Engineering Department 
Rutgers -The State University of New Jersey 
Piscataway, NJ 08854 
Abshrer - During medical images hmnsmission and storage, the 
big size of these fides becomes a big obstacle to the 
implementation of Telemedicine systems. A lot of effort bas been 
done to solve this problem by compressing the medical images 
witb minimum loss of information. 
Wavelet lransform changed the way we represent the image into 
a colledion of d e w  at several different leveh That gave us the 
ability to cbwse the highest effective details in the image and get 
rid of otben. With some additional techniques of saving space 
and cor rdng  the artifacts produced by the reconstruction 
process, we were able to get some excellent results that reduced 
the image fie size to less than a hall without changing the lile 
format wbicb made these images still accessible to most of the 
commonly nsed image processing algoritbms. 
1. INTRODUCnON 
One of the most commonly encountered problems during 
the implementation of Telemedicine is the big size of medical 
data, which will require more space and time during the 
transmission and the storage of these files or data packages. 
Medical images are probably the biggest medical data type 
in size. Therefore, the compression of these images became 
one of the major challenges in the field of telemedicine. 
Many methods have been developed for better image 
compression including the PNG, PEG.. .etc. These methods 
were very successful in reducing the image file sue in very 
small ratios, 201  and sometimes even less. However, these 
techniques have some disadvantages, especially from a 
medical point of view. FQr example, P E G  compression does 
not provide superior results. Sometimes the compression ratio 
is as low as 5:1, with a high loss of picture integrity. This 
happens because the P E G  compression scheme compresses 
similar hues well, but does not work as well with sharp 
differences in brightness or solid areas of color, which is the 
case in medical images. Plus, very few of the image 
processing algorithms and sofhvares that are used in hospitals 
and clinics support these types of format. 
These problems have defmed a clear image of what the 
compression method should do: it has to be able to convert the 
image into a set of numbers or data packages that can be 
reconstructed later (for example, in the remote site) into the 
original image with the minimum possible loss of information. 
Plus, the reconstructed image bas to be in the machine format 
Caresponding author: etnnakc@ci.Mgcrs.edu 
(i.e. able to get processed by the most commonly used image 
processing algorithms). 
11. METHOWLOGY 
Image transforms might be a good point to start with. In 
general, transforms will convert the image into a hunch of 
numbers (coefficients) that will represent the information as 
levels of details (frequencies). Reeonsbucting the image with 
only a portion of these coefficients will return an image with 
the information represented by these coefficients. Therefore, 
the reconstructions of the image with the absolute 
values of these coefficients will return the image with the 
&gh& effective details that are included in the original one. 
This is the baseline of the technique presented in this paper. 
Earlier work has been done using the Fourier transform and it 
gave some brilliant results [12,3]. Almost 93% of the energy 
in the original image was retained in the reconstructed image 
using only the highest 10% of the coefficients. There were 
some problems with using the Fourier transform; its 
coefficients are not localized in space. 
The wavelet transform is one of the most useful transforms 
not only in the image processing, but also in the one- 
dimensional waveforms. This gives us an idea about the 
frequencies contained in the image and their location within 
this image. Something that solved the previously mentioned 
problems with the Fourier based method. 
Also, the wavelet transforms introduced the idea that these 
coefficients are derived at different levels of detail. This 
means that there will be a classification of the details into 
“important” details and some other “not so important’’ details. 
This gives us the ability to choose from the vertical, horizontal 
and diagonal details at several levels. 
After this procedure, the compressed data contain only the 
required highest coefficients and their locations within the 
transform representation. 
The positions of these coefficients are very important to put 
each detail in its right place. Depending on the transform 
function output, the coefficients might be arranged in a two- 
dimensional format (in this case each position will be defmed 
by two values; X, Y), or it might be arranged in a one- 
dimensional format (the position will be defined by a single 
value). 
0-7803-8285-4/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 89 
In order to save even more storage space, a better way to 
define the positions without saving their actual coordinates is 
to represent each location in the wavelet transform 
representation as a bit which will take the value "1" or "0". 
This will create a "bit-matrix" (that is different from the 
windows images file format), this bit-matrix will point out the 
locations of the saved coefficients in the wavelet 
representation wbicb may be used later to reconstruct the 
original image, by putting these coefficients in the "1" 
locations respectively. 
The required space to save this bit-matrix in bits will be the 
number of pixels in the image. For example, for a 256x256 
image, the bit-matrix size will be 65536 bits, which means 
8192 bytes. This means that for this image, the highest 
coefficients positions can-be saved in an 8.2 KB variable, 
which is small compared to the required space to save the 
coordinates of each position. Also, for small percentages of 
the saved coefficients, it has been noticed that these 
coefficients are located only in the first half of the wavelet 
representation, a thing that will allow us to take only a bit- 
matrix of the fmt half and ignore the second one. Thus, the 
bit-matrix could also be divided by two. 
In. RESULTS 
Fig.1 shows the reconstructed images using different values 
of percentages for the highest saved wavelet coefficients. 
As far as we can see. with only 20% of the coefficients, we 
'can get an excellent result; the reconstlucted image at this 
level and the original one are almost identical. With some 
iidditional image correction techniques we can totally 
eliminate the artifacts produced by the reconstluction process 
and get much better results at even lower percentages. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
As previously explained, the components that & needed to 
reconstruct the original image are the highest saved 
coefficients and the bit-ma& that will define the positions of 
the coefficients. 
To calculate the compression ratio of this method related to 
the percentage of the saved coefficients, we need first to 
calculate the sum of spaces required to save the daw 
For an MxN image, the original image size would be MxN 
Bytes (for a 256 levels grayscale image). As for the size of the 
bit-matrix, it would be MxN bits = MxN/8 Bytes. This means 
that the space required to save the bit-matrk would be 0.125 
of the size of the original image size. 
As for the coefficients, for a percentage (a), the space 
required to save t h q  would be space required to save 
axMxN coefficients. For the best approximation that satisfies 
both precision and disk space, each coefficient will be stored 
in a 2 Bytes format. This means that the space required to save 
the highest a% coefficients would be 2xaxMxN Bytes. And 
the f i ~ l  compression ratio of this method (R) will be defined 
by the formula: 
(1) R = 0.125 + 2 x 0  
Fig.1: Recswtmcted h g a  at Merent  pernotager ofuved 
Ironically, for those values of (a) above a cemin limit 
(43%) the compression ratio will have values more than 1. 
This means that after this limit, the method will "expand" the 
image instead of compressing it. This is because each 
coefficient is saved using 2 Bytes of the disk space, as for the 
original image, each pixel was saved in only one byte. At its 
present form, this method is only useful for the Percentages 
below 43%, at which we can get a great result. As seen earlier, 
20% of the coefficients returned a great image that is almost 
identical to the original one. 
REFERENCES 
rotffieients 
Binge, G.M. and h4ichcli-TzanaLOu, E,: "Fourier Compmrion- 
rceoastrUetion Technique", h. 1 Ith A m  Intan. Cod. IEEEJEMBS 
Vol. 2.524-525. (1989). 
Binge, G. and M i d e l i - T d o u ,  E., "A Hybrid Jmage l kmsmct ioo  
Technique", Roc. of the 13th Northeast Bimg.  Cod. V?l.I. 19-22, 
Phil. PA (1987). 
Miehcl i -Tdou,  E. and Binge, G. M.: "FCORE: A Folnier bawd 
Image Compression and Reconstruction Technique", SPIE Roc. on 
Visual Comm and Image Roccssing N, Vol. 1199. 1563-1574 (1989). 
90 
