About Construction of Simulation Tank for 
Oil Recovery in Marine Situations 
Muneo Yoshie, lsamu Fujita, Yukihiro Saito 
Port and Airport Research Institute ( PARI ) , National institution, Japan 
3-1-1 Nagase Yokosuka, 239-0826, Japan 
yoshie@pari.go.jp, fujita@pari.go.jp. saitou@pari.go.jp 
Abstract - Since “NAKHODW oil spill incident in 
1997, several new equipments or systems for oil 
recovery have been researched and developed in Japan. 
New oil skimmig vessels were launched and expected 
to work well. It is hard to judge how effectively the each 
equipments or products performs at the site of coasts 
without experience. Canada and U.S. test the 
equipments in a large tank of Ohmsett with towing 
bridge, Norway does in big circulating tank and on the 
sea. They can improve their outcomes with many data 
from the experiments in such real situations. However, 
we did not have such a test tank in Japan, and we could 
not have any opportunities to test in real situations. 
The government appropriated funds for 
constructing new tank at PARI for research and 
development of oil spill response in supplementary 
budget for 2002. The tank‘s specifications were planned 
to test equipments for oil recovery as if we test them at 
the site of coasts. This paper collects requirements that 
the tank should satisfy and themes that we should do 
with this tank. 
Objective of the tank is to advance researches and 
developments about recovery of emulsified heavy oil 
that causes hard damages in marine environments. We 
should simulate waves, velocities of vessels (or 
currents), water temperatures, viscosities of the oil, and 
winds at the site of coasts, and test several skimmers, 
oil booms, oil recovery systems in  order to judge their 
performances and behaviors under being influenced by 
several factors. 
Therefore, the tank dimensions are that the width for 
6m, length for 20m, and water depth for 2.5m. Salty 
water is filled in and controlled its temperature by 
chiller and heater, and leftovers of the oil are cleaned 
through oil filter. We can generate waves for the max 
0.5m, current for the max lmls. Physics and chemistry 
analyzing room and a cylindrical tank (depth for IOm) 
are placed as supplementary facilities and the plant is 
appreciated synthetic. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Japanese industries impolt enormous crude oil and 
chemicals. Many oil tankers. large and small, are operated 
internationally and domestically on the coast of Japan. it is 
as same as Japan that oil and chemicals are shipping many 
tankers in other countries surrounding Japan and industries 
of Far East Asia keep on their activities. 
Since the Prestige oil spill incident off the northem 
Spanish coast in 2002, we are impressed that the politics of 
the double hull tanker regulation is not enough to defend 
from oil pollutions. In Japan of 2002 year, oil spill incidents 
of cargo ships grounding occurred one afler another. Many 
Japanese people know that oil spill incidents are not so rare 
case around their ordinary life. Making progress of oil spill 
response research and development is appreciated that we 
should continue it as important theme. 
However, it is said that many of oil spill response 
products can perform only at low level of their specification 
written on their catalogues in real marine situation. In order 
to satisfy reality of the specification data, it is necessary that 
the equipments and the products should to be tested in 
marine situations. In Norway, they have spread oil and 
tested products in the ocean once in some years. The 
biggest test tank of Ohmsett has been used by USCG, EPA 
CANADA, or so many engineers, for testing real size 
products and models. It must be also prepared such 
advanced test field in Japan. 
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and transport of Japan 
appropriated supplementary budget of 2002 for constructing 
the new tank for oil spill response research in PARI (Port 
and Airport Research Institute). The test tank was designed 
its specification level high ranking with international test 
facilities. This year (2004). we have begun to research and 
develop oil skimmer systems with the tank. 
This paper introduce you specifications of the test tank 
named STORMS (Simulation Tank for Oil Recovery in 
Marine Situations) and realms of the research and 
development with this facility. 
II. PROBLEMS OF R 8 D FOR OIL SPILL RESPONSE 
A. lmportance of Test Data with Real Oil 
It is necessary to study about behavior of oil for oil spill 
response technology. The oil is non-Newtonian fluid and its 
range of viscosity is wide, for example, from 100 to 
1,000,000 mPa . s. The oil has good wettability to every 
surface, and its adhesion to several materials is strong. 
These properties of the oil directly affect the difficulty of oil 
recovery. But it is not easy to deal those variables without 
any real information and actual data. Though there are 
many trial of test with plastic pellets, they can show 
indirectly fluid performance of water surface but not oil 
behavior floating on the water. We can not appreciate data 
without real oil. 
To get an official sanction, it is necessary to submit data 
of real oil examination. For other example, the World 
Catalog Of Oil Spill Response Products on which most of 
the products in the world may be listed has a table in which 
targeted oil types data should be written, for each skimmer, 
boom, separator, and so on [I]. It uses the ASTM grades of 
the oil for the classification of targeted oil. Makers of the oil 
response products submit oflen their original test data, or no 
data. However, they make a point of showing performance 
to real oil. 
The range of the oil in ASTM is from 150 to 170,000 cSt, 
so that it is a problem whether we can judge performance of 
the products on these data to emulsified heavy oil which is 
0-7803-8669-8/04/$20.00 02004 1EEE. ~ 1476 - 
high viscous like the NAKHODKA, Erica, and Prestige oil 
spill incidents. It is said that the oil viscosity of the incidents 
were over 200,000 mPa . s. 
However, it is difficult to get the data of test used real oil. 
because most of the test tanks are forbidden to float oil on 
their water. The causes of them are that cleaning after 
experiments is painful and most of the sensors ought to be 
coated in oil, and water of the tank contains scattered oil 
particles which are broken into colloid. They can not use the 
tank without exchanging the sensors and the water after the 
examination. 
In that background, it is necessary to build the special 
test tanks which are allowed to fill in oil for research and 
development of oil spill response technology. 
B. Problem of the Model Scale in Examination 
Oil skimming systems perform well only when those 
mechanical links and combinations are rational. It is not able 
to appreciate the system's capacity of oil recovery from 
basic data of each element. Objective of the oil spill 
response products should to be different from that like 
stability in hydrodynamics examination of airplanes, 
submarines, and boats. Consequently the model scale 
should be nearer to real size so that the system can be 
made to move natural. We should not use small model. 
Another problem is how to do about similarity law 
because of members of viscosity. It is easy to solve this 
problem with big size model examination. 
C. Problem of Specific Gravity of Water in the Test Tank 
Specific gravity of the oil concerns its behaviors in water. 
The specific gravity of the oil is varies by its weathering and 
for example, heavy oil shows about 0.9 readings. It is heavy 
oil that inflicts enormous damage on coasts [2]. The heavy 
oil is sure to be emulsified by waves and its specific gravity 
become higher such as 0.98 readings. In this case, behavior 
of the oil is definitely different whether it is floating on water 
or salty water. Of course. we must prepare the specific 
gravity of water filled in the test tank at the coast. 
Therefore, the test tank should be filled in with seawater or 
salty water prepared its gravity for each examination case at 
each targeted local ocean's readings. 
m. USCG and Ohmsett 
A. Opinion from USCG Expert 
We have made interview to USCG expert of oil spill 
response and have gotten some good opinion before 
building of our facility. USCG has a close connection with 
Ohmsett which was managed by Navy only in 1989. 
They make a point of simulation of the oil recovery site in 
oceans because of their practical viewpoint. They 
substantially trust data scored from such simulated test. It is 
said that capabilities of oil skimmers in real situation at the 
site may be lower than 20-30% than those of products 
catalogue. But if the data were taken from the test of 
Ohmsett, they say that it will be able to trust as 60.70% in 
the site. However, it is said that the efficiency of oil recovery 
at the site of sea may be 20-30%, and the rest may be 
recovered on beach 131. 
The performance and capability of oil spill response 
systems are influenced by situations of waters, so they say 
that it should be better not to adopt the data for US to 
Japanese coasts. 
B. Facilities of Ohmsett [4] 
Ohmsett is the National Oil Spill Response Test Facility. 
It was established in 1973 by the EPA. The EPA 
administered the facility up to 1988. In 1989, the facility was 
closed and transferred to the Navy. Then the supertanker 
EXXON VALDEZ oil spill incident was occurred that year. 
Title W of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 ( OPA-90) stipulated 
that 'agencies represented on the Interagency Coordinating 
Committee for Oil Pollution Research shall ensure the 
long-term use and operation of the Ohmsett Research 
Center in New Jersey or oil pollution technology testing and 
evaluations". Since 1990, MMS (Mineral Management 
Service) had been delegated the management of the 
Ohmsett. The Ohmsett facility has been used by USCG, 
EPA. U.S. Navy, Environment Canada. and MMS. 
Between 1990 and 1992, Ohmsett was refurbished by 
MMS at a cost of 1.5 million dollars. The financial support 
was from the USCG and Environment Canada. Since 1992, 
MAR Inc., of Rockville, MD has been awarded the contract 
to operate and maintain Ohmsett under MMS management. 
The tank of Ohmsett must be largest test tank for oil 
pollution research and development in the world (Fig.1). 
The tank is built in Naval Weapons Station in New Jersey 
without a roof. This open-air tank has 3 bridges and they 
can tow real size oil response systems. The dimension of 
the tank is 20m in width, 203m in length, and 2.4m in depth 
of water. The scale of the facility is so large that it can be 
supposed as real site of the water in the sea. Around the 
tank, there are a control tower, oil storage tanks, filtering 
plant, chemical analyzing container. workshop, and office. 
Salinity concentration of the water tilled in the tank is 
prepared between 32-35 psu as same as the open sea 
water's one. 
Mechanism of wave generator is very simple and it can 
generate waves for maximum 0.7m height. There is no 
current generator and towing bridge is used for the test in 
current or velocity of ships. They also use bridges for 
dispersing oil and acquiring the test data. 
Water filled in the tank is recycled after being purified by 
gravity separator, cyclone separator, and diatomeceos 
earth filter. Oil remains only less than 15ppm in the water 
after filtering and it can be disposed to Sandy Hook Bay 
when they must work for big maintenance once in 2-3 years. 
Fig.1 Panoramic View of Ohmsett Facility 
- 1477 - 
W .  Condition in Japan 
A. Previous Facilities in Japan 
After NAKHODKA oil spill incident, many examinations 
of research and development for oil spill response systems 
were carried out at a test tank which is managed by a 
private enterprise. The tank is not designed for oil recovery 
research and flesh water is filled in. Water depth of the tank 
is 1.2m in length that allow only small size skimmer to be 
tested. Of course most of oil booms are not able to be 
tested in real size in such shallow basin. Though waves can 
be generated for maximum 0.3m height, current generator 
is not built-in. We could not examine and research the oil 
response without several limits like an accuracy of each 
data, resignation of using sufficient scale models, and cost 
to be paid for the private sector's tank. 
A?. a reference, Maritime Disaster Prevention Center has 
tanks for oil spill response training. They have unique pools 
that enable to train cleaning of beach. The beach models 
are 3 types, a rocky beach, a beach with dissipating 
concrete blocks, and a sandy beach. They also have a tank 
for training of operation of the machinery and materials for 
oil recovery [5]. 
Formerly, Tsukuba Institute of Ship and Ocean 
Foundation (SOF) had run large scale facilities for research 
preventing from oil pollution with real oil. They have 
practically closed the facilities before the NAKHODKA 
incident and not been restored today. However the facilities 
were full-dress test site for research and development of oil 
recovery systems, booms, and so on. Though they used 
flesh water in tanks, they could use from crude oil to heavy 
oil. Once the examinations for official recognition of oil 
booms were done in this facility and also other several 
accomplishments came out. The facility in Tsukuba Institute 
is to be referred to, so next paragraphs introduce it [6]. 
B. Large Circulating Water Channel of Jsukuba Institute 
Tsukuba Institute of SOF had managed 2 different types 
of targe test tanks and the circulating type can simulate 
situations constituted currents. waves and winds. 
Especially, capacity of wave height and current speed are in 
the highest class. Depth of water is also the deepest class, 
in 4.3m, so that they could test big booms and deep-drafl 
skimmers. Because the tank is indoor basin, big fans can 
blow to simulate winds. 
Significant specifications 
>current speed: 0.1-1.5m/s 
>wave height: max 0.6m 
>wavelength: max 10m 
>wind velocity: 5-20mls 
>oil dispersion capacity: I .5m3/min 
>usable water channel: Length; 60m 
Width; 3.8m 
Depth of water: 4.3m 
C. Rectangular Tank of Tsukuba Institute 
Another large test tank is rectangular type. It has a very 
large space of water surface. Objective of the tank were 
researches for seaworthiness and controllability of boats, 
about marine structures in waves, and oil spill responses. 
There is a long span bridge and it can do towing test. This 
tank is also an indoor facility so that wind waves don't 
affect the examination quality. 
Ohmsett 
Significant specifications 
>wave height: max 0.3m 
>wavelength: max 10m 
>towing speed: max 2m/s 
>water surface: Length; 80m 
Width; 45m 
Depth of water 2.3m 
D. Oily Water Purifying Facilities of Tsukuba Institute 
The facilities are for purifying oily water and recycle as 
clean water for examinations. The separator of oil / water is 
coalescer type and it makes oil concentration less than 
IOppm, and combined system of flocculator, sand filter and 
activated carbon filter purify oily water until it contains oil 
less than 5ppm. 
E. Comparison of Specifications of the Tanks 
Table 1-3 show the specifications of the test tanks in 
Japan and abroad. In Japan, only flesh water filled in, but 
both of Ohmsett and KYSTVERKET uses salty water. 
KYSTVERKET is the heir of Norwegian Pollution Control 
Authority (SFT). These years, they look at the problems of 
oil spill in low temperature, so they put chillers in both 
KYSTVERKET and Ohmsett. 
It was very important that what specification for us 
should be given priority to, because of limit of the funds and 
cost of operation. We decided the specifications of our test 
tank from what we are to do. 
Table 1 ComDarison of Test Tank (scales) 
towing I L203xW20xD2.4 
I 1 Type 1-1 
KYSNERKET circulating 3Ox7x2 
Tsukuba Institute 1 
Tsukuba Institute 2 
A Private Enterprise 
MDPC 
~ ~ 
circulating 60x3.8x4.3 
towing 80x45x2.3 
rectangular 23~13.6~1.2 
rectangular 12X8X4 
i m;;) I m/;!y 1 m; j 
Ohmsett 
KYSTVERKET 0.77 
Tsukuba Institute 1 0.6 1.5 5-20 
Wave 
Hei ht Wind Current 
KYSTVERKET chiller 
flesh water 
Tsukuba Institute 2 0.3 
A Private Enterprise 0.3 
MDPC possible 
- 1478 - 
0.2-2 
Table 3 
Ohmsett 
Comparison of Test Tank (water) 
oil Temperature 
Control 
salty water crude oil chiller 
Water 
V .  Subjects of Oil Spill Response Research 
A. Background 
Drifting heavy oil affects serious damage to activities 
and environment of coast, because heavy oil is weathered 
slowly. Heavy oil is generally used for banker of ship and 
large cargo ship uses classification of 'C heavy oil. We 
must take care of the large cargo incidents for their large 
amounts of banker spill. 
However, the research and development for heavy oil 
and its emulsion are not so progressed. Conversely floating 
crane has been a highly capable oil skimmer for high 
viscous oil practically at the site of the incidents ever. There 
can be better method and mechanical system in such 
situation. 
B. Evaluation of Oil Recovery Systems 
It is important for research and development to evaluate 
products and systems for oil recovery by an official 
organization in the same criteria. Objective evaluation 
promotes research and development of this field. Oil 
recovery system performs differently in each different 
situation constituted wave height, wavelength. sweeping 
velocity, oil viscosity, and so on. We must chose suitable 
system for each situation, but we have no data of the 
performance and capacity at the same situation. If there 
were data for each system in equally situation, we were not 
bothered what and how to chose the best one. 
Therefore, new test tank should be used for making up 
criterions of testing standards in order to evaluate 
performances of the products and the systems. It is 
necessary that new facility can control and simulate waves, 
current, wind, temperature of water, specific gravity of the 
water, and property of the oil. 
C. Collecting and Containment System 
Generally, the oil recovery system has to collect and 
contain drifting oil in order to increase the oil thickness and 
encounter efficiency of its skimmer. The oil collecting and 
containing system contributes obviously to skimming 
capacity of whole system. It is significantly affected by 
current or vessel velocity if the collecting and containment 
system can perform enough. Factors of wave period, height, 
and length complicate the problem because oil is floating on 
water and sometimes perfons as solid. 
It is necessary to prepare windows for observing surface 
and under water in order to research behavior of the system 
and of course enough current speed, water width, depth and 
salty water are needed. 
D. Test of the System with Vessel Body Model 
Performance and capacity of the oil recovery system is 
not sum of its parts ability. Generally, the oil recovery 
system is installed on a boat, and when it works it is 
unfolded near the body of the boat. So the boat body affects 
performances of the oil recovery system. Especially, in case 
of the system that put on board or between the catamaran 
hulls, reflection of waves and current affect severely. We 
should consider the vessel body as a part of the whole oil 
recovery system. If we use small test tank, we have no 
choice but exam each part like skimmer, pump, separator, 
and so on. One of the important problems of oil recovery 
system is consistency in the whole system. It is necessary 
that dimension of the new test tank is enough to test the 
whole system including vessel body model. 
E. Study about Properry of Heavy Oil Emulsified 
Property of heavy oil emulsified is quite different from 
that of water. The emulsion of oil is non-Newtonian fluid, 
and its viscosity vanes in condition of share rate. The 
properties of oil are different each other by their source. 
Basically, heavy oil is mixture of several carbon 
compositions, and they are expediently divided into groups 
of aroma, resin, asphaltene. and saturated hydrocarbon. 
Therefore it is difficult to understand the property of the 
heavy oil from both chemical and physical method. 
It is necessary that basic equipments for analyzing 
heavy oil are supplied. We must study and solve the 
problem of relations between properties and performances 
of oil in recovering works. 
F. Simulations of Several Water Situations of Coasts 
In Norway, they test in the ocean with real oil once in 2-3 
years. There hard to be good data acquired in the site of 
incidents, and it is not so rare case that only rumor is 
information from the site. So it is important to acquire data 
from the test in the ocean. However it is too difficult to get a 
permission to test with real oil. 
Property of the water and waves are different at each 
region of coast. If we are to simulate water in test tank, we 
should prepare parameters of the water in the tank. Waves 
and current or velocity of the vessel collecting oil must be 
adjusted as real situations. If we can simulate the water in 
each region, we will be able to develop and tune the oil 
recovery systems adapted to each region waters. 
G. Suction Oil from Foundered Boat 
The oil tanker NAKHODKA sunk in 1997 has a lot of 
heavy oil in its tank under water. Now, a little spill from her 
on bottom of the Sea of Japan keeps on. If such a big oil 
tanker, cargo vessel, container ship, or so will sink with a lot 
of oil in their oil tank, we should care about oil spill pollution. 
When the ship sinks in water way, anchorage and other 
interrupting area in harbor, we had to prevent from oil spill 
before salvaging her. 
Though most of the works of suction oil from foundered 
boat are implemented by divers, it is not so safety works 
that we should develop new methods. If the foundered boat 
is located at deep sea like NAKHODKA, diver's works may 
be impossible. And there are many cargos. tankers, 
passenger ships, and warships sunk under water, we had to 
prevent from oil pollution by them. 
In this background, it is an important problem how to 
suck or seal the oil from the foundered boat under water in 
low cost and short time. In order to simulate the works, we 
need a deep tank in which is allowed infusing oil. 
VI. STORMS (Simulation Tank for 
Oil Recovery in Marine Situations) 
A. Specifications to Satisfy 
What we considered for our research and development 
of oil spill response is intemational standard level of 
examination and really needs of this realm. For example, 
there were many persons mention to take care of precision 
waves generated, but practically it is not so important but 
scale and irregular wave like harbor-chop are more 
important. Current is an essential function for simulate the 
performance of the oil recovery systems because oil 
collecting and containment booms and skimmers are 
usually advanced with vessel operation and the current of 
- 1479 - 
water affects significantly behavior of floating oil. 
Water filled in the tank had to be salty water because 
remainder of specific gravity between oil and water affect 
the velocity of oil movements. 
Viscosity of the emulsified oil is an essential factor in all 
of the oil recovery systems. The viscosity varies widely 
affected by its temperature. Because the viscosity becomes 
high in low temperature, the many of recovery systems are 
influenced their works. Ohmsett and KYTVERKET has 
introduced chiller for icing their water in tanks. Because of 
sensitivity of the viscosity to temperature, a controller of 
water temperature should be put in the tank. 
It is crucial equipment that purifies water filled in the tank 
for managing the facility. In Yokosuka. the wastewater 
quality standards for draining into the sea from a business 
facility force us to contain oil in the wastewater less than 
Sppm. If we dispose all water as industry waste, the cost 
will stall all activities of research. 
In these requirements, we designed the new facility to 
have reasonable specifications in limited funds. We named 
the facility "STORMS, Simulation Tank for Oil Recovery in 
Marine Situations, and it has constructed in March, 2004. 
8. Scale of Tank 
Main facility of STORMS is a water tunnel tank with 
wave generators. The tank wall and floor slab is reinforced 
concrete. Surface of the concrete is coated in waterproof 
daub. It makes tank to be long Me. Water basin scale is 32m 
in length, 9m in width, and 3.5m in wall height (2.5m in 
water depth). Water amount of the tank is about 720 m3. 
Water area is divided into 2 channels, and the channel of 
3m in width is for tunnel of current generator, and another of 
6m in width is for measurement of examinations (Fig.2). 
Therefore dimension of the water for the measurement 
channel is 20m in length, 6m in width and 2.5m in water 
depth. These scales are supposed to test. in real size, the 
large-size weir skimmer on "Hakusan", the drug and oil 
skimming work vessel. When the bigger circulating skimmer 
set on board of Hakusan is to be tested, the skimmer model 
scale is 1/2. Hakusan is one of the largest vessels for oil 
recovery. Vessels of catamaran type which operated by 
regional bureaus for cleaning up and skimming oil from 
water take their width between hulls in about 3m, and the 
tank has sufficient size to simulate phenomenon between 
the hulls. 
There are 4 windows at the one side of the tank wall for 
ObSeNhg underwater. Size of the window is I m  in width 
and 2m in height. Especially for obselving the oil behavior 
creeping out under skirt of containing boom, the windows 
will be used efficiently. 
C. Wave Generators and Current Generator 
Type of the wave generators is 3 series of salter duck. 
The generators are put on the water surface and a beach for 
wave absorber is put on another side. The maximum wave 
height generated is 0.5m (regular waves). Waves are 
generated from 1 to 5 seconds for period, and other wave 
type like irregular waves can be generated. The highest 
wave height can be generated only their period for 2s. 
The current generator has two propellers in tunnel for 
circulating water (Fig.3). The current speed is able to Im/s, 
about 2 knot for maximum. One propeller output is 132kw 
and two propellers are controlled its output continuously by 
inverter system. Current speed 2 knot is one of critical 
speed for oil collecting works, if the current speed is over 2 
knot, floating oil will sink and dive out under the skirt of 
boom. Practically oil recovery at the site is carried out on 
this speed. When real size model is examined, we can 
simulate the case of the system advancing by vessel in 
Pknot. 
These two systems are operated from control room 
standing on the end of the tank. 
The tank has two bridges, one is for measurement, 
controlling a model, and another is for dispersing oil and 
blow with optional fans. Two bridges are connected together 
and can run at speed of 0.25m/s. 
I 
L- .- -.. 
Fig.3 Two Propellers in Tunnel 
D. Temperature Controller and Salty Wafer 
Temperature of the water in the tank is able to be 
controlled from 5 to 30 "c by a temperature controller. The 
controller heats water by two steam boilers, each of the 
boiler output for 1253kw and 1000kg/h. the controller cools 
water by an absorption refrigerating system which outputs 
for 2lOUSRT (735kw). 
In most of Japanese coast, the water temperature is 
from 5 to 3 0 t ,  except the winter icy water in the Sea of 
Okhoisk. So the facility covers most of Japanese sea water 
temperature. Consequently the tank solves the problem of 
varying viscosity during examinations caused by the water 
temperature. Viscosity of target oil is the most essential 
factor for recovering result. Of course. the specific gravity of 
the water is able to be fitted to the coast. Generally, the 
open sea's specific gravity (salinity) is higher than that of the 
1480 - 
bay. These factors are vaned by location, seasons, rains, 
and tide. It is diicult to fit these situations if the facility does 
not allow salty water. 
In these days the problems of oil spill in ice bound seas 
are attracted and the tank does not cover such situations. 
But the water in the tank is salty seawater, so that we can 
put anytime optional equipments and materials like chiller, 
mass of ice, or so. From the 4 windows of the tank wall, we 
will able to observe behavior of oil under ice. 
In Japan, STORMS is the first facility that the sea water 
filled in for oil recovery research. Perhaps, STORMS is the 
first facility in the world as the large circulating tank with 
wave generators and the temperature controller for oil 
recovery research. 
E. Oil Separator 
Another basin for oil separating pit is mounted on the 
wall of the main tank. The basin is designed as an oil 
separator. Oil comes floating into the first pit from the gate 
between the main tank and the separation basin, and dived 
oil comes next pit and rises, the third pit absorbs the small 
particles of the oil and the forth pit absorbs micro particles. 
Then for the last, oil concentration becomes less than Sppm. 
that is clear the regulation of drain. 
The purified water is recycled to main tank. The oil 
separator is also used for separating oil from waste water of 
cleaning. The facility makes the amount of water disposed 
down and the cost of disposal will be lower. 
F. Physical and Chemical Laboratory 
It is an interesting theme between behavior of oil and the 
oil chemical composition. The chemical composition of oil is 
varied by source of the oil. There have been several reports 
and researches about weathering of crude oil in marine 
conditions, and many of those have been carried out by 
petroleum industries. In addition concentration of water in oil 
emulsion varies viscosity. adhesion, and behavior of the oil 
emulsion. Therefore it is important to analyze physical 
behaviors composed of viscosity. adhesion and fluidity, 
because they influence performance of oil recovely. So we 
must approach the problem from rheology, surface 
chemistry. We have to analyze several chemicals for oil 
dispersant, oil separator, emulsion breaker. and so on, from 
colloid chemistry. Several absorbents and chemicals are 
strange for us because they don't say why and how they 
can works well or not. Of course, safety for environment is 
not indemnified by them. 
The physical and chemical laboratory supplies some 
kind of equipments for analyzing heavy oil, oil emulsion. 
chemical dispersant, and so on. For example, viscometers. 
TLCIFID, FT-IR, moisture measuring system, automatic 
contact angle measuring system are main equipments. 
There is a temperature control room in the laboratory. In 
the room, a small tank for long time examination of oil being 
emulsified is put on. Basin of the tank separated in 3 
channels and each has a flap of wave generator. 
G. Cylindrical Tank 
There have been a cylindrical tank in our institute and 
this time it is added a new function that enable to inject oil in. 
A new oil separator is mounted beside of the tank. However, 
we should take care that we can not use salty water in this 
tank, flesh water only. 
The basin is 5 meters across and 10m in water depth. 
The cylindrical wall is made of steel and the basement is 
Type 
Scale (test basin) 
Wave Height 
Current 
Wind 
Water 
Oil 
Temperature Control 
concrete floor. Crane is placed over the top of the tank and 
a hatch and an observation window is opened on the 
sidewall at the bottom. 
This tank will be used for research and development of 
prevention from oil spill of founded boat and sucking oil from 
the boat safely and rapidly. 
W. Conclusion 
Condition for oil spill response research has been 
prepared with the new facility "STORMS. See Table.4, 
STORMS can simulate several situations in the coast of 
Pacific Ocean, Japan Sea, East China Sea, Seto Inland Sea, 
Tokyo Bay. Ise Bay, Osaka Bay, and so on. We are sure 
that STORMS contributes to progress of research and 
development of the oil spill response. The scale of the basin 
and diverse equipments allow STORMS to be used for 
training of oil spill response. Real oil and seawater makes 
examinations carried out in STORMS to be examinations in 
a real site of the coast. 
In Japan, the market of oil spill products may be very 
small. Marine accidents are not rare, but oil spill doesn't 
occur every day. Because of that, private sector in Japan 
can not research and develop hard in this realm of their own 
accord, so public sector had to do and decrease the 
damage and influence of oil pollution. 
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport 
Government has 3 large oil skimming vessel 'Hakusan", 
"Kaisyomaru", "Seiryumaru". which is usually a drug suction 
vessel. They have other vessels for use of oil recovery, for 
example, sea surface cleaning boats which are kind of 
catamaran type. We must improve oil skimming systems on 
these vessels, and henceforth with STORMS, we can 
suppose the test data as those acquired in the site of coast. 
Table 4 SDecifications of STORMS 
circulating 
LZOxW6xD2.5m 
0.5m 
l.Om/s 
option 
salty water 
heavy oil 
5--30°C heal and WOI 
. .  
Symposium 2003, FAJ. 
[4] JOSEPH V. MULLIN 8 JAMES S. LANE, "R & D Users 
Guide to the Ohmsett Oil Spill Response Test Facility", 
Spill Science i3 Technology Bulletin, V01.6, No.1, pp77, 
2000. 
[5] Training Division of Marine Disaster Prevention Center 
[6] Ship and Ocean Foundation, 'Tsukuba-kenkyujo"(in 
leaflet. 
Japanese), booklet, April 1990. 
- 1481 - 
