Numerical Characterization of the Stress Induced Voiding 
Inside Via of Various CUnow k Interconnects 
C.H. Yao, T.C. Huang, K.S. Chi, W.K. Wan, H.H. Lin, Chin C. Hsia and M.S. Liang 
Advanced Module Technology Division, R & D, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 
No. 6, Li-Hsin Rd. 6, Science-Based Industrial Park, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan 300-77 
Tel: 886-3-5636666 Ext. 5324, Fax: 886-3-5775407, E-mail chyao@tsmc.com 
Abstract 
Modeling methodologies including a dynamic stress 
evolution are proposed in this work to characterize the 
relative stress-induced voiding (SIV) probability inside via of 
various CdLow k interconnects. Seven patterns being 
representative of versatile IC design units are selected. It is 
demonstrated that our modeling approach can serve as a good 
method identifymg the most tronblesome layout units to 
inside-via SN, and the results aligned well with the 
experimental data. From our studies, two kinds of layout 
styles when designed together are found detrimental (I) the 
layout units with via(s) subjected to significant upper-metal 
edge confimement and (2) the one with via close to big 
vacancy sources. 
Keywords: Stress-induced voiding, SIV 
Introduction 
The reliability concerns associated with the stress induced 
voiding (SIV) phenomena are becoming important 
engineering tasks as the interconnect dimension shrinks and 
the material system advances to CdLow k. In general, there 
are two kinds of voiding sites (I): one is commonly found 
upon via bottom and another is inside the linking vias. To 
set-up robust circuit design rules avoiding SIV occurrence, 
numerical simulation using the finite element method sewes 
as an effective and economic tool for the extraction of S N  
circuit pattern dependency and the invention of S N  resistant 
layout designs in addition to the costly experimental approach. 
A numerical index including vacancy evolution had been 
proposed (2) to assess the former via-hottom voiding 
behavior of various interconnects. This article will present 
the modeling results of the latter SIV mode, namely the 
voiding inside the linking vias Fig. 11 of CdLow k 
interconnects. Various simple geometries that can be treated 
as the fundamental building blocks of the diverse circuit 
designs are studied [Fig. 21. The vacancy clustering and the 
void nucleation tendency inside via of various Cu/Low k 
interconnects will be discussed. Moreover, the relative 
failure probability due to stress-induced voiding inside the 
linking vias is also presented. 
Experimental 
Two levels of CuJLow k interconnects plus one top metal 
layer and one passivation layer were fabricated. Single 
damascene wafer processing was applied to the bottom metal 
layer and dual-damascene techniques to the upper metal 
layers and the linking vias. After the multi-level processes 
and the passivation, the processed wafers were subjected to an 
unbiased thermal-stressing environment for a continuous time 
period. The testing circuit resistance was measured and 
recorded before and after the thermal stressing. The resistance 
shift of all samples was then analyzed to obtain their statistic 
significance. 
Numerical Simulations 
Test structures 
A few of the most representative geometries that can be 
treated as the fundamental building blocks of the diverse 
circuit designs were selected and numerically simulated to 
characterize their S N  performance. Schematics of these 
unit patterns are illustrated in Fig. 2(A) - Fig. 2(G). One 
quarter or one-half of the symmetrical 3D-modeling domains 
were constructed for each of the studied unit pattern geometry. 
The fmite element simulations were carried out using the 
commercial package ANSYS to obtain their stress profiles for 
further analysis. The initial stress fiee temperature and the 
final thermal stressing temperature were specified at 275°C 
and 175"C, respectively. 
Modeling Methodology 
It is important to elucidate the mechanism of SIV phenomena 
inside vias in order to model it correctly. In addition to the 
significance of the thermo mechanical via pulling stress ( U J, 
experimental work had been carried out to assess the 
applicability of diffusion mechanism which asserts the 
saturated vacancies are driven by the stress gradient(Au3 
and migrate towards the low stress regions just like those 
causing via-bottom voiding, yet through diffusion pathways 
with much higher activation energy. Our silicon data [Fig31 
show the test circuit failure rate is stressing temperature 
dependent, which implies (3) the vacancy diffusion 
mechanism can't be ignored modeling SIV inside vias. 
1. Vacancy clustering tendency on regions atop via - 
Modeling efforts are made to characterize the evolved 
vacancy clustering intensity on top of the linking via for the 
interested geometries as they affect the following void 
nucleation inside the via. The numerical index (2) 
previously proposed, being influenced by the local geometry- 
dependent stress field and the via-site-dependent vacancy 
source (upper metal area), is adopted to emulate the vacancy 
concentration evolution towards a predefmed control volume 
atop via. [Fig. 41 In addition, since a relaxed stress field 
resulted fiom the vacancy migration alleviates the vacancy 
migrating intensity and their clustering tendency, the physics 
of stress evolution is also considered to avoid the over- 
estimated andlor even erroneous tendency prediction. 
2. Relative void nucleation tendency inside the vias - SN 
phenomena usually begin with the micro-void nucleation, 
which then creates a zone with local minimum stress 
soliciting the vacancies. To characterize the relative 
hucleation tendency among the modeled geometries, an index 
I,,, is defined (Eqn. (I)) and the geometry of Fig. 2(A) is 
adopted as a reference. It is noted that, in Eqn (l), R ,  stands 
for the SIV probability of the creep model (3), C, is the 
clustered vacancy concentration, R the atomic volume, k the 
B o l m n n ' s  constant, T, the thermal stressing temperature 
and Aa, the hydrostatic stress gradient. The superscript 
"ref" stands for those physical properties of the benchmark 
geometry. 
3. Relative failure probability - In order to extract the 
pattern dependent vulnerability to S N  inside vias an 
empirical relation is proposed. (Eqn (2)) It correlates their 
relative failure probability with the dominant thermo 
mechanical pulling stress component (U, )  inside via, the 
voiomg nucteaiion renoency mu me eiiecnve moouius o 
of via (4). It is noted that the effective modulus of vias is 
about the same for the same material system regardless of 
their locations. Therefore, another index IFp is introduced as 
shown in Eqn (3) to assess the relative vulnerability of 
various patterns lo the stress induced voiding inside via. 
(3) 
Results and Discussion 
Figure SA shows the index reflecting the vacancy evolution of 
various interested geometries with and without the stress 
relaxation. (2) The evolution of vacancy also induces the 
stress relaxation ( S ) ,  thus the stress profile evolves so is the 
vacancy miflation intensity. Figure 5B illustrates the stress 
via. m aumnon, oesign or uuai vias lmproves me 
vulnerability of S N  inside the linking vias. 
References 
( I )  M. Kawano et al, International Interconnect Technology 
Conference, p. 210-212 (2003) 
(2) T.C. Huang et al, International Interconnect Technology 
Conference, p. 207-209 (2003) 
(3) E.T. Ogawa, el al., IEEE International Reliability Physics 
Symposium Proceedings 40’Annual, p.312- 321 (2002) 
(4) Stefan P. Hau-Riege and C.V. Thompson, J. Mater. Res. 15(8), 
p.1797-1802 (2000) 
(5) M.A. Korhonen, et al, J. Appl. Phys. 73(8) p.3790-99 (1993) 
conto& bGfore and after the stress evohhon. Figure 6 
shows the hydrostatic stress profiles of the interested via area 
of various geometries where the via locations and the 
corresponding stress environments vary. Figure 7 shows 
the dominant mess comnonent wide  via n .) of various 
&e trench metal (atop -the via) would relax the thermal 
stresses yet the regions near the confined metal edge are less 
likely to deform, thus resulting in higher thermal mismatch 
stress. Therefore, as more edge confinement near the metal 
area atop the interested via, higher stress component will be 
resulted. For example, A > C > B and E > D. Figure 8 
indicates the assessments of the relative void nucleation 
tendency among these structures considering both the stress 
component and the hydrostatic stresses. Patterns E and F, are 
both in a group showing the highest potential to suffer fiom 
the void nucleation inside the vias. Figure 9 shows the 
relative failure probability due to SN inside vias where 
pattern E and F are in the high-risk group and pattern F is 
shown to be the most vulnerable layout design unit to SN 
inside vias. It is noted that some similarities are identified 
for these two smctures. For both patterns, large vacancy 
source (metal area) atop the via are found and the edge 
confinement effect is also significant so as to yield higher 
thermal stresses distribution (higher vacancy driving force 
and the via pulling stress) in the regions near via. Whereas 
only one of these two conditions is found for the rest of 
patterns. Figure 10 illustrates the silicon data of one of our 
earlier version C u h w  k process flows, in which the testing 
circuits possess various Fig. 2F like unit patterns. It is found 
that the geometrical dimension affects the results sigmficantly 
and the various resulting stress fields are crucial. For 
example, as the dimension B and W become shorter (closer to 
the large vacancy source and slmnger edge confinement) the 
higher the failure rates. Figure 11 illushates the similar 
results where there are two linking vias and this design trick 
improves the SN probability inside vias. Although inside- 
via SN phenomena had been nicely resolved with our later 
process optimization, high-risk layouts should still be smartly 
avoided to guarantee a robust product reliability. 
Conclusions 
Numerical methodologies including a dynamic stress 
evolution are presented in this work to characterize the 
vacancy clustering and the relative void nucleation tendency 
inside vias of various unit patterns commonly seen in 
versatile IC layouts. They are both associated with another 
numerical index aiming at predicting the relative failure 
probability due to inside-via SN It is found that the most 
detrimental unit desiens as far as the inside-via-SIV is 
I IC 
Fig. 2 Studied pattern units. (A) VI lies below the center of a ( 1  x 1 )  M2 
(B) V I  lies below the center of a (1 x 20) M2 (C) VI lies below the edge of a 
(1 x 20) M2 (D) VI  lies below the center of a (20 x20) M2 (E) VI lies below 
the edge of a (20 x 20) MZ 0 VI  lies below the edge of a (1  x I )  M2 that 
extended from a (20 x 20) M2 (G) VI lies below the edge of a (I  x 20) M2 
thatextendedfroma(20x20)M2.AllVIslinktoa(l x1)MI.Unit:um 
I 30 I 
25 75 125 175 225 275 
Seessing Temp (C) 
Fig. 3 Failure pereatage of the panems having Fig. 2 0  like unit patterns 
with M2 atop a single linking ria using 65-nm processing technology, after 
168 hours of thermal stressing; Rc shifl ovm 20% is considered failure 
I Control volume I area )I 
concerned are those &Wing both the large VaCaUCy Source 
(metal area) and significant edge confinement effect atop the 
Fig. 4 The control volume awplof via of each modeled geometry inside 
which the vacancy concentration evolution is monitored 
25 
I 
Fig. 5 A: Index reflecting the vacancy concentration evolution within the 
contml volume atop interested via (or the vacancy clustRing tendency), B: 
l l e  exemplary evolved stnss contours; l ek  without stress evolution, right: 
with stress eVOlUti0" 
Fig. 6 Hydrostatic s a s s  pmfile of the various d e l e d  geometries 
I A B C D E F G I  
Fig. 7 Th- mechanical via pulling s=rs (MPa) of various geometries 
26 
1 1  1 IW.0 , , 
10.0 
I ,  
1 .o 
0.1 
A B C D E F G  
Fig. 8 Index Iw reflecting the relative void nucleation tendency inside vias 
of various modeled pattern geometries 
1.00 
0.10 
0.01 
A E C D E F G  
Fig. 9 Index I, reflecting the relative failure probability due to SN inside 
vias of various modeled pattern geometries 
Fig. 10 Failure rate of the test circuits having Fig. 2 0  like unit p a m s  
with one linking ria afier 168 hours of thermal stressing; Rc shift over IW% 
is considered failure 
I B=5 B=2 B=1.4 Bs0.5 I 
Fig. 11 Failure rate of the test circuits having Fig. 2 0  like unit patterns 
with two linking via after 168 hours of thermal sassing; Rc shift over 100% 
is considered failure 
