Knowledge on Knowledge in Knowledge Portal 
Z o l t h  Baracskai 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary 
H-1 I I 1  Budapest, Muegyetem rkp. 9. T. bld I1 28. 
baracskai@imv. bme. hu 
Jolan Velencei 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary 
H-11 I I Budapest, Uuegyetem rkp. 9. T bld. I1 28. 
velencei@imvt. me. hu 
Abstract. Knowledge has become the most 
important producer of wealth in society and in 
organizations. Corporate success in today's 
economy comes from being able to acquire, 
codifi, and transfer knowledge more effectively 
and with greater speed. Important aspect of 
knowledge management is extraction of the 
personal tacit knowledge and putting it into 
words and order, so that others can attain it and 
use it. Big enterprises need concept maps. In 
places where the knowledge workers are familiar 
it is a waste of money. Where more than 200 
people use knowledge it is very time demanding 
to find requisite knowledge. 
Keywords. Knowledge Management, Cognitive 
Map, C-map, Knowledge Visualization 
1. Introduction 
This article focuses on the business decision 
maker's requisite knowledge. In some enterprises 
we have found that workers spend a lot more 
time for hunting information than for collecting 
data. With our DoctuS knowledge portal we 
support decision makers and foster quick 
decisions. For carrying out this conception we 
had to improve the access to existing knowledge. 
We realized that the classification principle in 
organization is hard to define. While making a 
prototype of C-map the first problem that 
occurred was the taxonomy. The applied 
decision conducted knowledge management 
means that decision maker has defined the 
needed terms for taxonomy. The 
second problem was finding the occurrences 
of the requisite knowledge. This puts focus and 
responsibility on the knowledge worker. Concept 
maps are simple at the end. 
2. Doctus knowledge portal 
The knowledge management is impracticable 
without cultural changes. To create a knowledge 
sharing culture we need to encourage people to 
work together more effectively. The most 
important elements of this e-culture that 
strengthen or weaken one another are: 
o trust (the vital part of an organization, 
trust i s  the condition for collaboration) 
o communication (open communication 
increases the trust and it leads to 
collaboration) 
learning (it is adopted that knowledge 
increase is expansion of doubtful 
knowledge) 
o 
One survey (see Fig. 1.) - in which we do not 
believe, though it is good for debate - shows that 
the respondent workers spend 25% of their time 
hunting for information.. In a world where we 
find only 20% of inner data to contrive a 
decision in half an hour, something is wrong 
with data warehousing. 
26th Int. Conf. Information Technology Interfaces IT/ 2004, June 7-10, 2004, Cavtat, Croatia 
Figure 1. Hunting for Information 
DoctuS knowledge portal (see Fig. 2 . )  will be 
useful only to organizations where creation and 
division of knowledge worker is present and 
needles for "plan-accomplishers" without 
empowerment. The organizations will have the 
following benefits: 
o 
o 
smart data mining (which data was used 
and what was it good for) 
smart knowledge angling (which relation 
was used, who knows the relations if no 
data is available and what kind of new 
knowledge can be assembled) 
experience was used, who knows the 
leading experience and what can we use 
from the leading experience) 
o smart experience fishing (which 
25 years ago we made our first program for 
business support. Our chief told us to make 
program for the processes that we know well and 
to wheedle the customer. Then we were able to 
program wage accounting. We did it. Now we 
are able to select data for the decision maker. 
Now we make intelligent portals. 
," 
Figure 2. DoctuS Intelligent Portal 
We use a well-known method, deduction. An 
expert gives the attributes and its values, and 
puts the attributes in a multi-step graph and 
the attribute values. For benchmarking cases we 
choose values for particular attributes. A 
knowledge engineer helps the expert to put in 
words that he/she knows. We call this process 
knowledge acquisition. This is part of long, 
complex process called knowledge engineering. 
The impossibility of extracting the tacit 
knowledge is valid for the deductive reasoning, 
i.e. for a rule-based reasoning. Our solution: 
instead of acquiring rules, acquire the cases of 
experience, from which DoctuS Knowledge- 
based System software deduces the rules. This is 
called induction or case-based reasoning.. 
If we use induction, the expert describes the 
cases, with values of attributes. For this we need 
cases that have well-known results. Through the 
process of knowledge acquisition the knowledge 
engineer supports the expert's work. The 
knowledge acquisition's output is a case-based 
graph and a set of rules. 
articulates the "if. .. then" logical rules between 
I 
' Originally the case-bared reasoning was inherited from 
quantitative decision suppon. Its essence was - and in many 
soh'are it still peeps out behind the symbolic solution veil - to  
define some metria and distance built on it, which will be the 
similarity. For a new case the newest one ~ that means the m s t  
similar - is searched from the case-base. In symbolic logic cases 
described with the same rules are similar. 
3. Indispensable communication 
The problem considering the majority of 
organizations is not that they have little 
knowledge; it is that they can not know exactly 
what is that they know. If we want to build a 
learning organization, we need to increase the 
extent of knowledge transmission and 
conversion. It is important to create the 
framework for free data flow. Free speech is 
indispensable. Chat reveals farther about a 
person than any conference. When we are 
communicating, we are not just putting ourselves 
into someone’s position; we also manifest our 
point of view confronting it to various aspects. 
Different aspects recurrently have an unnoticed 
influence on us. Ideas put into words or written 
down help us to perceive and receive new 
concepts. It is important to accept that new 
knowledge is perishable. It devaluates. In 
enterprises where discussion - even in tea 
kitchens, or at bureau - is welcomed, it is easier 
to procure the utilized terms. Gossip at the office 
is self-maintaining knowledge network. 
Undermining its value can be dangerous. We 
have to develop a common language, set of terms 
in order to understand each other. It is facile to 
locate each term, if we put them in some order. 
Knowledge management subsists in 
following: 
o extracting the requisite knowledge for 
decision maker 
o improving the access to existing 
knowledge 
o enclosing the knowledge into process, 
and if necessary re-contemplating the 
process 
o producing and accepting new, doubtful 
knowledge 
What is our approach to knowledge 
management? We comprehended that the 
question is current. Guilds and family ventures 
have practiced this approach. The knowledge 
was passed on and developed through 
generations. However the success of guilds was 
mostly determined through occupancy of natural 
resources. Statement drafted in 90-ies - 
knowledge is power- emphasized this approach. 
It seemed evident that the possession of 
knowledge purports power. Many concluded as 
once our grandparents had, that possessions 
should be enclosed. People that preserved 
knowledge enclosed were actually looked up to. 
The British Petroleum knowledge 
management budget’s (20 million dollars), 20% 
was spent on hardware and software, 80% was 
spent on employee training and organizational 
culture changes. 
4. Taxonomy 
Let’s return to well known topics. They are to 
be defined on basis of some order principle. On 
Harvard Business Online (see Fig. 3.) the 
“leadership” topic - for example - is divided in 
four other topics. 
Figure 3. Topics 
Maybe it is useful for studies, but by 
representing the relations individually we get to 
know little of topic inherences covering the 
whole subject. For that we need a map, the 
“visualization” of topics. Searching by Google 
we found 2300 links for “knowledge 
visualization”. That is a lot. So, it is good to 
follow up if one cannot be the “first swallow”. If 
we narrow it down (e.g.”knowledge 
visualization” demo software -book -pdf -ppt), 
we get only 44. 
For representation and for quick locating of 
resources, the knowledge elements should be 
defined primarily, then comes the description of 
their links and classification. It is similar to 
taxonomy of a museum. Let’s accept the 
following simple definition. The taxonomy is a 
trick of classification, depictive systematization. 
The researchers of the living world are collecting 
living creatures systematically, examining, 
giving names and classifying. 
Let’s introduce several specifications. As on 
geographic map, we have to find the 
knowledge occurrence on concept map too. The 
starting point is always a requisite knowledge, 
from the decision aspect. Many emphasize that 
knowledge management should be introduced at 
once from above, from the top level of an 
enterprise. It is impossible to define the terms, if 
they are determined individually at different 
places. We do not disprove that collecting begins 
at occupants. The popular TM goals (comfort, 
knowledge share and transparency) are to be 
endorsed everywhere. This is possible only if we 
agree on purpose of the requisite knowledge. E.g. 
if we start the knowledge acquisition from IT, 
informatics terms can be determined, in human 
department the selection of employee, in 
production department the products. Essential is 
to define which knowledge is required in each 
department. Decision conducted knowledge 
management means that decision maker defines 
the needed terms. 
Among terms on requisite knowledge and 
occurrence there cannot be more than two levels. 
This is important because the lowest level should 
be the occurrence, as we are on the third level. 
Considering the capacity of short term memory, 
on one level there can be 7 i 2  terms. If we put 5-  
9 terms on each level, then on third we will have 
more than 200. This would be valid if all 
knowledge has different occurrences. As this is 
not the case, namely one occurrence may have a 
lot of diverse knowledge. Name the levels. Here 
and now we use topic and keyword. Relations 
among requisite knowledge and topics as well as 
among topic-keyword and keyword-occurrence 
may diverse. 
5. Cognitive model 
Terms are displayed with cognitive maps 
which utilize “if. ..then” relations, while at 
concept maps the elements are related with 
verbs. Glance at the cognitive maps that are 
important for us. They show knowledge elements 
in human long term memory. Examine the links 
among knowledge elements in an outsourcing 
decision situation. .Decision maker’s reasoning 
(see Fig. 4.) can be described as: if conditions are 
“advantageous” and if quality is “excellent” and 
if credibility is “good or good on long term” then 
supplier is “the winner”. 
Figure 4. “If ... then” rules 
The content maps are relating knowledge 
elements with verbs. Relations on the maps may 
diverse. In other words, the relation verbs 
between requisite knowledge and topics can he 
described differently. Take a glance at the 
business sample! It may sound clumsy again, but 
we hope it helps to understand: There is a 
required knowledge on the occurrence about 
competitors’ business plan. 
6. Prototype of Concept Map 
In our prototype we have determined five 
topics. (see Fig. 4.) There are competitors, 
technologies, customers, consulters and 
suppliers. On each topic we connected five 
keywords. Let’s examine the supplier topic’s 
keywords. Classification principle in 
organization is hard to define. It can be 
conducted by decision, human or money. In 
depicted prototype the principia were exactly 
themselves the supplier companies, from 
supplier-I to supplier-2. It is unnecessary to 
explain how much problems would face the 
enterprise which would maintain 105 suppliers. 
Another reason for ranking the company of the 
suppliers into prototype is because the evaluated 
enterprise’s quality management demands the 
constant evaluation of suppliers. They need a 
decision support system for evaluation of 
suppliers. On our prototype we show the 
requisite knowledge for supplier-5 evaluation. 
Requisite knowledge is divided in hard data, and 
soft knowledge. Soli knowledge should be linked 
to knowledge occurrence, namely decision can 
be fast only if we find fast the occurrence of the 
require knowledge. 
7 
Figure 4. Requisite knowledge 
Let’s take another example. When the studied 
enterprise deals with outsourcing, and a decision 
maker has defined needed topis for outsourcing- 
decision, then one of the topics will be ,,task”. 
Then each task will have an intelligent 
evaluation system acquiring hard data from the 
database, while the occurrences of soft 
knowledge are depicted on concept map. (see 
Fig. 5.) 
Figure 5. Occurrences of soft knowledge 
So far we simulated reality so it fits different 
hierarchies. In real business terms impossible to 
define as simple relations than “parent - child - 
grandchild” relations. ,,As each scheme is a 
reference system too, every time we summon a 
scheme in our RTM, we modify our reference 
system. From this aspect it is not surprising how 
often we change our standpoints. It is rather 
amazing how we are able to be coherent for 
longer time. At the same time refined surviving- 
machines of schemes watch that not just any 
scheme comes to our mind, that is in our RTM. 
In  our entangled hierarchies we do not notice 
when we are thinking on a meta-level, and when 
do we slide to more concrete level, or perhaps a 
higher meta-level. 
The systematization of term depends on 
agreement. It means that a term can become 
topic, keyword or attribute. 
It is easy as Chinese alphabet, of course for a 
literal Chinese. Concept maps are simple at the 
end. This does not mean that it is easy to reach 
the simplicity. Patience is utility for ;hose who 
are able to systematize topics. 

