 1
Fault Protection for the Space Interferometry Mission 
 
Scott Peer 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Insitute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA  91109 
scott.peer@jpl.nasa.gov, 818-393-3702 
 
Abstract—The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) is a 
deep space mission with limited ground contact and 
challenging instrument fault protection requirements. Some 
faults that could occur on SIM have symptoms only visible 
in the scientific measurements, and many of the 
observations that SIM makes must be repeated to be useful. 
Because of this, SIM needs to be very reliable. 
We are addressing these challenges by combining several 
approaches. The use of redundancy in the instrument will be 
important in making the complex instrument with several 
dozen actuators reliable. Probabilistic Risk Assessment and 
reliability modeling are being performed to study the most 
cost effective areas for redundancy. Ground checks are 
important parts of the fault detection approach. Special 
approaches such as “flood mode” (providing large amounts 
of raw data) and diagnostic data dumps are also 
important.1,2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION......................................................1 
2. SIM OVERVIEW ....................................................1 
3. SIM FAULT PROTECTION PHILOSOPHY...............2 
4. SIM FAULT PROTECTION ARCHITECTURE..........2 
5. RELIABILITY MODELING ......................................3 
6. FAULT PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS ..................4 
7. FAULT PROTECTION DESIGN ................................6 
8. CONCLUSIONS .......................................................6 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ...........................................6 
REFERENCES .............................................................7 
BIOGRAPHIES ............................................................7 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) presents unique 
challenges for fault protection design.  Although it is a deep 
space mission with limited weekly ground contact, SIM has 
less fault protection autonomy than interplanetary missions 
because it does not have an orbit insertion or other rigorous 
time critical event. At the same time, SIM has challenging 
instrument fault protection requirements because some 
faults that could occur on SIM will be extremely subtle, 
resulting in symptoms only visible in the scientific 
measurements. SIM is a single instrument mission, and so 
                                                          
1 0-7803-8870-4/05/$20.00© 2005 IEEE 
2 IEEEAC paper #1066, Version 5, November 30, 2004 
an instrument failure equates to mission failure.   
SIM has a higher level of ground segment involvement in 
fault protection due to the unusually high level of precision 
required for the instrument to function and large amount of 
ground analysis. The most precise measurements required 
are the relative path length measurements needed to 
determine the angles between stars; these measurements 
need picometer (one thousandth of a nanometer) precision. 
Picometer level processing occurs only on the ground, and 
so subtle faults at that level will only be detectable on the 
ground. Examples include undetected environmental 
changes (such as temperature) or slight degradation in 
sensors. 
This paper presents an overview of the mission and the fault 
protection philosophy and architecture. It then discusses the 
application of Probabilistic Risk Assessment and reliability 
modeling to SIM, and concludes with key fault protection 
requirements and design.   
2. SIM OVERVIEW 
The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) is a space based 
optical interferometer to be launched in 2010. Its purpose is 
to make astrometric measurements with unprecedented 
accuracy. By making repeated measurements of star 
positions over the course of years, SIM will be able to 
determine characteristics of orbiting planets. It is a deep 
space mission (helio-centric orbit) with ground contact three 
times per week.  The primary SIM mission is 5 years, 
preceded by a 6 month In Orbit Checkout (IOC), and 
followed by an additional 5 year extended mission if 
possible. 
The instrument consists of three simultaneously operated 
Michelson stellar interferometers and an external metrology 
truss that monitors the relative orientations of the three 
baselines. At any time, one interferometer is dedicated to 
taking science data while the other two act as guide 
interferometers to determine the orientation of the baseline 
of the science interferometer as it changes over time. Using 
“bright” stars, these guide interferometers act as a high 
precision star tracker for the science interferometer. A 
fourth interferometer is provided as a redundant “spare” 
interferometer. The interferometer baseline is 10 meters. 
 2
Each interferometer is composed of elements from the four 
instrument subsystems: Collector (COL), Combiner (CMB), 
(external) Metrology (MET), and Real Time Control (RTC). 
The RTC coordinates the activities of the other subsystems 
and performs the data and command handling functions for 
the instrument as a whole.  
 
Additional information about SIM may be found at the SIM 
website [1]. 
3. SIM FAULT PROTECTION PHILOSOPHY  
The primary goal of SIM Fault Protection (FP) is to 
maintain the health and safety of the Flight Segment (the 
spacecraft and the instrument) despite conditions induced 
by hardware failures, environmental effects or ground 
system errors (erroneous commanding). This goal is limited 
by physical and programmatic constraints which limit the 
design and implementation of the Flight Segment and the 
fault protection system. As a result, mission critical single-
point failures may exist in the Flight Segment, but are 
identified and approved as accepted risk.  
The health and safety of the Flight Segment takes priority 
over any planned observations, and the fault protection 
system will take autonomous action to cancel activities 
which threaten the Flight Segment. 
SIM has less fault protection autonomy than interplanetary 
missions because it does not have an orbit insertion or other 
rigorous time critical event, and the distance from earth is 
limited. Flight Segment FP autonomy is limited to: what is 
needed to protect the flight segment from damage, ensure 
time-critical activities, and areas that could reduce life cycle 
costs (such as RTC low level re-tries). SIM has more 
instrument fault protection than most missions because it is 
a single instrument mission, and so an instrument failure 
equates to mission failure.  SIM has a high level of mission 
system involvement in fault protection due to the unusually 
high level of precision required for the instrument to 
function and large amount of ground analysis.  
In the interest of cost reduction, Flight Segment Fault 
Protection will have considerable commonality and 
inheritance from Northrop-Grumman Space Technology 
(NGST) missions including the James Web Space 
Telescope, Chandra X-Ray Observatory, and Earth 
Observing Satellites. NGST is building the spacecraft bus, 
while JPL is building the instrument. Chandra is in an 
elliptical high earth orbit, and so the light time is less than 
SIM.  Chandra is required to operate with 72 hour 
transmission outages, and has uplink/downlink schedules 
similar to SIM.  These similarities indicate that in general, 
the fault protection legacy for Chandra spacecraft functions 
will tend to be adequate for SIM. Chandra has 1 telescope 
system that feeds 4 science instruments.  Because SIM has 
only one instrument, the level of acceptable risk will tend to 
be lower. This results in higher instrument FP autonomy 
requirements for SIM. 
4. SIM FAULT PROTECTION ARCHITECTURE 
The Flight Segment Fault Protection functions reside 
primarily in two different Flight Segment elements: the 
spacecraft subsystem (containing command and data 
handling, power, thermal, and attitude control functions) 
and the Real Time Controller (RTC) Electronics which 
control the science instrument functions.  A spacecraft 
failure could result in loss-of-vehicle and therefore loss-of-
mission.  An instrument failure could result in loss-of-
mission because SIM is a single instrument mission.  The 
over-riding FP responsibility resides in the spacecraft 
subsystem where the Flight Segment health and safety is 
ensured.  The spacecraft can safe (transition to a non-
observing mode that reduces risk) both the spacecraft and 
instrument.   
An architectural view describes the entire system from a 
single perspective. Several views are used to describe the 
SIM FP architecture. In combination these views provide a 
thorough description of the architecture.  
The classification view classifies the SIM FP algorithms. 
The view defines the proper sets and subsets of FP 
algorithms and the terminology used to refer to each set. 
This view shows the following decomposition: 
Project Fault Protection 
Flight Segment FP 
Safing, undervoltage, data bus, etc. 
Spacecraft FP 
Attitude control 
Communications (RF) 
Data management 
Payload interface 
Power 
Thermal 
Instrument FP 
CMB, COL, MET, RTC, interfaces 
Mission System 
Fault recovery, contingencies, flight rules 
Science Operations System 
Instrument engineering 
Subtle fault detection 
The dataflow view provides a two-fold purpose. First, it 
defines the elements which make up the system. Second, it 
defines the information transferred between the system 
elements. This information is based upon the set of 
scenarios which cover the range of desired post-fault 
behavior. The fault protection dataflow is: 
 3
CMB, COL, MET 
Generate FP data 
Send FP data to RTC 
RTC 
Generates FP data 
Detects CMB, COL, MET, RTC faults 
Detects loss of spacecraft communication 
Sends FP data to spacecraft 
Sends Fault Log to spacecraft 
Sends mode and engineering data to spacecraft 
Sends commands to CMB, COL, MET 
Spacecraft 
Detects attitude, comm, power, thermal faults 
Detects RTC faults (especially interface) 
Sends commands to RTC 
Sends data and fault logs to ground 
Behavioral views capture the desired system behavior in 
state diagrams, also known as state charts. These state 
diagrams are based on the desired behavior as captured in 
the fault protection scenarios, and describe system states 
and transitions. Behavioral view state charts are formatted 
to be compliant with the statecharts defined in the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML 2.0). For the SIM fault 
protection architecture, separate statecharts are developed 
for the instrument and the spacecraft (SCS) systems. The 
instrument FP behavior is captured in Figure 1, Instrument 
FP Statechart. The designators such as “IF/Ta” (which 
stands for “interfering - target”) refer to the fault severity 
levels described below in the design section of this paper. 
 
5. RELIABILITY MODELING 
Many of the observations that SIM makes must be repeated 
to be scientifically useful, for example determining planet 
masses and orbits from star wobble. Because of this, SIM 
needs to be very reliable, for lost observations would 
diminish the value of observations already made. A 2.5 year 
SIM mission would have less than half the value of a 5 year 
SIM mission.  
The use of redundancy and Fault Containment Regions 
(FCR) in the instrument will be important in making the 
complex instrument with several dozen actuators reliable. 
However, due to tight cost constraints, redundancy needs to 
be applied judiciously. Probabilistic Risk Assessment 
(PRA) is being used to determine areas that will benefit the 
most from increased reliability or redundancy. However, 
PRA tools have difficulty with some of the complex areas 
of the instrument, and so instrument-specific reliability 
modeling is also being performed in addition. 
Probabilistic Risk Assessment was originally used by the 
nuclear power industry; the first major result in the US was 
a reactor safety study in 1975. The first use in a space 
application was in 1987 for the space shuttle. However, 
adaptation of the technique to robotic spacecraft was first 
accomplished for the current Mars Exploration Rovers 
On
Off Normal
Non-Observing
Observing
Safe
Cmd
Cmd or
IF/Ti fault
Cmd or
IF/Inst, or
IF/FS fault
Cmd
- waiting for cmds
- all cmds accepted
- executing tile obs
- all cmds accepted
- ‘safe’ all actuators
- waiting for cmds
- reject obs cmds
Cmd,
IF/Inst
fault or
IF/FS
fault
Cmd
Cmd, NI fault
or IF/Ta fault
Figure 1 - Instrument FP Statechart 
 4
(MER). The MER PRA effort uncovered several 
unexpected risk areas and contributed significantly to the 
success of the mission. The MER success provides 
motivation for applying PRA to SIM. 
The SIM PRA utilizes fault trees, event trees, and 
component and assembly reliability statistics to compute 
reliability at several levels. The event trees provide the 
temporal framework for the analysis, tying in component 
lifetimes and failure rates with the impact to the mission of 
failures at different times. Fault trees provide coverage of 
the failure modes and components. By varying the inputs to 
the PRA tool (SAPHIRE), sensitivity analyses may be 
performed [3]. The PRA can produce mission success 
probability as well, but due to the great variability of the 
inputs this typically is not accurate enough to be useful.  
While SAPHIRE is a powerful computational tool, it lacks 
the flexibility to model some of the more complex aspects 
of the SIM instrument. Also, it can be unwieldy to operate, 
and so sensitivity analysis can be tedious. For this reason, 
additional reliability modeling is performed for parts of the 
instrument. 
In 2002 reliability modeling was performed for the previous 
configuration of the SIM instrument [2]. This included both 
a closed-form solution and Excel-based Monte Carlo 
models. Because the SIM instrument design has changed 
significantly, these models are no longer valid for SIM. The 
main utility of the closed-form solution was to validate the 
Excel-based model, and its maintenance is costly, and so it 
will not be updated for the new SIM configuration. 
However, the Excel-based model is more flexible and easy 
to update, and so we are currently working to update it. 
A key area to explore with the Excel model is the metrology 
subsystem (MET). Although MET in not involved in the 
starlight, it is a critical subsystem that provides solutions to 
the distances between optical elements of the active 
interferometers. It provides absolute distance between two 
corner cube fiducials with an accuracy of a few microns, 
and measures relative changes in path length with an 
accuracy of approximately 20 picometers (which relates 
directly to instrument accuracy). The metrology subsystem 
consists of the metrology fiducials (optical corner cubes at 
the ends of the interferometers), the beam launchers, and the 
metrology sources. The fiducials serve as the endpoints of 
the measurement system. The beam launchers inject laser 
light to measure the distance between the fiducials. Finally, 
the metrology source generates the optical signal and 
frequency offsets necessary to derive the metrology phase 
differences. The arrangement of the optical elements is 
called the truss.  
A MET gauge is comprised of the (shared) metrology laser 
source, a fiber distribution network, a beam launcher 
(heterodyne interferometer that performs the metrology 
between the fiducial points), fiducials (cornercubes that 
represent the baseline endpoints between which the 
launchers measure distance), and electronics that sense and 
measure the optical phase measured by each gauge. There 
are 15 links between the 6 fiducials. There are 19 gauges, 
providing full redundancy for the 4 most critical links. In 
addition, an adequate truss solution may be formed when 
one or more of the less critical links is performing below 
required levels (for example when the electronic 
components degrade and have an increased noise level). 
However, the different gauges have different leverage on 
the truss solution, and that leverage changes based on the 
performance of the other gauges. Modeling the relationship 
between component reliability and degradation and the 
ability of MET to meet its performance requirements is a 
difficult task that is in progress.  
6. FAULT PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS 
SIM FP requirements are intended to capture the high level 
essence and critical details of the system without 
constraining the design or implementation. In the grey areas 
that lie between requirements and design, items are typically 
moved to the design rather than requirements. This 
approach is intended to reduce the effort needed to maintain 
the requirements and to allow as much flexibility as possible 
in achieving ambitious goals. 
SIM fault protection requirements include many of the 
generic requirements found on other deep space missions. 
Recovery after any single fault is required, with a short list 
of exemptions. Fault protection is always active, parameters 
are modifiable, and telemetry and logs provide visibility 
into detections and responses. Testbeds must include fault 
injection capabilities. 
Some SIM fault protection requirements are not particularly 
unusual but do influence the design significantly. For 
example, by requiring actuators to accept any value without 
being damaged, instrument fault protection is simplified 
significantly and the criticality of instrument control 
software is reduced. The number of actuators and circuits is 
about seven times that of other complex missions such as 
the Mars Exploration Rovers, and so requirements are 
levied that limit the frequency and impact of upsets (for 
example due to environmental effects) that may occur.  
The SIM instrument has an exceptional level of control of 
the overall activities of the flight segment. RTC essentially 
schedules when observations begin and end, and therefore 
controls the timing of 90% of the mission. The main 
spacecraft activities that need to be scheduled are 
calibrations, reaction wheel unloading, and downlinks. 
Because of this, traditional approaches to faults, in which 
the spacecraft either ignores an instrument fault or goes to 
safe mode are not ideal for SIM. On Spitzer Space 
Telescope there is a mode called "standby mode" which is 
 5
used for the case where there is a problem that is not health 
threatening but does not allow further observations. In the 
Spitzer architecture this results in killing the slave sequence 
(science observations are run by the spacecraft to a great 
extent), leaving the master (top level) sequence active (but 
pretty much just clocking along), and the flight software 
does some minimal telecom reconfiguration to sit and wait 
for directions. However, the NGST architectures tend to be 
quite different: they are much more sequence oriented than 
Spitzer or Cassini (which tend to have more capability built 
into the flight software). So our solution is to include the 
equivalent of standby mode as part of Flight Segment 
observation mode, under the presumption that the needed 
hooks exist or will be created to allow minimal spacecraft 
disruption (in particular, thermal stabilization can be a 
lengthy process). It is likely that observation/standby mode 
will allow an easier transition to a flood or diagnostic mode 
or back to science observations.   
Flood Mode 
A unique element of SIM is the flood mode, in which raw 
instrument data is captured at high rates. The command to 
the instrument initiated from the ground, although a goal is 
to have onboard triggers from RTC Fault Protection initiate 
flood mode (this could be difficult due to the telemetry 
architecture). Flood mode makes all raw instrument data 
available to support ground analysis of the instrument 
performance, and is used when regular telemetry or 
telemetry with adjusted schedules is not adequate for 
analyzing a problem. 
Possible causes that would initiate flood mode include:  
   Instrument fault detected 
   Unexpected behavior 
   Interferometer loses guide star fringe lock 
Normal science observations do not occur while taking 
flood mode data (it disrupts science) but engineering data 
continues normally.  It would be desirable to have science 
continue during flood mode, but processor throughput 
limitations preclude this. 
The flood mode data contents are fixed in RTC flight 
software and include: 
Raw instrument science data: full sample rate, not 
averaged/reduced nor compressed 
RTC intermediate variables 
Instrument engineering telemetry 
Instrument engineering data (such as encoders that 
aren’t in telemetry) 
SCS Engineering data  
Flood mode has a selectable duration of up to 2 minutes, 
which is limited by memory capacity and throughput of 
processors and busses. The full raw data rate is about 7 
Mbits/sec, so it requires about 0.85 Gbits of Solid State 
Recorder (SSR) storage per 2 minute collection. Data is 
stored in the SSR science partition. 
RTC buffers the data in RAM and then sends it to SCS.  
RTC intends to allocate over 100Mbytes of RAM (among 
its several processors) for flood and diagnostic modes, 
which should be barely adequate. 
After flood mode is complete, science observations may 
resume autonomously. 
“Deluxe” Flood Mode is an extension to flood mode that 
would have the capability to function exactly the same as 
basic flood mode, but as a goal would have significant 
enhancements. It is considered to be a goal, rather than a 
requirement, because it may be too expensive to implement 
by RTC (requiring too much memory and/or CPU, as well 
as impacting the RTC software design). In addition to the 
basic flood mode features, deluxe flood mode would look 
forward and backward in time: 
Allow the start time to precede the 
trigger/command time by up to 1 minute.  This 
would require continuous buffering of all raw 
science data (which may not be feasible within cost 
constraints). 
Data collection would be for n seconds before the 
command and m seconds after the command. 
If implemented, deluxe flood mode would probably make 
both basic flood mode and Ring Buffer Instrument 
Diagnostic unnecessary. Additional goals include on-the-fly 
data selection and onboard triggering. 
Diagnostic Ring Buffer 
It is expected that some instrument faults that result in 
observation failures will be intermittent and difficult to 
catch. A key tool used to gather data related to these faults 
is the diagnostic ring buffer. This buffer runs continuously 
capturing instrument data. Upon command from the ground 
or onboard FP the contents of the ring buffer are captured 
and sent to the ground for analysis. 
The diagnostic data snapshot is sent to SSR when 
commanded from the ground or onboard FP. Data flow into 
the ring buffer will be interrupted during the snapshot data 
transfer due to processing limitations. 
Uses could include fault diagnosis as well as support for 
trend analysis (periodic detailed data snapshots). It is non-
disruptive to science observation in general, but might 
interfere with science output for the current target. 
 6
The detailed data contents are not yet determined, but will 
be fixed in RTC software, and will include a mix of raw 
data and selected processed data. Data items could be 
placed in buffer at varying rates. Examples include: CCD 
raw output, encoder values, and actuator commands. 
The data quantity is about 10 Mbits, and the duration (oldest 
data in buffer) is about 30 seconds (depending on data 
chosen). 
Ground Segment 
Ground checks such as data quality, data consistency (i.e. 
fitting residuals), data re-processing using different 
combinations of external metrology gauges, measuring the 
same star field at different orientations, and periodic star 
observations are important parts of the fault detection 
approach. Subtle faults, such as degrading components that 
effect picometer level performance, can only be detected 
during ground analysis. It will be critical for these checks to 
be run in a timely manner to minimize the loss of data after 
faults occur, and to prevent the use of invalid data.  
7. FAULT PROTECTION DESIGN 
Onboard fault monitors classify their detections according 
to severity. The severity levels are defined around the 
science structure of the mission, in which observatory time 
is divided into tiles that last about an hour and include a 
group of observations of targets in a particular part of the 
sky that can be viewed without slewing the spacecraft. The 
severity levels in increasing severity are: 
non-interfering: unexpected behavior; doesn't affect current 
observation or target; no health concern  
interfering - target: interrupts/invalidates current target/data; 
instrument goes to next target; no health concern  
interfering - tile: interrupts/invalidates the current tile; 
instrument goes to next tile; no health concern 
interfering - instrument: prevents instrument operation; 
instrument goes to faulted-idle mode, safe or off; no health 
concern 
interfering - safe: immediate danger to instrument or 
spacecraft; instrument goes to safe or off 
Responses to fault monitors are captured in a 
monitor/response table. A sample entry follows: 
Monitor Name: Inst_Damage 
Monitor Description: Risk of immediate instrument damage 
Response Name: Inst_Off + Inst_Safe (when detected by 
RTC) 
Response Severity: interfering - safe (severe)   
Response Action: Power off instrument immediately 
Example Fault: RTC Heartbeat loss, RTC/SCS interface 
failure    
Fault tree entries are cross referenced to fault monitors to 
help ensure complete coverage. An example follows: 
Fault Tree: RTC 
Fault Description: Error in MET truss solution too 
large 
Detection Location: RTC 
Monitor Name: Inst_Data_Bad_Obs 
Response Name (duplicated here): Inst_Diag + 
Inst_Abort_Obs 
Multi-level redundancy is employed due to the exceptional 
complexity of the instrument. For example, there are 
redundant interferometers, and in each there are additional 
redundant components such as piezo actuators. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
The SIM fault protection approach is intended to be a cost 
effective approach to providing high reliability for a very 
complex space observatory. On-board autonomous fault 
protection is used to reduce hardware damage resulting 
from faults, while ground based detection is used for subtle 
instrument faults. The use of multi-level redundancy in the 
instrument will be important in making the complex 
instrument with several dozen actuators reliable. Reliability 
modeling, including Probabilistic Risk Assessment, is being 
performed to study the most cost effective areas to make 
redundant. Ground checks such as data consistency (i.e. 
fitting residuals), data re-processing using different 
combinations of external metrology gauges, and periodic 
star observations are important parts of the fault detection 
approach. Special approaches such as “flood mode” 
(providing large amounts of raw data) and diagnostic data 
dumps are also important. The combination of approaches 
and techniques create a fairly complex SIM FP with the 
goal of helping to enable a successful mission with 5 years 
of observations. 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research described in this paper was carried out at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. 
 7
REFERENCES  
[1] SIM website: 
http://planetquest.jpl.nasa.gov/SIM/sim_index.html . 
[2] Aaron, Kim; Fox, George; Ebbeler, Donald; Walker, W. 
John; “Reliability Modeling for the Space Interferometry 
Mission” paper +019, IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big 
Sky, 2002. 
[3] SAPHIRE website: http://saphire.inel.gov/ 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Scott Peer is a systems and software engineer at JPL. He is 
the Fault Protection Engineer 
for the Space Interferometry 
Mission. He is also on the 
Cassini flight software team, 
responsible for maintaining 
the star tracker software he 
developed. Earlier he led the 
Spitzer Space Telescope 
block development effort. He 
has a BSEE from Cornell 
University and a MS in 
system science from UCLA. 
 
 
 
