RADECS 2005 Proceedings
Gamma-ray induced optical absorption
in Ge and P-doped fibres at the LHC.
Authors: A. Presland, T. Wijnands & L. De Jonge, CERN Geneva, Switzerland.
T. Sugito, Draka Comteq NKF Kabel B.V., Gouda, Netherlands.
Keywords: optical fibres, radiation induced attenuation, LHC
1. Introduction
From 2007 the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) will
provide 14 TeV proton interactions by colliding two counter-rotating 7 TeV proton beams at four points on the 27
km circumference accelerator. Experiments situated at the interaction points will use the decay products to test the
standard model of fundamental forces and search for new physics.
Many LHC electronics will be installed in the tunnel close to beam in order to optimise performance, increase the
S/N ration and to reduce cabling costs. The 3 major distributed control systems in the tunnel that use WorldFIP
protocol over fibre optical links are the Quench Protection System, Power Converters and the Cryogenics system.
Another big consumer of fibres in the tunnel is the BLM/BPM system that transmits raw data from the low level
BPMs/BLMs crates directly over a fibre optical links to the surface at a rate of 40 MHz.
Fibres in the LHC tunnel will suffer from radiation-induced attenuation caused by the ionizing component of the
mixed LHC radiation field. This may eventually halt communication of data after a few years of nominal
operation of the LHC. Radiation-induced attenuation depends mainly on the type and the concentration of dopants
(such as Phosphor (P), Fluorine (F) and Germanium (Ge)) in the amorphous silicon dioxide (a-SiO2) core. At
present Ge-P-doped and Ge-doped fibres are being installed in the LHC tunnel.
2. Attenuation of light in a fibre
The attenuation for a fibre is specified in decibels per kilometer (dB/km). When they are delivered at CERN, the
single mode fibres used in the LHC tunnel have an attenuation of approximately 0.35 dB/km for light at 1310 nm.
For a complete fibre connection between 2 points, the attenuation will be superior to this number because of the
optical joints and connectors.
In addition to decreasing attenuation with increasing wavelength, several bands in the attenuation curve may be
present if the SiO2 contains impurities or structural or point defects. Even if the sample is initially free of
absorption bands, some may appear if the sample is exposed to radiation. This is because the radiation creates free
electrons by radiolysis that can activate pre-existing point defects that then begin to absorb photons of a specific
energy. It can also create totally new point defects that are then populated by radiolysis electrons. The wavelength
at which the defects absorb will depend on the structure of the point defect and, if it involves a dopant atom, the
type of dopant involved.
Concurrent with the damage process, thermal and optical bleaching processes occur. These cause deactivation of
absorption centres, for example by the liberation of a trapped charge. Activation and deactivation of absorption
centres reaches equilibrium at a value of attenuation that depends on the dose rate. Attenuation will then be
observed to saturate. Once irradiation has terminated activation will cease but the recovery processes will
continue. This leads to the observation of short term recovery of fibre transmission. The radiation induced
absorption centres continue to exist and once irradiation is resumed the attenuation levels quickly return to the
saturating value as new charge carriers are created by radiolysis and start to populate the traps.
3. Kinetic Modelling of radiation induced attenuation
The dependence of the saturation value on dose rate (and temperature) is easily seen in a simple, first order kinetic
formulations for defect generation. Considering the equation [2]
an n
= aD-- (3.1)
at Tr
PAl-1
where n is the defect concentration, D the dose-rate, a the probability of defect generation and t the characteristic
lifetime of the defect. For an isothermal, constant dose-rate regime, the solution of (3.1) is a saturating exponential
of the form:
n = abr( - exp(- t / r)) (3.2)
Since the characteristic lifetime of the defect, ;, is temperature dependent, it may be clear that the overall
attenuation of light in a doped fibre is dose rate and temperature dependent.
To describe the experimental data presented in the next section we have used the kinetic model of Kyoto et al [3].
This model considers the sum of saturating exponentials to describe the overall attenuation of light A (t):
n-I
A(t) = E [Ki (1 - exp(-u/I1 ))] (3 3)
The constants K1,2...n- correspond to the saturation values of the different contributions to the induced attenuation
and are dependent on the dose rate. However, most of the attenuation will anneal when irradiation is stopped as
the trapped radiolysis electrons escape and without being replaced. For the period after irradiation, the recovery of
the induced radiation is parameterised with another set of constants:
A(t) = ,E[j exp( t I -r ) (3.4)
j=1
After the annealing period the attenuation in the fibres do not, however, regain the initial values before irradiation.
In the absence of transient effects related to the dose rate, it is reasonable to assume the asymptotic limit whereby
the number of colour defect centres (and thus the optical absorption of the fibre) is proportional to the total
absorbed dose.
A=Kn(D) (3.5)
The range over which expression (3.5) is valid is limited because of the known saturation at very high doses and
the transients observed during intense, pulsed irradiation. After a sufficiently long shutdown period, the
attenuation in a LHC fibre in the tunnel will be almost entirely determined by the value of the total accumulated
dose.
4. Experimental setup
The attenuation of the LHC type fibres under ionizing irradiation was studied in detail by irradiating the 2 types of
LHC fibre with gamma rays from 60Co in the POSEIDON irradiator at the nuclear centre of CEA-Saclay in Paris.
The aim of the experiment was to confirm the radiation induced attenuation as predicted by literature and earlier
experiments in the TCC2 test area and to verify the resistance of the mini-tubes after irradiation to ensure that
fibres can still be replaced after several years ofLHC operation..
At the time of the experiment, the intensity of the 60Co source was 631 kCi (22.5 kW) The dose rate at which the
samples are exposed can be varied by increasing or decreasing the distance to the source. We choose to expose the
cable drums at dose rates of 500 and 1000 Gy per hour. Each cable drum contained 1 km of SM fibre in a
polyethylene minitube. The first cable drum was wound with the Ge-P doped MCVD produced SM fibre from
Draka NK Cables Ltd and exposed at a dose rate of 500 Gy/hr. The second drum contained 1 km of Ge-doped
PCVD SM fibre from Draka Fibre Technology BV and was exposed at 1000 Gy/hr. Both fibres were exposed for
a total of one hour with a 2.5 hour annealing period after the initial 33 minutes.
Attenuation during irradiation was measured with an Optical Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR). The OTDR
injects a series of optical pulses into the fibre and measured the intensity of light that is scattered and reflected
back. By the integrated intensity of the return pulses as a function of time, one can estimate the fibre length and
total attenuation.
PAl -2
5. Attenuation under irradiation
5.1 Ge-Doped SM fibres
Figures 1 (a) and 1 (b) show the radiation-induced attenuation in the Ge-doped LHC SM fibre sample when
irradiated at 1 kGy/hr. The irradiation was interrupted after approximately 33 minutes for approximately 2.5 hrs to
study the annealing behaviour.
Figure 1 (a) shows the attenuation data as function of time. This figure clearly shows the strong annealing effect
when irradiation is interrupted. The attenuation in the fibres does not, however, regain the initial values before
irradiation. When the samples are irradiated again, the attenuation follows the same saturating exponential
development as before. After the second annealing period the remnant attenuation is higher (indicated with
arrows) than after the first annealing period suggesting the existence of a dose dependent, linear contribution as in
(3.5).
30 1-4
-i No irradiation -
1310 nm Ge-doped
12 1550 nm Ge-doped
10
E
a 6 .-
o ,.4
or ,
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Dose [Gy]
Figure 1 (a) Radiation induced attenuation of an LHC fibre (Ge-doped SM fibre) as a function of time (dose rate
1000 Gy/hour). The kinetic model fits to the growth and anneal data have been superimposed. Figure l(b)
Radiation induced attenuation in Ge doped SM fibres as a function of the total accumulated dose after complete
annealing at room temperature.
The existence of a linear term has been investigated further in figure 1 (b), which shows the attenuation of the Ge
doped SM fibre as a function of total dose after each annealing period (i.e. the points indicated with arrows in
figure l(a)). The dependence on dose is quasi linear and approximately equal to 0.01 dB/km per Gy for light at
either wavelength.
5.2 Ge-P-Doped SM fibres
Figure 2 shows the radiation-induced attenuation of the Ge-P-doped SM fibres as a function of the time for the
same two wavelengths. The Ge-P-doped SM fibre in this experiment was irradiated at 500 Gy/hr. In contrast with
the Ge-doped SM fibres, the Ge-P-doped SM fibre does not show any short term annealing and the attenuation is
approximately equal to 0.08 dB/km per Gy for 1310 nm and 0.12 dB/km per Gy for light at 1550 nm.
No irradiatn)5 +~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 1 31 u n mT
< ,c'~~~' d ~No irradiation
Figure 2. Radiation induced attenuation of the Ge-P-doped SM fibre as a function of time (dose rate 500 Gy/hour).
PA1 -3
6. Fit to kinetic models
The formulations derived in section 3 have been used to fit the attenuation data for the Ge-doped fibre during
irradiation and annealing. The resulting plots are shown in figure la with the fit parameters tabulated below.
Table I. Fitting parameters for the radiation-induced attenuation in Ge doped SM fibres for light at 1310 nm and
1550 nm.
Table II. Fitting parameters for the annealing at room temperature of the radiation-induced attenuation in Ge
doped SM fibres for light at 1310 nm and 1550 nm.
The dynamic response of Ge-doped SM fibres under irradiation at 1 kGy/hr can be described well with a single,
dose-rate dependant, saturating exponential as proposed by the kinetic model from Kyoto [3]. The permanent
damage that remains after a sufficiently long annealing period at room temperature is linear dependent on the total
accumulated dose.
At the radiation levels investigated in this report the attenuation in the Ge-P-doped SM fibre shows neither
evidence of saturation during irradiation nor of annealing after irradiation. The attenuation can be described by a
single dose dependent term.
The overall attenuation for an optical connection between the tunnel and the SR surface building may be superior
due to losses in the optical connectors (around 4 dB in total, i.e. 0.5 dB per connector) and radiation-induced
degradation of the lasers or light emitting diodes [4].
7. Estimate of radiation induced attenuation in the LHC tunnel
To estimate the radiation induced attenuation in the tunnel we have used the fibre layout as presented in [1]. In
point 7, communication fibres from the SR7 surface building reach low level electronic crates located under the
cryostats in the tunnel by passing through the Long Straight Section, the Dispersion suppressors and the regular
ARC.
We consider here an optical fibre that connects a low-level electronics crate located under a cryostat at the mid
ARC to an acquisition crate in the local control room in SR7. This fibre will be damaged by radiation from beam-
gas interaction in the ARC and from radiation due point losses in the Dispersion Suppressor and the Long Straight
Section where the collimators are located. The dose rate in these areas during nominal operation have been
simulated with cascade codes and the results can be found in [5] [6] [7] and [8] assuming the usual 200 days of
LHC operation per year (4800 hours) at nominal intensity with fill durations of approximately 15 hours with 5-
hour turnarounds.
Table III gives estimates of the radiation-induced damage in the 2 SM fibre types assuming that the attenuation
depends only on the total accumulated ionizing dose. The overall attenuation for an optical connection between
the tunnel and the SR surface building may be superior due to losses in the optical connectors (around 4 dB in
total, i.e. 0.5 dB per connector) and radiation-induced degradation of the lasers or light emitting diodes [8].
PAl -4
Damage fit coefficients 1310 nm Ge-doped fibre 1550 nm Ge-doped fibre
K1[dB/km] 24.20 14.50
| I[mins] 11.16 17.40
Recovery fit coefficients 1310 nm Ge-doped fibre 1550 nm Ge-doped fibre
A1 [dB/Gy.km] 15.34 6.75
t1[mins] 31.14 35.92
Table III. Estimates of the annual radiation induced attenuation in an optical fibre due to ionizing radiation around
IR7 based on the fitting parameters in section 4 obtained from the 60Co gamma ray experimental data and the
exposed fibre length in each tunnel area.
8. Conclusions & future work
The SM fibres in the LHC tunnel will show an increase in the attenuation of light at 1310 nm due to radiation
damage from ionising radiation. The attenuation will depend on the wavelength of the light, the type and
concentration of dopants in the Si-core, the total accumulated dose and the dose rate.
The observed attenuation in Ge-P-doped SM fibres irradiated at a dose rate of 500 Gy/hr is 0.08 dB/km per Gy
for light at 1310 nm which is approximately 8 times higher than that in Ge-doped SM fibres. The attenuation
increases linear with the total dose and no saturation of the attenuation has been observed up to a total dose of 0.5
kGy. When the irradiation is stopped, Ge-P-doped SM fibres do not show any measurable short term annealing
effect .
Ge-doped SM fibres show a saturating exponentially increasing attenuation at a high dose rate (1 kGy/hr) and the
level of saturation is approximately 20 dB/km. There is a strong short term annealing when the irradiation source
is turn off. At room temperature, the attenuation does not return to the level of the un-irradiated fibre. The remnant
attenuation is approximately linearly dependent on the total dose and equal to 0.01 dB/km per Gy.
Draka performed blowing tests on lkm micro-ducts containing eight-fibre micro-cables. After irradiation up to
300 kGy the micro-cables could be blown in and out again at 100 meters per minute in test beds.
As a result of the work presented here Ge-P-doped fibres have been excluded from use in IR7 in favour of the
more radiation tolerant Ge-doped fibres. In addition the routing of fibres has been optimized to minimize exposure
in the hottest radiation areas and minimize attenuation. Fraunhofer INT has been commissioned to investigate, for
different fibre types, the dose rate dependence of the attenuation increase and assess the impact of annealing at the
time-scales of the LHC duty cycle.
References
[1] L. De Jonge, Presentation in the LHC Technical Coordination Committee, 6 December 2002,
[2] P. Borgermans, B. Brichard, , IEEE J. Trans. Nucl. Sci., Vol. 49, No. 3, June 2002
[3] M. Kyoto et al., IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol 10, No. 3, March 1992.
[4] I.Azhgirey et al, LHC project note 297, CERN, June 4 2002.
[5] I. Baichev et al, LHC-Project-Note-121; Geneva: CERN, 04 Dec 1997.
[6] I. Baichev et al, LHC-Project-Note-33 1; Geneva: CERN, 12 Dec 2003
[7] C. Fynbo, G. Stevenson, "Radiation Environment in the Main Ring of the LHC", LHC seminar 22
November 2001
[8] I.Azhgirey et al, LHC project note 297, CERN, June 4 2002.
PA1-5
Tunnel Area Length Dose rate Annual Dose Attenuation 1310 nm Attenuation 1310 nm
[ml [Gy/h] [GY] Ge-P doped [dB/y] Ge doped [dB/y]
LSS R7 270 0.416 2000 42.0 5.4
DSR7 170 0.002 10 0.14 0.02
HalfARC 1214 0.001 5 0.49 0.06
Total 1654 - 3015 42.6 5.5
