 1
Algorithm Development to Ascertain the True 
Characteristic Impedance of a Wire for Wire Diagnostics 
 
Dr. Eric Bechhoefer 
Goodrich Fuels and Utility Systems 
Vergennes, VT 05491 
802-877-4875 
Eric.Bechhoefer@Goodrich.com 
 
Dr. Jun Yu 
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Vermont 
Burlington, VT 05401 
(802) 656-8539 
Jun.Yu@uvm.edu 
 
Abstract—Electronic1,2 wiring interconnect system (EWIS) 
traditionally have been treated as a commodity as apposed 
to a system. The EWIS, being responsible for the transfer of 
power and information of aircraft systems, represents a 
point of failure that is usually considered as a Maintainer’s 
last resort. We attempt to develop a diagnostic capability for 
the detection and progression of EWIS damage of data 
using Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR). TDR measures 
changes in EWIS characteristic impedance.   Damage, such 
as chafe, nicks and corrosion, change the characteristic 
impedance of the EWIS, suggesting that detection is 
dependent upon as true representation of impedance as 
possible.  Wire characteristic impedance is corrupted by: 
multiple reflections (an artifact resulting from the 
interaction of the TDR waveform and changes in impedance 
on the EWIS), and attenuation in the high frequency 
component of the TDR signal. 
  
A transmission line problem was developed using RLC 
circuit model. We present systems of differential equations 
to solve for the wire characteristic impedance. This led to a 
system of wave equations in terms of line voltage and 
current, which we solve by the method of characteristics. 
The inverse scattering method was then successfully 
implemented to remove multiple reflections.  We then 
control environmental effects including skin effect, 
capacitance and wire resistance to account for attenuation in 
the TDR signal. Formulas based on hypothesis as well as 
derived from the electromagnetic field theory for the 
capacitance as a function of the distance of the wires were 
developed and tested. These solutions were then 
implemented in a hand held device for the prognostics of 
EWIS. 
 
                                                          
1 0-7803-8870-4/05/$20.00© 2005 IEEE 
2 IEEEAC paper #1104, Revision 2, updated January 4, 2005 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.INTRODUCTION.......................................................1 
2.THE RLC CIRCUIT.................................................2 
3.CALCULATING CHARACTERISTIC IMPEDANCE.....2 
4.CONTROLLING SIGNAL ATTENUATION .................4 
5. EXAMPLES .............................................................4 
6. DISCUSSION ...........................................................6 
REFERENCES .............................................................6 
BIOGRAPHY ...............................................................6 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The study of the transmission line problem, especially 
involving multiple scattering, is important to many 
applications. Inverse scattering method provides a powerful 
tool to analyze multiple reflections of the waves in the 
transmission line. This type of the problem has been applied 
to discrete transmission line models [1] and [2], elastic 
waves in layered media [3], and electromagnetic scattering 
[4]. While [1], [3] and [4] dealt with lossless inverse 
scattering problems; [2] studied the problems in lossy and 
absorbing media. In our present paper, we focus on 
developing a diagnostic procedure for analyzing changes in 
EWIS characteristic impedance and for detecting wire 
damages. This procedure incorporates inverse scattering 
algorithm with formulas derived from data-analysis 
modeling and electromagnetic field theory to account for 
various environmental effects.    
 
We start, in Section 2, with a general problem formulation 
for the wire response, based on Maxwell’s equations. 
Representing a transmission line by the distributed 
parameter equivalent circuit, we study wave propagation on 
the line in terms of voltage and current. For a more detailed 
derivation, see Chapter 7 of [5], for example. In Section 3, 
we describe the implementation of the inverse scattering 
algorithm for calculating characteristic impedance in 
Goupillaud medium. The center piece of the algorithm is the 
so called “layer peeling” method described, for example, in 
 2
[6]. In Section 4, we show that the theory can be used to 
derive a correction for multiple reflections and the effect of 
capacitive and resistance in a transmission line. Examples 
are then presented in Section 5 and finally, we do discussion 
in Section 6. 
 
2. THE RLC CIRCUIT 
 
When a fast rise time pulse sent down a wire, the measured 
voltage response is depended on a number of physical 
phenomena.  These phenomena can be modeled as a series 
RLC circuit. 
 
In the series RLC circuit, the inductor and capacitor are 
connected in series.  The source-resistor circuit can be 
written as a Thevenin equivalent, which reduces to a circuit 
that has a voltage source, resistor, inductor, and capacitor 
connected in series. 
The governing equation for the capacitor voltage vC(t), is 
given by:  
LC(d2vC)/dt2 + RC(dvC)/dt + vC = vT,           (1) 
 
where L, C and R are constants. The Thevenin voltage vT is 
always a known driving force, where the initial conditions 
are: 
vC(0) = Va, (dvC(0))/dt = I0/C                   (2) 
The second-order differential equation characterizes the 
response of the series RLC circuit in terms of the capacitor 
voltage.  Once the solution of the capacitor voltage is found, 
it is possible to solve for every other voltage or current, 
including the inductor current, using the element and 
connection constraints.  This is the solution strategy used to 
solve a model of a transmission line.  
 
We consider a lossless transmission line that is switched to 
a direct current (DC) source.  The model is described by a 
distributed inductance and capacitance, with inductance and 
capacitance per unit length designated as Ld and Cd, 
respectively. The conditions on the line at a time dt after the 
connection of the source, when the source voltage has 
penetrated a distance dx into the line can now be described. 
 The capacitance of the energized segment of the line Cd dx 
has charged to a voltage of VA, hence a charge of dQ = Cd 
dx VA has been transferred. 
DC
 
Figure 1  Lumped RC Circuit 
The current flowing into the line is:  
i = dQ/dt = Cd(dx/dt)Va = CdVau,              (3) 
where u is the velocity of propagation along the line of the 
disturbance caused by being switched to the source.  The 
flow of the current establishes a magnetic flux φ, which is 
associated with the line inductance: d φ=Ld dxi,. i = VA/Z0. 
Faraday’s Law states that the rate of change of the flux must 
equal the line voltage, e.g.: VA = (dφ)/dt = LdCdVAu2.  
From this, the velocity of propagation on the line is simply: 
u = (Ld Cd)-.5.                                  (4) 
Substituting the velocity of propagation back into the 
equation for current on the line gives: 
i = Va(Cd/Ld) .5.                               ( 5) 
Note that this is the same relationship for resistance, 
namely: i=Va/R. The characteristic impedance of the line is: 
Z0 = (Ld/Cd) .5, with units of Ohms (Ω).  When a driving 
voltage propagates along a line, there is an associated 
current pulse, namely, i = Va/Z0.  Given this, until a 
condition on the line affects the characteristic impedance, 
(discontinuities such as a termination), the input impedance 
of the line is Z0.   
The Inverse Scattering Problem—The process 
of determining the true transmission line impedance from 
the measured waveform is the inverse scattering problem.  It 
is an extraordinarily difficult problem to solve found in 
many fields that studies waves.  Some examples include the 
study of elastic pressure waves (geology, seismology), 
sound waves (acoustics), transmission lines (electrical 
engineer), and the wave behavior of matter (quantum 
mechanics). 
  
Fortunately, the inverse scattering problem for simpler, one-
dimensional system of layered media (as is the case of 
lossless transmission lines) is relatively easy to solve.  In 
this case, there is a pair of coupled first-order partial 
differential equations that govern two-state variables, 
current i(x,t) and voltage v(x,t): 
∂ v(x,t)/ ∂ x = -Z ∂ i(x,t)/ ∂ t.                    (6) 
∂ i(x,t)/ ∂ x = -Z-1 ∂ v(x,t)/ ∂ t 
 
where Z is the local impedance at the point x. 
 
It can be shown that when there is a mismatch in 
characteristic impedance, some small amount of energy is 
reflected from the discontinuity.  Where there are a number 
of these mismatches close to each other on the transmission 
path, their reflections interact and generate a number of 
reflection artifacts.  These artifacts corrupt the measured 
waveform via superposition and make analysis of the true 
impedance of the transmission path difficult. 
 
 3. CALCULATING CHARACTERISTIC IMPEDANCE  
 
Further analysis of the transmission line requires the 
establishment of a voltage and current convention.  The 
velocity of propagation u will be taken at going to the right, 
with voltage and current being positive: 
 3
X
Va
I = Va/Zo Current
Voltage
U
 
Figure 2 Voltage and Curent Propagation 
 
Consider the moment when the voltage and current pulses 
travel the length of the line and encounter an open-circuit 
termination.  The current at the open-circuit must be zero.  
This means that a current pulse must be initiated at the 
termination, traveling toward the source with a magnitude 
of -Va/Z0 so that the line current is progressively forced to 
zero.  When the pulses reflected from the open circuit 
termination arrive at the source end, the voltage along the 
entire length of the line is V’ + Va, and the current is zero. 
This occurs at a time 2τ following the switching of the 
source, where τ is the travel time of the pulses from the 
source to the termination and is equal to the length divided 
by the velocity of propagation. 
 
The equations governing plane waves in various mediums 
are all described by similar second-order differential 
equations.  The solutions to the governing equations given 
in equation (6) involve waves travel with some speed c.  
The square of the wave speed is 1/(LC). At any position x 
on the transmission line, there will be a local value of the 
wave speed, c(x).  When the wave moves from x to x + dx, 
the time taken is; 
dς  = dx/c(x).                               (7) 
This ensures that the time taken to move from 0 to x is: 
( )∫= x ucdu0 /ς .                            (8) 
This time ς will be defined as the travel time.   
 
The concept of travel time ς as a measure of distance, 
allowed the equations governing waves to be reduced to 
standard form.  In this standard form, the medium in which 
the wave propagates is specified by a single parameter, the 
characteristic impedance Z, as a function of travel time, 
Z(ς). Additionally, an alternative formulation was provided 
in terms of down and up moving waves. Using these 
formulations, an analysis of the reflection and transmission 
wave in a medium will be developed. 
 
Consider a medium in which Z(ς) is piece-wise constant 
with discontinuities only at some dx, 2dx .... positions.  This 
implies that the travel time between each layer in the media 
is constant.  This type of medium is called a Goupillaud 
medium. See [6] for a detailed account of the Goupillaud 
medium. The analysis of the wave’s medium requires two 
situations: as the waves travel along a part where Z is 
constant, and as the wave crosses a discontinuity.  Over the 
distance traveled ς, which is a member set of  [(i-1)d, id] 
where Z is constant, the waves are separated into a 
downward moving wave and an upward moving wave: 
D(ς ,t) = f(ς -t),I                              (9) 
 U(ς ,t) = f(ς+τ). 
 
Where D= (v+Zi)/(2Z .5) and U=(v-Zi)/(2Z .5).  The 
downward moving wave is just above the discontinuity at id 
at any given time t must have departed from (i-1)d at the 
instant t - d.  The wave has traveled without any change in 
shape, such that; 
D(id-,t) = D[(i-1)d+,t-d].                      (10) 
 
The value of D[(i-1)d+,t-d] at the instant prior to t-d, is 
obtained from D[(i-1)d+,t], by executing the delay operator 
d.  The delay operator has the defining property of changing 
any function of time, f(t), into its value at the instant t-d.  
Therefore, df(t) = f(t-d), such that D(id-,t) = D[(i-1)d+,t-d], 
and can be written as:  
 
D(id-,t) = dD[(i-1)d+,t].                       (11) 
 
The same argument applies to the upward moving wave 
such that U[(i-1)d+,t] = U(id-,t-d) = dU(id-,t). This can be 
inverted to give: 
U(id-,t) = d-1U[(i-1)d+,t].                      (12) 
 
The equation establish a non-causal relationship between 
U(id-,t) and U[(i-1)d+,t+d].  The downward and upward 
wave equations can now be combined into the matrix 
equations: 
⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
+−
+−
⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
=⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
−
−
− ],)1[(
],)1[(
),(
),(
1 tdiU
tdiD
d
d
tidU
tidD               (13) 
 
This is the first of two equations that describes the evolution 
of the waves.  It shows that the D,U waves travel without 
change of shape when the characteristic impedance, Z, does 
not change. 
 
Using the fact that v and i are continuous across a 
discontinuity in Z, the downward and upward interaction 
equations can now be combined into a casual evolution 
equation: 
⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
+
+−
⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡Σ⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
=⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
+−
+
),(
],)1[(
1
1
],)1[(
),(
tidU
tdiDd
dtdiU
tidD
i
  (14) 
 
Where 
⎥⎦
⎤⎢⎣
⎡
−
−
=Σ=Σ
ii
ii
i στ
τσ ,                             (15) 
 
and σi,  τi depend on the values of iZ s.  
 
The derived evolution equations for waves in a Goupillaud 
medium allow for the derived difference equations.  This 
will be the basis for algorithms constructing waves in a 
 4
medium from a given initial and boundary data.  The 
essential characteristic of wave phenomena in a Goupillaud 
medium is that a response at any discontinuity point ς = id 
at any time t depends only on the input at the times t, t-d, t-
2d, etc. 
 
 4. CONTROLLING SIGNAL ATTENUATION  
 
The TDR signal is a step-pulse with a short rise-time. This 
equates to a high frequency component within the TDR 
signal, which due to the properties of the transmission line, 
is attenuated and dispersed in time.  In order to correct for 
this behavior, an inverse filter is required that is matched to 
the transmission line transfer function for a given frequency 
and length. 
 
Attenuation for shorter transmission lines (3 meter or less) 
are governed by skin effect. Maxwell’s equation shows that 
very high frequency attenuation is an exponential function 
of wire core diameter, frequency, characteristic impedances, 
and length (see for example, [7]): 
)( .
),,(
5
ofdZ
LengthK
o eLZfA
−
= ,            (16) 
where: Length is distance, K is the conductivity, Z is the 
characteristic impedance, and f is the frequency.  For longer 
transmission lines, the attenuation is predominately a 
function of transmission line resistance and capacitance.  
This allows the loss to be modeled as a RC circuit, a 
function of the capacitance and resistance of the wire itself. 
  
 
The resistance of the wire is a function of wire segment,  
 
R = dLength2/(2r2K),                          (17) 
 
where r is wire radius.  The capacitance is a function of the 
measured characteristic impedance z:  
 
C= 1./(c*vop*z),                              (18) 
 
 c is the speed of light and vop is the velocity of 
propagation, taken as 1/sqrt(dielectric).  Note that this is the 
capacitance per unit meter.   
 
What remains is to model the frequency response for each 
transmission line segment.  The frequency loss is a function 
of cumulative resistance and capacitance.  Thus, attenuation 
at the end of the transmission line is significantly greater 
effect than the beginning of the transmission line. The 
frequency response for transmission line segment i, Hi, 
described entirely by the Fourier transform of RC impulse 
response: 
⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛ℑ= − iiCRt
ii
i eCR
1H                         (19) 
where RiCi is twice the cumulative wire resistance and 
capacitance of the transmission line segment i.  The 
frequency, Hi, is used to generate filter coefficients, bi, 
which normalize for the frequency attenuation for each 
segment of the transmission line. 
 ⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛ℑ= −
i
1
i H
1b                                 (20) 
Filtering is an operation of convolving the filter coefficient 
bi with the signal (e.g. measured waveform).  This can be 
represented as a matrix-vector product involving the 
circulant matrix, which is a special case of a Toeplitz 
matrix. Interpretation of the convolution sum in this way 
generates a convolution matrix, which is a rectangular (N x 
p) Toeplitz matrix whose first row is all zeros except for the 
first element of b1, and whose first column has zeros in the 
last p-1 elements.  This allows the generation of a length 
varying filter. 
dt
dZ
b00
b
b0
00b
dt
dZ Meas
n
1n
2
1
norm •
⎥⎥
⎥⎥
⎥⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎢
⎣
⎡
=
−
            (21) 
Note: the transfer function is dependent on the impulse 
response of the system.  The actually TDR signal is a step 
response, which requires differencing prior convolution.  
The resulting, filtered waveform is then integrated to 
recover the normalized, step response. 
∫= t0 normnorm dtdZZ                         (22) 
This gives best estimate of the actual transmission line 
impedance. 
 
 5. EXAMPLES 
 
We demonstrate the use of the evolution equations for 
waves in a Goupillaud medium for a real world test 
harnesses. We use the analysis developed in equations (14) 
and (15) to show that the first order approximations to the 
equations governing the medium are exactly the same as 
those relating to a Goupillaud medium, provided Zi is 
interpreted as Zi =Z[(τ+1/2) d].  These system of equations 
were then used to develop the inverse scatting algorithm.  
The diagnostic application first calls the inverse scattering 
algorithm, then the normalization algorithm.  While 
attempts were made to integrate the effect of attenuation 
into the inverse scatting algorithm itself, it was not 
successful. However, sequential processing the two 
algorithms gives an impedance characterization which can 
be used in an event detection/classification algorithm for 
machine recognition. 
The first example is an artificial a test harness using a 50 
Ohm coaxial cable interspersed with two length of 75 Ohm 
coaxial cable and is not atypical of an aircraft harness.  
However, it is a good test of the inverse scattering 
 5
algorithm.  This TDR equipment uses a 37 ps rise time step 
function, sampled at 200 ps.  It is apparent in Figure 3 that 
the inverse scattering algorithm successfully removes the 
superposition of voltages due to multiple reflections.  Note 
that at the end of the cable, the characteristic impedance is 
effectively infinite, with a reflection coefficient of 1.  The 
measured voltage is the sum of the incident voltage (0.25 V) 
with the reflected voltage.  This shows that the cable is 19 ft 
long (voltage is 0.25 V + 0.25 V =  0.5 V).   
 
Figure 3 Example of 50 ->75->50->75->50 Ohm Coax 
 
Coaxial cable typically has little frequency attenuation.  
However, it can be noted from the step function, even in 
this coaxial cable, is stretched in time (i.e. the rise time of 
the step function increases with length), indicating a loss in 
frequency content.  The normalization algorithm 
compresses the step function, recovered that lost frequency 
content (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4 Detail of Improved Waveform Representation 
 
The next example is a 22 gauge single wire, which is typical 
of most aircraft harnesses.  The characteristic impedance of 
single wire is dependent on the distance to the return path 
and is largely uncontrolled.  This results in characteristic 
impedances of 120 to 160 Ohms.  The incident voltage is 
0.25 volts at 50 Ohms, the measured voltage of the wire 
under test is approximately 0.38 volts, resulting is 
significant voltage superposition as seen in Figure 5. 
Additionally, the small diameter of AWG 22 wire results in 
significant wire resistance and a corresponding large 
frequency attenuation per unit length.  The combination of 
these environmental effects makes it difficult for machine 
recognition to even identify the end of the wire. 
 
Figure 5 Raw and Processed Single Wire Example 
 
Fuel quantity systems or other devices that require high 
integrity measurements may have harnesses with twisted 
shielded pair or twisted triple shielded (TTS) wires, such as 
seen in Figure 6.  The shielding and identifiable return path 
gives the wire controlled impedances similar to coaxial 
cable. The result is much improved detection of wire events 
and/or features.  
 
Figure 6 Raw and Process Damaged Triple Twisted Shield 
 
Figure 7 is a magnified view of the features in the TTS 
waveform, which shows a 1 cm chafe (exposed shielding) 
in the TTS and two connectors.  Normalization compresses 
the step function, giving a more idealized representation of 
the features, which would improve probability of machine 
feature recognition 
 
Figure 7 Detail of Damage 
 6
 6. DISCUSSION 
 
We have gained a better understanding of wire response by 
solving a system of differential equations for the wire 
characteristic impedance. The inverse scattering algorithm 
and normalization for frequency attenuation has been 
successfully implemented in a hand held diagnostic tool, 
which allows for an improved characterization of a EWIS.  
While not all fault features (such as a chafe of a single wire) 
can be identified, we believe that we have the best 
representation of wire characteristic impedance possible.   
 
Identification of wire features, such as chafes and nicks, is 
important when trouble shooting and diagnosing EWIS 
damage and failure.  We feel that moving to a condition 
based management (CDB) paradigm (i.e. tracking changes 
in EWIS characteristic impedance mean and variance, etc) 
will allow for identification of gross system degradation that 
is not identifiable via machine recognition. Finally, we 
realized that this is a complicated problem due to the 
geometry of the wire configuration and additional work in 
detection algorithms is needed in order to find certain “soft 
faults”, such as chafe in single wire.  We have identified a 
number of directions along which we would like to explore 
further, such as the effect of inductive cross coupling due to 
the numerous wires in close proximity within a harness. 
 
 REFERENCES  
[1] A.M. Bruckstein and T. Kailath, “Inverse Scattering for 
Discrete Transmission-Line Models,” SIAM Review, Vol. 
29, No. 3,  pp. 359-389,  1987. 
 
[2] J. Frolik,  “Forward and Inverse Scattering for Discrete 
One-Dimensional Lossy and Discretized Two-Dimensional 
Lossless Media,” Ph. D. Thesis, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, 1995. 
 
[3] J. Berryman and R. Greene, “Discrete Inverse Methods 
for Elastic Waves in Layered Media,” Geophysics, Vol. 45, 
No. 2,  pp. 213-33,  1980. 
 
[4] P. Smith, “Digital Realization of Forward and Inverse 
Models of Electromagnetic Scattering,” Electronics Letters, 
Vol. 25,  pp. 816-7,  1989. 
 
[5] N.N. Rao, Elements of Engineering Electromagnetics. 
Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall, 1991. 
 
[6] G.M.L Gladwell, Inverse Problems in Scattering, An 
Introduction. Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1993. 
 
[7] M.A. Heald, and J.B. Marion, Classical Electromagnetic 
Radiation. Fort Worth, Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 
1995. 
 
BIOGRAPHY 
Dr. Bechhoefer is retired Naval 
aviator with a M.S. in Operation 
Research and a Ph.D. in General 
Engineering, with a focus on 
Statistics and Optimization.  Dr. 
Bechhoefer has worked at Goodrich 
Aerospace since 2000 as a 
Diagnostics Technical Lead.  He has 
previously worked at The MITRE 
Corporation in the Signal Processing 
Center. 
 
Dr. Yu is a Professor and 
Associate Chair in the Dept. of 
Mathematics and Statistics at the 
University of Vermont with a Ph.D. in 
Applied Mathematics from University 
of Washington in Seattle (1988), 
focusing on Theory of Partial 
Differential Equations and Nonlinear 
Waves. 
 
 
 
 
