Study on ITS Data Management Based on 
Multi-Agent Systems 
He-sheng ZHANG, Yi ZHANG, Jun-hua XU, De-yun XIAO & Dong-cheng HU 
Absfma-With the development of intelligent transportation 
system. the tralfic data management system becomes important 
and imperative, which will be a necessary tool for people in 
future to organize all data and use them efficiently. The 
agent-bared approach provides a useid method to manage the 
vast quantities and various types of traflic data. This method also 
invokes an integrntion of data resources, various types of data in 
physical storage media and various computer sewers and 
analysis algorithms. So we carry out the fundamental study on 
the topic of traffic data management by using the multi-agent 
systems (MAS). In  this paper, the architecture for traffic data 
minagemen1 based on WAS is designed. The design principles, 
the components oi  agent and the workilow of MAS are also 
introduced. Finally. the iurther research work is provided. The 
architecture discussed is adapted in a practical project of urban 
traffic control renter, which is under the construction in a big 
city ofchina. 
Znder Term-Intelligent transportation systems, Multidgent 
systems. Traffic data management 
I. INTRODUCTION 
ITH the development of  information technology, b e  
intelligent transportation systems (ITS). At present, more and 
more new information theories and technologies are widely 
used in the ITS. 
The tntfic data and information play an imponant role in the 
ITS. Based on the collection, processing, storage. analysis of 
traffic dam and the course of  information sharing and 
application. the simple and static control in the transportation 
management can be transformed into the intelligent and 
dynamic control. So the traffic data management is important 
and imperative in ITS. 
There are various kinds of  ITS data. From the point of view 
of the attribute of data, there are the transportation status data 
(including the traffic volume, speed and occupation), video 
He-sheng ZHANG is with the School of Electrical EnginKing Nonhem 
Ji~otong University. Beijing IWO44. P. R. China (phone: 86-10-62785047: 
fax: 86-10-62795043; email: zhsOi@ mils.uinghuaedu.cn). 
Yi ZHANG is with the Dcpanment of Automation. Tsinghva University, 
B~i j ing  IwO84. P. R. China (e-mail: zhyi@ mail.uinghua.ed”.en). 
lun-hua ?N. De-yun XIAO. Dong-cheng HU w with the Depanmenl of 
Automation. T’ringhua University. Belling IOW84. P. R. China 
0-7803-8125-4/03/S17.00 0 2003 IEEE 
W .  rapid progress in recent y e m  has been achieved in 
data, geographic data, vehicle and driver data, police affair 
data, anomalous traffic data and so on. In addition, the storage 
types of ITS data are various, such as, digital data, graphic data, 
video data, character data, etc. 
From the perspective of  system in ITS, the ITS data are made 
up of several subsystem data, such as the geographic 
information data, traffic control data, vehicles and drivers data, 
anomalous traffic data, police affair data and so on. Data in 
these subsystems are physically distributed, but logically 
interrelated and united through the network. So, the traffic data 
systems are distributed and heterogeneous system. 
Vast quantities and various types of traffic data make it  
diflicult to manage the traffic data. The practical problem in 
ITS is how to manage the large scale. heterogeneous and 
distributed traffic data in order to provide the valuable and 
accurate information for managers and users to analyze 
correctly and make wise decisions in the areas of  traffic signal 
conlrol. traffic assignment, route guidance, and efficient 
information inquily. .In order to resolve the problem, it is 
necessary to take a new method to manage the traffic d a w  
The multi-agent CM be used to  solve the big and complicated 
problems that we face today. By using the multi-agent_ there 
are some characteristics of the solution to practical problems 
such as strong robustness, reliability and high efficiency. 
Multi-asent systems have been applied successfully in many 
fields, such as electronic commerce in [I]. digital library in [?I, 
distributed database in [3], traffic and transportation in 
[4][51[6] and so on. Then. multi-agent systems can play an 
imponant role in the distributed ITS data management. 
This study aims to demonstrate the feasibility and to design 
scheme of  using multi-agent for ITS data management. This 
paper will first present the problems to be resolved in 
distributed traffic data management. The multi-agent systems 
(MAS) and their design principles are introduced in detail in 
section 3, The MAS framework and [he workflow are 
presented in section 4 and 5 .  The ongoing research efforts to 
further develop MAS are also presented in the last. 
11. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
The local area network (LAN) and wide area network (WAN) 
are essential media and environment for the traffic data 
transmission, The traffic data distributed in different sites are 
communicated and exchanged by either LAN in a traffic 
183 
control center (TCC) or WAN in a city or among cities. The 
trafiic data have the abilities of not only local autonomy but 
also global union and logical interrelationship through 
network. The self-organization of data in subsystem and 
cooperation of data among subsystems are the importation 
features for distributed traffic data. The structure of distributed 
traffic data is showed in figure 1. 
DBMS OfTCC .” 
in subregion 1 DBMS ofTCC 
in subregion m 
; DBMS: database management system 
1 ATS: anomalous mafic subsystem 
I TCC: traffic control center 
TCS: lrafic control subsystem 
GIS: geographic information system 
Figure I: The distributed traffic data structure 
The traffic data include a large collection of objects, stored 
and maintained by multiple sources, such as databases, image 
and files and so on. Such ob,jects can be maintained on a 
diverse range of platforms and can be organized and managed 
in different ways. For example, the image data such as 
geographic map is stored and maintained in the geographic 
information system (CIS). The relational database such as the 
traffic status data and vehicles and drivers data are 
respectively stored and maintained in the traffic control system 
(TCS) and vehicles and drivers management system (VDMS), 
which may have different data model and operation system 
and so forth. 
Ifthemanager intraffic control,center(TCC) wan t s tohow 
the traffic status of a certain link or region, he/she needs to 
access the GIS sever and TCS sever through LAN or WAN to 
obtain the geographic map of the interested place or region and 
the data of speed, traffic flow, occupation etc. And then, 
hehhe should integrate the different data to know the present 
traffic status of a place or region. From the point of view of 
traffic data management, there are some technical problems 
involving the query at least including: 
I ) .  How to integrate the heterogeneous traffic data; 
2). How to get hold of the complete information but to 
reduce the communication of network, 
If the manager has an unclear and f u u y  query, such as the 
places where the anomalous traffic has often happened, the 
real-time incident or accident affairs and so on. There are other 
technical problems as followed: 
I). How to understand the fuzzy query; 
2). How to integrate the different real-time data from 
distributed and heterogeneous data source. 
To meet these requirements, it is important to provide a 
means to organize objects for the cc-existence of multiple 
heterogeneous data sources, to give support for the 
management of vast quantities of data representation, to 
understand the intention of the users. The integration of 
different information sources generally requires the 
development of a general system data model, and the 
subsequent translation of each specific source data model into 
the system data model. 
In addition, the increasing data volume and the varying data 
content provide the new requirements for traffic data 
management. They include: 
I ). How to design the scheme to organize and quest the large 
quantities of data, including the structure data, semi-structure 
data and no structure data. 
2). How to extract the multimedia data sets in order to 
manage and archive image, video and textual data. At the same 
time, metadata can also be archived. 
3). How to inform the users and related subsystem the 
changes in data content to keep the data consistence. 
4). Hou, to design the access mechanism to obtain the 
complete information but to reduce the communication of 
network. 
5) .  How to design the user-friendly and intelligent interface 
to understand the intention of users. 
All in all, the focus of traffic data management is therefore 
to provide seamless and transparent access to various objects 
through LAN or WAN and efficient and speedy retrieval. In 
order to finish the difficult work, it is necessary to take new 
methods. 
111. MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS AND % DESIGN 
Multi-agent systems are a set that is made up of many 
computable agents. Each agent is a physical or abstract entity 
that supports a context of autonomous decision-making and 
communicates with other agents. According to Wooldridge 
and Jennings in (71 and Franklin and Graesser in [SI, there are 
kinds of functions of agent as followed 
Autonomy--operating without direct intervention of human 
or other agents, while exhibiting control over their actions 
and internal state; 
184 
Sociabi l i~ol laborat i~~ely interacting with each other via 
Pro-acriviry--taking action based on goal-driven behavior; 
Reaction-perceiving changes in the system and 
Rutionalily-making actions to enhance the potential for 
MobiliO-moving around network to collect data and 
Multi-agent systems provide a new method to access, query 
and integrate the distributed traffic data. In the design of MAS, 
we abide by the following principles: 
0 Modularity: MAS is composed of interchangeable 
modules, each providing some of the required functions. 
For example. local retrieval module can understand and 
translate a query task and then retrieve information from 
a local database. If local database changes, the local 
retrieval module must be updated and inform the local 
task module. 
Securify: MAS has the security scheme and provide a 
shield. including the integration, control access, private 
protection and group share. Only the authorized agent is 
permitted to enter MAS, communicate uith each other 
and perform in the MAS. 
Reliability: MAS should be reliable during network 
overload and failures. 
Decentrulization: MAS should be open and evolvable. 
There should be no global administrator agent because it 
would be inefficient to route all agents through a central 
site. So the agents are distributed. 
Exrensibility: MAS should allow new elements, such as 
new services to be easily added. 
an agent communication language; 
responding in a timely manner; 
achieving stated goals; 
interface with other agents. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Iv. MAS ARCHITECTURE FOR DISTRIBUTED TRAFFIC DATA 
According to the design principles, considering the 
needs of the practical project o f  the urban traffic control 
center, we design the MAS framework for the distributed 
traffic data management as illustrated in Figure 2. There are 
two kinds of  agents in MAS: user interface agent and local 
information agent. Each agent has several modules. 
A. User Interface Agent (VIA) 
The users of agents can be either people or other agents. 
User interface agent is primarily responsible for understanding 
and modeling the users' intention, for interpreting and 
presenting the results ofthe task. So the main functions of UIA 
include: 
0 Receive and understand the users' intention or aims and 
translate them into the agent's tasks. 
0 Display and describe the related information, including 
the results and exolanations. 
0 Provide additional information and ask the user for 
validated information needed in the course of resolving 
the problem. 
F 1  [TJ ... ... 
ofTCS of A T S  
DBMS of 
Fig 2: Distributed MAS architecture 
UIA is made up of three modules according to its function, 
including User Request ,Module (URM), User Task Module 
(UTM) and Retrieval'Result Module (RRbl). The functions 
of these three modules is as followed: 
0 User Request Module translates the user's intention into 
the agent's possible task steps according to the 
knowledge in URM and in combination with the 
individual preference. 
User Task Module translates the task steps from the 
UFN into the agent's diferent tasks. finds the related 
local information aeents (LIA) in network and 
communicates with the LIA. 
Retrieval Result Module displays and describes the 
related information including the results and 
explanations. provides the additional information and 
asks the user for validated information needed in the 
course of resolving the problem. 
B. Loco1 Information Agent (LIA) 
0 
0 
Local information agent queries the local database and 
cooperates with other LIA. Each LIA is responsible for each 
distributed traffic database and for retrieval data fusion. LIA is 
composed of four modules: Local Task Module (LTM), Local 
Retrieval Module (LRM), Local Management Module (LTM), 
and Local Security Module (LSM). 
0 Local Task Module interacts with any visiting messages 
or agents from UTM, and informs them of the available 
data and computing resources. If a request is received. 
the LTM exchanges the information with the visiting 
I85 
messages or agent and translate user’s task into the local 
retrieval work and into cooperation and negotiation work 
among the different LIA if necessary. 
Local Retrieval Module translates the retrieval work 
into the executable codes, perfoms the work in the local 
database and sends the retrieval results to local 
management module. 
Local Management Module receives the tasks from 
LTM, integrates the retrieval results from the local LRh4 
and the cooperation LRM in other LIA, transmits the 
integrated information to MRM in user interface agent, 
informs the LTM to record the tasks and  results. 
0 Local Security Module performs a validation check on 
the incoming messages or agent and authorizes them. The 
UTM will be allocated an access permission level 
determining the range of data that the UTM can access 
the local database. The server administrator sets access 
permission, and agent from the registered users may have 
access to more information resources than agents from 
unregistered users. 
The components of multi-agent systems and the cooperation 
are shown in figure 3. 
Goal and task1 Result 
Fig. 3 The cpmponents of multi-agent systems and their cooperation 
V. MAS WORKFLOW 
A practical m e  is given to illustrate the workflow of MAS. 
A user or manager wants to know the traffic flow in a certain 
lint or an anomalous traffic in some regions in a city. Helshe 
inputs a quen, which is sent IO the user request module in UIA. 
URM understands the user’s intention and translates it into the 
agent’s possible task steps. And then, the URM dispatches the 
steps to UTM. If additional information is needed, the URM 
sends a message lo RRM to ask user for the additional 
information. 
The user task module receives the tasks from URM and 
translates them into the agent’s different tasks, finds related 
local information agent in network and communicates with 
LIA. In this example, the UTM will find the data in GIs, TCS 
and ATS. So the related local information agents are located in 
the GIs, TCS and ATS. In addition, a main UIA is allocated by 
UTM according to the task. And then, UTM sends agent to the 
main UIA. 
In the information source, the agent is received by the LSM, 
which allocates a securi~y-level determining the range of data 
that the agent can access the local database based an the site 
from which the agent has been received. The authorized agent 
is sent to LTM in LIA. The LTM exchanges the information 
with the visiting agent and translate user‘s task into the local 
retrieval works and into cooperation and negotiation 
information among the LIA in TCS and ATS. If additional 
information is needed, the LTM will send message to URM. 
The LlRM will ask the user for additional input in order to 
achieve the task through the RRM. 
The retrieval work is translated into the executable codes in 
LRM after receiving the work from the LTM and performs the 
work. The retrieval result is sent to LMM. In addition, the 
retrieval results from the LRM in other cooperation LIA are 
integrated in the LMM. And the integrated information is 
Vansmined to RRM in UIA. At the same time, LMM informs 
the LTM lo record the tasks and results. 
The workflow of multi-agent is illustrated in fig. 4. 
186 
Fig. 4 The workflow of multi-agent systems 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER Wow 
We design a multi-agent-based system for managing the 
traiiic data. Our goal is to make the multiple data sources 
co-exist, and to support data integration from multiple trafiic 
data systems. The agent based approach enables us to divide a 
complex task into a set of collaborating work unit, which is 
responsible for pan of the total work. The role played by each 
agent can be moditied over time. And agent interaction can 
also vary depending on the usage characteristics of the system 
and the task. 
The ITS data management based on the multi-agent 
systems discussed in the paper is practical. The architecture in 
this paper can resolve the problems proposed in the paper. 
They are being adopted in a practical project of urban traffic 
control center, which is under the construction in a big city of 
China. But there are also some important work to be further 
researched. including: 
I). The general model to manage the various and 
heterogeneous trafiic data using the multi-agent systems. 
2). The effective mechanism of negotiation and cooperation 
among agents in order to save the inquiry time. 
3). The effective transmission method and content between 
agents to reduce the communications of the network. 
121 Yanyan Yang, Omer F. Rana et al. .Agrni bawd dam monoggemeni in 
digcfd lihranes. Parellel computing. 2002 28. pp: 773-792 
[3L SUvor P.. George S., Evagge1ia.P. “Mobile agenu for WWW 
dirtributed database access”. Proceedtngr of IS* lnurnarronol 
confeience on D a n  Engimermg. 1999, pp:23-26 
141 Burmeister B.. Haddadi A.  el al. “Application of multi-agent system in 
oaffic and transportation”. IEE Proceedmgr ofSofwme Enginrerings. 
1997. 144(l).pp:5140 
151 Jeffrey L. Adler. Victor I .  Blue. “A cwperxiuvc multi-agent 
transportation management and route guidance qstem”. Tronrponorm 
Reseorch Par1 C 2002(lO), pp: 433-454 
Hursein Dia “An agent-based approach 10 modeling driver mute choice 
behavior under the influence of real-time information”. Tm.~pponoiion 
Research Pan C 2002(10), pp: 331-349 
Wooldndge, M.. Jenningr. N.R. “Intelligent agenu: theory and practice”. 
The Knowledge Engineering review. I995 192). pp: 115-152 
Franklin. Stan and A n  Graeser. “1s it an Agent. or Just a program?: A 
Taxonomy for A U I O ~ O ~ D U I  Agentr’t Proceedings of the Thhml 
lniernoriowl Workhop on Agent  none.?, Archiieciures, onrl 
longwqes. Springer-Verlag 1996 
[9] Katia Syeara et al. Dtwihured Inrelligenr Agenrr. IEEE Expen 
lntelligcnt Synems & Their Applicalion 19% (12). pp: 3646. 
[IO] Albtna H.F. Lacnder et al. “The Debyc Environment for Web Daw 
Management”. IEEE Inreme, compuiing 2002(7,8):pp 60-69 
[a] 
171 
[8] 
2WO.pp 40341b 
187 
