The Shape of Knowledge 
The Embedded Zooming Applications for Personal Digital Assistants 
Kwang Bok Lee 
Department of Engineering Science 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
Troy, New York, USA 
leek3(iii,rui.edu 
Abstract 
Zooming technology is an essential part of Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs) for  today’s information- 
intensive world, which caused big problems for small 
screen interfaces. This paper introduces many zooming 
applications such as afire zoom, a focus zoom, and a 
search zoom which are based on geometric and 
semantic zooming methods. The file zooming 
applications use dynamic zoom-in and zoom-out 
functions for visualizing large amounts of information 
on the PDA screen. Also, users can save afire into the 
PDA using a zoom-out function based on a semantic 
zooming method; thefile will gradually shrink until it 
appears as an icon or a small image on the screen. 
The focus zooming applications are built on a 
magni3ing glass lens that is a 2D visualization for 
large rectangdar presentations; they allow a user to 
quickly focus on a part ofthe PDA screen. In addition, 
we implement a blurring lens on the screen, so that 
users can ignore blurred objects to increase their 
focusing ability. The paper also describes the search 
zooming applications that allow for easy recognition 
and comparison of the content of files on the screen. 
Two types of viewing approaches, a popup viewing 
method and a shadow viewing method are introduced in 
this zooming method. 
n e s e  zooming applications are developed to devise 
an eflcient method for opening applications, showing 
large amounts of information on the small screen 
devices. The prototype and implementation of the 
zooming method on PDAs are also provided in this 
papeE 
Keywords: Zoomable User Interfces (ZUIs), Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs), Small Screen Interfaces, 
Popup and Shadow Zooming, Distorted yiew and Non- 
distorted E m ,  Geometric Zooming and Semantic 
Zooming 
Roger A. Grice 
Department of Language, Literature & 
Communication 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
Troy, New York, USA 
gricer@iQi. edu 
1. Introduction 
The increasing availability of small-size computers 
such as PDAs, Palm pilots, or handheld devices with 
possibilities to transmit information over the World 
Wide Web on wireless networks have enormously 
enhanced opportunities for researchers. Usually these 
devices have a small screen, thus it is too difficult to 
load today’s information because most information is 
based on a large display. 
How do we present information effectively on small 
devices? This is a main challenge for small-screen 
interface developers because viewing on a small screen 
is becoming more crucial in OUI daily lives. These 
developers must find effective ways to organize, show, 
and search data or results on a small screen. One of the 
methods is to build a Zoomable User Interface (ZWI) by 
using several zooming applications so that the amount 
of information that needs to be handled by users can be 
shown on the PDA screen. Typically, many users have 
an interest in capturing some portion of a PDA screen, 
and they need tools to enable them to control the 
zooming applications. Smooth zooming technology 
helps users to interact with their sense of the focus and 
context by shiftiig the cognitive load to the human 
visual system. Thus, the ZUI provides a possible 
solution that satisfies the above demands by means of 
increasing the effectiveness for using the small screen. 
The goal of the methods described in this paper is to 
increase the performance of the user interface by 
developing zooming applications on PDAs. We will 
introduce three approaches: first, we will use file 
zooming methods based on the geometric zooming 
technology, zoom-in and zoom-out functions, so that 
data or tiles can be enlargedreduced or saved on the 
PDA screen. Second, we will describe focus zooming 
methods, which consist of the magnifymg glass that 
was introduced from a Bifocal Display [7], and the 
blurring lens that was introduced from a Focus+Context 
Visualization [IO] into the PDA. Finally, we will 
describe search zooming methods which have two 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 109 
The Shape of Knowledge 
functions, a popup zooming function and a shadow 
zooming function based on two viewing file 
mechanisms, a fingemail-viewing file and an icon- 
viewing file. One is a popup zooming method whereby 
a user touching the file produces a bigger zoom-out 
image in a popup style so that the file's contents can be 
viewed. The other approach is a shadow zooming 
approach that presents users with a magnifymg glass 
that helps them identify ludden data or files. 
Multiple studies have focused on zooming 
applications. The Bifocal Display [7] is an early 
computer-based display technique, and the fisheye 
concept proposed by Fumas [I]  provides a basis for 
much subsequent work. Other examples include the 
Continuous Zoom [6 ] ,  which supports multiple focus 
points, enhances continuity through smooth transition 
between views, and maintains location constraints to 
reduce the user's sense of spatial disorientation. The 
Document Lens is a 3D visualization for large 
rectangular presentations that allows the user to quickly 
focus on a part of a presentation [3]. Pad [5], which is a 
2D information plane shared among users, uses a 
spatial metaphor for computer interface and the Table 
Lens [SI for visualizing and making sense of laige 
tahles by using a focus and context technique. 
In this paper, we first describe the basic zooming 
applications on PDAs in section 2, and the system 
structure of these applications will be examined in 
section 3. A prototype has been implemented on a 
Pocket PC simulation program in section 4. Finally, we 
conclude by describing some of our experiences in 
building the system and outlining future work. 
2 Basic Zooming Applications on PDA 
2.1 File Zooming Applications 
Simply, zooming methods are categorized by the 
following presentation techniques: non-distorted and 
distorted zooming, geometnc and semantic zooming 
which are based on the mathematical transforming 
method [2][11]. Each method will he adapted for 
making an efficient view for a user by considering the 
characteristics of hardware, software, and necessary 
environment. 
A Onglnal Screen 
B PDA Screen 
v 
C. Zoom-Out Filer ,o *," 
OFingemail viewing status, @ Icon viewing status 
Figure 1: Geometric zooming method 
While the semantic zooming changes the shape or 
context in which the information is being presented, the 
geometric zooming has a scale operator to perform a 
geometric transformation, which can he used to shrink 
or magnify the size of an image, as seen in Figure 1. 
The file zoom has zoom-in and zoom-out methods in 
PDAs based on this geometric method, which allows 
the user to specify the scale of magnification to increase 
or decrease the image or display screen. /Irml 
... ...... ...... 
(a) Fingernoil-viewi~gfilesfil=s (b) Icon-viewingfiles 
Figure 2: PDA screen display by using two methods 
The other zooming application in this research is a 
saving method that users by using the geometric and 
semantic zooming method. This approach focuses on 
making s U i t a b  1 e zoom-out f i I e s for efficiently 
managing files on PDAs. Here, when a user completely 
z o o m  out from a file, it will gradually shrink until it 
appears as an icon or a small image, as seen in Figure 2. 
This shrunken file can be saved on the PDA without 
changing the original content of the file. To expand its 
contents, the user touches the icon or the small image. 
These two viewing methods represent how to save files 
into a database, and also efficiently retrieve files from 
the database in small screen computers in Section 2.3. 
The first method is to save a file as a fingemail view 
by using a geometric zooming method. The second 
method, an icon view, uses the semantic method, so a 
certain icon can cover the small zoom-out file. Both are 
useful ideas for making user interaction with a database 
on the PDA easier by saving screen space, and also 
providing visual abstractions to the user for what 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 110 
The Shape of Knowledge 
kinds of files are saved on the database. 
Furthermore, the method should be used for memory 
buttons that are needed in graphic interaction in the 
small screen interface where the current file and its 
status can be saved as a small image or an iconic 
representation [4]. So, if a user desires to access the 
previous file state or browser, just handling the 
graphical memory button will bring up the previous file 
or browser status. Figure 3: Focusing glass 
An icon is an especially useful physical metaphor in a 
small screen interface because they can give users 
complete information ahout files' fimctionality and 
processing by compact pictographic representations. 
From the standpoint of the interface, using icons can 
increase the file abstraction, where each icon represents 
the overall data structures and processing procedures. 
By doing so, we are able to effectively increase the 
use of PDA screen space as well as provide a useful 
search mechanism, as the following section describes. 
2.2 Focus Zooming Applications 
Although users usually want bigger screens, they want 
a smaller appliance to put in their pocket. However, 
PDAs' hardware and software are still far from meeting 
these demands due to the small screen, small font size, 
unclear visual acuity, and supporting simple media 
types. So, here we will develop specific tools for which 
small devices will be suitable used. 
By using two facts, we introduce the focus zoom 
mechanism for increasing Users' focusing ability on the 
PDA screen. One is that the human transition is based 
on focusing on a magnified moving object by the 
human perceptual system; we can use the magnifying 
glass as a focusing tool for viewing the screen area in 
different zooms. The other is that the human eye is used 
to ignoring blurred objects because the eye also has a 
limited depth of filed by blurring currently irrelevant 
objects [IO]. 
We introduce two focus zooming methods, the 
magnifying glass or the blurring lens. When they are 
moving on the screen, their movements are represented 
with interactive magnification or the amount of blur, so 
that the user easily focuses on what is being displayed. 
These focus zooming applications give users more 
detail of certain parts of the screen, which is 
particularly helpful when lots of data is shown on the 
PDA screen. 
In Figure 3, the focusing glass, (XN yJ rectangle, 
shows a detailed view as a 2D form, and the other 
regions remain de-magnified or blurred areas according 
to the physical position. Cutting, pasting and blurring 
various sections of bitmaps in real time will generate 
this focusing area. Even though the focusing glass does 
not provide good spatial continuity between regions, it 
is relatively simple in terms of use and implementation. 
Also, using the focusing glass does not need much of 
the computational power of hardware and system 
memory that was needed in the distorted view. Thus, it 
will be a good viewing technique for relatively low 
memory and small devices 
2.3 Search Zooming Applications 
In Section 2.1, we introduced two tile saving methods 
using a zoom-out process. The original tile can be 
reduced or increased by the user's intention, and also 
the file will be displayed as a fingernail view or an icon 
view. Here, we describe the search zooming methods, 
which have two approaches to make another view of 
the above zoom-out files. These two viewing methods 
will be used for searching and retrieving files in a 
database of small screen computers according to users' 
preferences. 
Figure 4: Popup viewing 
The first method is a popup viewing which allows for 
the touching of the area of the original zoom-out files, 
and then a bigger zooming window is shown as a popup 
style. The popup zooming window promptly fades 
away when the user's attraction is moved to another 
place. So, the user easily knows what file or data 
included in the zoom-out file, as seen in Figure 4. 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 111 
The Shape of Knowledge 
...... I 
Figure 5: Shadow viewing 
The other method is a shadow viewing. When a user 
has located the point of interest with a small 
magnifying glass, which is embedded, the magnifying 
glass reveals the content of the file as a background, 
like a shadow, as seen in Figure 5 .  If the user touches 
the area of the file with the magnifying glass, then the 
embedded background of the zoom-out file will he 
shown. The more the magnifying glass moves on the 
area, the more background image appears. When the 
user’s attention moves to another place, then the 
zooming promptly fades away. In this way, the user 
easily knows what files or data are saved in the original 
file. 
Both techniques will he potentially powerful tools 
because we can save the searching time to see a full text 
or image when a user works on the PDA database. We 
will expect that great research efforts should be focused 
on exploring the application for searching methods and 
building databases with these applications on PDAs. 
3. System Structure of Zooming 
Applications 
In this section, we discuss the theoretical background 
for basic zooming techniques on PDAs, and in 
particular, we hy to focus on the usefulness and 
extension of the above applications. Also, we describe 
the necessary concept needed to support our approaches 
In all cases, the basic assumption is that users handle 
the application with a pen, and navigate through it in 
effective ways for their tasks. 
3.1 Magnifying Process 
The magnifying processes transfer pixels from a 
specified source pan to a specified destination pan, 
which is the magnifying glass, altering the pixels 
according to the selected raster operation code. 
mom- 
& 
I ...... 
D,: The size of source pan, (x,x y,) 
Di: The size ofthe magnifying glass pan, (x> x y2) 
RI ,  Ri: Magnifying ratio 
L,, L?: Daw loss area 
H: Height 
Figure 6: Magnifying process 
To magnify data, a source pan containing source data 
on the original screen is smaller than the magnifying 
glass pan, as seen in Figure 6 .  Thus, the ratio to 
magnify data will be decided by comparing the size of 
two pans, a source pan and a magnifying glass pan. 
A degree of interest (DOI) function map that was 
introduced by Fumas [ l ]  indicates the level of interest 
in the item, and it can he used to control how available 
space is allocated amongst items. The DO1 function has 
been changed over time according to the change of user 
interaction, such as searching process and the moving 
focus. So, instead of using DOI, we suggest another 
approach to calculate how much data is magmfied and 
how much data is lost, as seen in Figure 6.  
In the magnifying glass, the technique allows a user 
to determine the glass size and magnifying ratio based 
on the varying interest levels of parts. To calculate the 
magnifying ratio, we can use three factors: the source 
pan (D,) that is based on the original source data; the 
data loss (LI+LI) that is an obscured region due to the 
big magnifying glass; and finally, the destination pan 
(DI) that is the target window for copied the source data. 
Thus, the magnifying ratio depends on the size of each 
pan and data loss. Even though the magnifying glass 
does not provide a pure focus and context mechanism, 
it should be clear enough for making a visual attraction 
on the small screen interface. 
3.2 Zooming Process 
Zooming processes are veIy similar to a magnifying 
glass method. These processes, zoom-in and zoom-out, 
copy hitmaps from the source rectangle and transferring 
them into a destination rectangle by stretching or 
compressing the size of bihnaps to fit the dimensions of 
the destination rectangle, if necessary. 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 112 
The Shape of Knowledge 
(a) Zoom-In (b) Zoom-Our 
Figure 7: Zoom-in and zoom-out processes 
By the zooming sue, S, and the zooming ratio, 
R={O<. ..a/, defined by the user, we are able to reduce 
the size by transforming a bihnap image into the 
zooming size. The PDA screen address, P====, Z), 
has both a location and a scale defined by the rectangle 
size, Z=(S/R), is defmed by the linear transformation, 
T,: (X-WZ), WZD)) c, (X-(SL2), Y-(Sn)). A zooming 
region, A=p, W,  HI, is a rectangle defmed by an 
address together with a pixel width and height (w, €I), 
as seen in Figure 7. 
The other level of zooming applications is to visibly 
display windows to the users as a popup or shadow 
zooming style. Every display window in the popup or 
shadow zooming applications has a region, pb W, HJ 
where i is window number, which is the portion of the 
PDA screen, and these windows are located behind the 
original window by the fingemail-viewing file or the 
icon-viewing file. In particular, the shadow zooming 
has another window area, /Pj+,, Wj+,, Hj+d, which is the 
small magnifying glass to magnify the hidden data 
instead of showing all data. We can summarize the 
properties of zooming applications as follows: 
0 Visibility Window 
Each object can have a certain range of visibility for a 
user. 
@ Background Window 
Popup or shadow viewing objects have a certain range 
of which the source image is copied. This allows the 
window to fade away as the user's attention is moved to 
another after zooming the object. 
0 Magnifying Window 
The glass to magnify data should have a certain range 
of magnification that allows users to see a small part in 
which they are interested. 
4. Implementation on PDA 
The zooming application was written in eMhedded 
~ 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 113 
Visual C-H supported by MicrosoftCB eMhedded Visual 
Tools 3.0 and developed in common Pocket PC 
applications. In this section, we implement the various 
zooming applications we mentioned above on the PDA 
as seen figures in Section 4.1- 4.3. 
4.1 File Zooming Operations 
We add zoom-in and zoom-out skills to make 
dynamical zoomable interfaces based on the geometric 
method for focus and context visualization in Figure 8, 
by keeping the original file content. The process has 
several steps. At first, the file is shown at the 100% 
size of the original screen, and then it shr inks  90%, 
75%, and so on until it reaches the final scale. 
Files will he a fmgemail view or an icon view status 
according to the type of saving files on the PDA, as 
seen in Figure 9. The option for saving files as either 
the fngemail or the icon representation is described in 
the setting. These visual abstract interfaces are able to 
reduce searching and retrieving time when a user is 
looking for a file on the PDA. Furthermore, these 
fingemail or icon viewing files will provide perceptual 
references to the user because of their graphical images. 
Figure 8: Zoom-in and zoom-out operations 
The Shape of Knowledge 
(a) Fingernail viewingfiles 
Figure 9: The fingernail and iconic representations 
4.2 Focus Zooming Operations 
We add the magnifying glass to help users see as much 
information on the screen, as shown in Figure 10. The 
user is able to see the magnified part of the pen moving 
point while other areas remain as an original view. The 
pen pointer keeps the magnified screen of the location, 
and this allows the user to specify the scale of 
magnification and focus on a specific area. 
Also, as seen in Figure 11, we add the blurring lens to 
help users focus on interesting information in the screen. 
The user is able to see the focusing part of the pen 
moving point while other areas remain as blurring state 
or dark colored view. 
Figure 11: Blurring lens operation 
4.3 Search Zooming Operations 
This section inh-oduces the search zoom 
implementation using a popup and a shadow zooming 
methods. As we mentioned above, the viewing method 
provides a user with taking the first visual abstraction, 
however, in some cases, these visual perceptions do not 
give the user enough original tile information when the 
user wants to retrieve or search. Here, we propose the 
second viewing method by using a popup or a shadow 
zooming operation. Two types of methods are 
summarized as follows: 
0 Popup Style 
This shows the overview file information as a 
thumbnail image size like a popup menu when a user 
points to the file location, as seen in Figure 12 (a). If the 
pen is moved to another location, the thumbnail image 
quickly disappears. It does not require many application 
windows to load a contextual and visualization screen, 
and also the user can control the popup window size. 
0 Shadow Style 
This shows the overview tile information with the 
magnifying glass, where the magnifying caption views 
the content of a file, as seen in Figure 12 @). By 
moving the magnifying glass, a user understands the 
file information quickly, instead of seeing the overview 
of file information like the popup style. 
Figure 1 0  Magnifying glass operation 
0-7803-7949-7/031$l7.00 02003 IEEE 114 
The Shape of Knowledge 
Figure 12: Popup and shadow zooming operations 
There exist differences between the popup zooming 
and the shadow zooming in terms of having the mag 
nifying glass and showing the file information. 
While they have physical differences, both are 
convenient ways to quickly recognize the file type w 
ith a visual view by reducing the user's selecting a 
wrong file. Each method may be a file retrieval tool 
in PDAs according to the user's preference. 
Therefore, these functions are very useful methods 
for increasing the system performance of PDAs that 
contain many p h y s i c a l  drawbacks such a s  low 
memory, low speed, and small screens. In addition, 
these approaches will help users to efficiently manage 
screen space in the multiple window environments, 
even though cwent PDAs cannot implement such 
environment today. 
5. Conclusion 
PDAs provide convenient and portable access to the 
wealth of information. However, there are formidable 
design challenges because of their hardware constraints. 
How do we present information effectively on the small 
~ 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 115 
screen? Here, we suggested zooming applications for 
these open problems. 
This paper has described specialized zooming 
interfaces on PDAs with designing and developing two 
basic zooming approaches, geometric and semantic 
zooming methods, in order to increase the usability of 
the small screen interface. Through three zooming 
methods, the file zoom, the focus zoom, and the search 
zoom, we created new zooming interfaces for the 
devices. The file zooming applications were 
dynamically implemented zoom-in and mom-out 
functions; we were able to enlargelreduce the sue of 
each file and saved it into the PDA. Also, we suggested 
a fingemail-viewing file method and an icon-viewing 
file method for increasing the efficient use of file 
saving tools. The focus zooming applications were built 
on a magnifying glass and a blurring lens which had a 
2D visualization rectangular presentations that allowed 
a user to quickly focus on a part of the PDA screen. 
Also, we introduced the search zooming applications 
that had two useful focusing views when a user 
searched and retrieved files on the PDA. The popup 
viewing operation gave a good small window of the file 
for easy recognition and comparison of the content of 
files. The shadow viewing operation had a magnifying 
glass, 2D visualization for rectangular presentations. It 
allowed a user to quickly focus on a part of a 
presentation on the PDA. Both were specifically 
designed to help a user when managing file or database 
systems in the small screen device. Finally, the detail 
prototype and implementation of these zooming 
applications were introduced in this paper. 
However, there are problems because this application 
was designed for the PDA simulation program in a 
desktop computer. So, we do not h o w  how many 
different results exist between the application program 
and the real physical device. Especially, in terms of 
hardware, the current PDA does not have enough pixels, 
so users could potentially encounter broken characters 
when the magnifying glass is used. 
While this zooming application is not substantially 
implemented in commercial PDAs, it will he used for a 
new interface in small screen computers by supporting 
various zooming functions. We look foward to 
continuing the research and development of this 
application according to the future development of the 
PDA's hardware performance and elements. Therefore, 
the biggest contribution of this paper is the creation of 
zooming applications on PDAs by encouraging the 
development of practical zooming methods over 
theoretical methods. 
The Shape of Knowledge 
References 
[ 1 ] George W. Fumas. Generalized “Fisheye Views,” 
Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI ‘86, pp. 16-12, 
April 1986. 
[ 2 1 Geroge W. Fumas and Benjamin B. Bederson. 
“Space-Scale Diagrams: Understanding 
Multiscale Interfaces,” In Proceedings of CHI ’95 
Human Facfors in Computing Sysfems, ACM 
press, May 1995. 
[ 3 ]  Geroge G Robertson and Jock D. Mackinlay. 
“Thk Document Lens,” UIST ‘93, November 1993. 
[ 4 ] J.  Ghee1 and T. Anderson. “Data and Metadata for 
Finding and Reminding,” IEEE Conference on 
Informafion Yisualizafion 4“, 1999. 
[ 5 1 Ken Perlin and David Fox. “Pad An Alternative 
Approach to the Computer Interface,” 
SIGGRAPH ’93 (Anaheim, CA) pp.57-64,1993. 
[ 61 Lyn Bamam, Albert Ho, John Dill and Frank 
Henipan.  “The Continuous Zoom: A 
Constrained Fisheye Technique for Viewing and 
Navigating Large Information Spaces,” UIST ’95, 
About the authors 
Kwang Bok Lee is a graduate student at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, NY. He is a researcher in 
the Usability Center at RPI. He is a member of Korean- 
American Scientist and Engineers Association (KSEA). 
Roger Griee is a Clinical Associate Professor of 
Technical Communication and Information Technology 
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, NY. He is a 
Fellow of the Society for Technical Communication 
(STC). He is a Senior Member of IEEE and past- 
president of IEEEs Professional Communication Society. 
He received IEEE Professional Communication 
Society’s Alfred N. Goldsmith Award. He teaches on- 
campus and distance-education courses on bnman- 
computer interaction, communication design for the 
WWW, information usability, and technical 
communication. 
.~ 
November 1995. 
I 7  1 M. D. Aouerlev. 1. Tzavaras and R. Snence. “A L .  
Bifocal D;splai Technique for Data Prebentation,” 
Proceedings of Eurographics ‘82, pp. 27-43, 1982. 
[ 8 ] Ramana Rao and Stuart K. Card. “The Table 
Lens: Merging Graphical and Symbolic 
Representations in an Interactive Focus+ Context 
Visualization for Tabular Information,“ Reading 
in Information Visualization Using Vision to 
Think, Morgan Kauhan Publisher Inc., pp. 343- 
349,1999. 
[ 91 Robert Spenc and Mark Apperley. “Database 
navigation: An office environment for the 
professional,” Behavior and Informafion 
Technology I ( I ) ,  pp. 43-54, 1982. 
[ IO]  Verena Giller, Manfred Tscheligim, Jobann 
Schrammel, Peter Frohlich and Birgit Rahl. 
“Experimental Evaluation of Semantic Depth of 
Field, a Preattentive Method for FocusiContext 
Visualization,” Technical Paper TR-2001-3, 
Vienna University of Technology, 
h~://www.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/aseaar~echnical- 
Reoorts/Asgaard-TR-200 1-3 .udf 
[ 11 ] Y K. Lenng and M. D. Apperley. “A Review and 
Tkonomy of Distortion-Oriented Presentation 
Techniques,” Readings in Information 
Visualization Using Vision to Think, Morgan 
Kaufman Publishers, Inc.;pp. 350-367, 1999. 
0-7803-7949-7/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 116 
