Plenary Lecture 
Monday. Sept. 29,8:45am - 9:45am 
Plenary: Some Challenges In Statistical Signal Processing Some Thoughts on 
Those Challenges and Some Challenges to Those Challenges 
Alan S. W//sky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
Abstract 
This talk builds around three challenges: Fusing heterogeneous and uncertain sources of 
information. extracting and tracking geometry, and dealing with computational complexity. 
In the first of these I'll briefly describe the work being done in my group (and led by Dr. 
John Fisher) on machine leaminglinformation-theoretic methods, with illustrations in 
audiolvideo fusion and in association of signals subject to propagation distortion. The 
second topic focuses on so-called cuwe evolution methods, their probabilistic 
interpretation. and some of the methods being developed in our group that incorporate 
both information-theoretic methods for "blind" segmentation and prior modeling of shapes 
for segmentation in complex imagery. Illustrations will be given to two problems of 
profound societal importance: automatic segmentation of the prostate (for prostate 
brachyiherapy) and automatic segmentation of photos of zebras when you have no idea 
what a zebra is (it's a kind of tulip isn't it?). The third topic deals with research in our group 
on large-scale problems of statistical inference specified in terms of so-called graphical 
models. I'll briefly describe some of the significant (at least I think so) theoretical 
successes we have had in developing methods that exploit embedded tractable graphical 
structures to solve both large-scale estimation problems and large integer programming 
problems such as arise in data association. 
Finally. I'll close the talk with brief comments about two really big challenges-very large- 
scale data assimilation for geophysical fields and fusion of large numbers of distributed 
and individually very limited sensors. Addressing each of these challenges requires much 
more than the union of the topics addressed in this talk, but 1'11 ask a few questions that 
suggest how research in these areas might evolve to contribute to these very large and 
very interesting challenges. 
Biosketch 
Alan S. Willsky received both the S.B. degree and the Ph.D. degree from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1969 and 1973 respectively. He joined the 
M.I.T. faculty in 1973 and his present position is as the Edwin S. Webster Professor of 
Electrical Engineering. From 1974 to 1981 Dr. Willsky SeNed as Assistant Director of the 
M.I.T. Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems. He is also a founder, member of 
the Board of Directors, and Chief Scientific Consultant of Alphatech, Inc. and from 1998- 
2002 served as a member of the US Air Force Scientific Advisory Board. In 1975 he 
received the Donald P. Eckman Award from the American Automatic Control Council. Dr. 
Willsky has held visiting positions at Imperial College, London, L'UniversitB de Paris-Sud. 
and the lnstitut de Recherche en lnformatique et Systemes AlBatoires in Rennes, France. 
He was program chairman for the 17th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, has 
been an associate editor of several journals including the IEEE Transactions on Automatic 
Control. has SeNed as a member of the Board of Governors and Vice President for 
Technical Affairs of the IEEE Control Systems Society, was program chairman for the 
1981 Bilateral Seminar on Control Systems held in the People's Republic of China. was 
special guest editor of the 1992 special issue of the IEEE Transactions on Information 
Theory on wavelet transforms and multiresolution signal analysis,'and served as co-chair 
of the 1998 ONR Working Group on the Role of Probability and Statistics in Command 
and Control. Also in 1988 he was made a Distinguished Member of the IEEE Control 
Systems Society. Dr. Willsky has given several plenary lectures at major scientific 
meetings including the 20th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. the 1991 IEEE 
International Conference on Systems Engineering. the SIAM Conf. on Applied Linear 
Algebra, 1991, the 1992 Inaugural Workshop for the National Centre for Robust and 
1 
Plenary Lecture 
Monday, Sept. 29, 8:45am - 9:45am 
Adaptive Systems, Canberra, Australia, the 1993 IEEE Symposium on Image and 
Multidimensional Signal Processing, Cannes, 'France: the 1997 SPlE Wavelets and 
Applications Symposium, San Diego, and the 2003 IEEE Workshop on Statistical Signal 
Processing. A number of papers authored by Prof. Willsky and his students and 
collaborators have received Best Paper Awards from conferences including the IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition and the Conference on 
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Dr. Willsky is the author of the research monograph 
Digital Signal Processing and Control and Estimation Theory and is co-author of the 
undergraduate text Signals and Systems. He was awarded the 1979 Alfred Noble Prize 
. by the ASCE and the 1980 Browder J. Thompson Memorial Prize Award by the IEEE for a 
paper excerpted from his monograph. Dr. Willsky's present research interests are in 
problems involving multidimensional and multiresolution estimation and imaging, statistical 
image and signal processing, data fusion and estimation of complex systems, image 
reconstruction. and computer vision. 
. 
2 
