DEVELOPMENT OF AN OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE TO ESTIMATE SURFACE 
ALBEDO FROM THE SEVIRI/MSG OBSERVING SYSTEM IN USING POLDER 
BRDF MEASUREMENTS 
Igor Pokrovsky 
(1)
, Oleg Pokrovsky 
(1)
 and Jean-Louis Roujean
(2)  
(1) 
Voeikov Main Geophysical. Observatory, 7 Karbyshev Str., St.-Petersburg, 194021, Russia 
(2) 
GAME/CNRM (Météo-France/CNRS), 42, avenue Gaspard Coriolis,  31057 Toulouse, France 
Phone : (33) 5 61 07 96 91 ; Fax : (33) 5 61 07 96 26 ; E-Mail: roujean@meteo.fr
Abstract— A statistical inversion method is first presented in 
support to the application of kernel-based BRDF (Bi-directional 
Reflectance Distribution Function) models for the calculation of 
the surface albedo. We present an operational procedure for the 
inversion of kernel-driven BRDF model and further albedo 
retrieval to be applicable to the SEVIRI/MSG reflectance 
measurements. The processing steps applied to space-borne 
POLDER sensor data were as follows: 1) quality control, 2) 
accumulation of a priori information on model coefficients of 
directional hemispherical reflectance, 3) implementation of the 
BRDF model inversion methods based on the biased estimation 
instead of usual non-biased least solution, which has too big 
variance in this case. The data control procedure consists both in 
filtering inputs of reflectance data and output of model 
coefficients based on analysis criteria determined by Fisher 
statistics. A multi-criteria procedure follows considering in 
particular the shape of the reflectance angular signature: 1) T-
statistics, 2) the bowl shape index (BSI), 3) the dome shape index 
(DSI), 4) the white sky albedo (WSA, bi-hemispherical 
reflectance), 5) the black sky albedo variance (BSA, directional 
hemispherical reflectance). The procedure is applied to POLDER 
data corresponding to the 16 classes of IGBP land cover 
classification. The statistical results include mean values and 
covariance matrix for the spectral BRDF model coefficients.
BRDF model inversion; albedo retrieval; a priori information; 
data control procedure; Fisher and T statistics ; biased estimation 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The determination of a surface albedo product requires the 
implementation of a number of data processing steps in which 
the cloud screening and the removal of atmospheric effects, 
merely water vapor content and aerosols loading, must 
concentrate our efforts. Furthermore, satellite systems provide 
a sparse angular sampling of the Bi-directional Reflectance 
Distribution Function (BRDF) when a hemispherical 
knowledge of this latter is necessary to derive an albedo 
variable. Embarked on a sun-synchronous platform, the 
AVHRR sensor scans everyday the same target under varying 
viewing conditions and similar sun geometry. After a few days, 
it provides a sampling of the BRDF close to the principal plane 
– the plane containing the sun and the target – in both forward 
and backscattering directions. On the other hand, the 
SEVIRI/MSG mission, as it is the characteristic of geo-
stationary sensor systems, will provide a large variety of solar 
angular measurements but at fixed view zenith angle and for 
various sets of relative azimuths. In this latter case, the BRDF 
sampling will be a warping of the perpendicular plane in the 
backscattering area, away from the tropical belt and at the 
exception of the summer season. It is anticipated that the lack 
of having data in the principal plane – where angular effects are 
amplified – will lead to biased estimates of the BRDF and 
thereby surface albedo. Since only restricted angular sampling 
for land surface reflectance measurements is available, it yields 
a difficulty to calibrate BRDF models. In many cases the ill-
conditioned index (ICI - the ratio of minimum to maximum 
eigen-values of matrix to be inverted) lies in the interval of 
small values. Therefore, the retrieved BRDF model coefficients 
are sensitive to small perturbations in the reflectance values 
registered by the satellite sensor. As a result there is a 
possibility to obtain unphysical solutions. In some respect this 
situation might be improved by the selection of optimal angular 
subsets providing higher ICI values than its initial values [1]s. 
But, nonetheless, inevitable contamination of measured signal 
coming from the land surface through the atmosphere becomes 
a question of a serious concern. Any atmospheric correction 
module cannot solve this problem principally because of 
frequent impact of partial cloudiness, which is not properly 
detected by existing remote sensing methods (see [2]) and 
cannot be described by radiation transfer methods. This paper 
is aimed to consider above problem with application to 
SEVIRI/MSG geometry case. 
II. DATA QUALITY CONTROL
A. Measurement Data  
We note b the vector standing for coefficients ki=0,1,2 of the 
BRDF parameter model. The traditional Gauss-Markov 
regression model reads: 
                             İbAy +⋅=    (1) 
Having y as an n-by-1 vector of measurements, A as a 
given n-by-p matrix of predictors, b as a p-by-1 vector of 
model coefficients to be estimated, İ  as an n-by-1 vector of 
random disturbances having unknown variance matrix of 
standard form, IȈİ
2σ= . Usually, the model (1) is related to 
the minimization of the quadratic norm of residual vector 
                  yybAyr

−=⋅−=                                        (2) 
0-7803-7930-6/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE
0-7803-7929-2/03/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE 3905
In (2), y

 stands for vector of the model predictor. Then, a 
possible estimate of b is: 
                   yA.A)(Ab ⋅⋅=
− T1T
                            (3)                                                                                                       
(‘T’ is a sign of transpose and ‘-1’ a sign of inverse matrix). 
However, this definition has poor numerical properties. 
Particularly dubious is the computation of (AT.A)-1, which is 
both costly and imprecise. To avoid those difficulties, most 
prevalent methods are the singular value decomposition (SVD) 
and QR decomposition of A, A=Q.R, where Q and R are the 
orthogonal and triangular matrices, respectively [3]. The 
residue in (2) might be rewritten in the following form: 
       İ)A)A(AA(Ir ⋅⋅⋅⋅−= − T1T                      (4) 
We consider now the residual in more details and begin the 
demonstration with the simple case of having a single angular 
measurement iy . The posterior probability density function 
(pdf) for a single element of residual, say 
),...,2,1(, niiyir
T
i
=⋅−= ba , where
T
i
a is a i-th row of A, is in 
the form of a univariate Student-t pdf with a posterior mean 
                     ),...,2,1( niiyi
r
T
i
=⋅−= ba

                    (5) 
and variance 
)2(),2/()(
212
>−⋅⋅⋅=
−
νννσ s
i
TT
ii
aAAa . That is, 
)2(,])([/)( 2
1
1
>⋅⋅⋅−=
−
ν
ν i
s
i
r
i
rt
TT
i
aAAa

   (6)                                                  
has an univariate Student-t pdf with Ȟ  degrees of freedom. 
Note that the posterior mean of (5), which is a least square 
residual, is its optimal estimate relatively to a quadratic loss 
function appeared in method of least squares. 
We assume that in (5)-(6) the estimate for 
2
σ is used in 
form of )/(
2
pns
T
−⋅= rr

. In other words, the estimated 
standard deviation of the i-th residual 
i
r  is 
i
s , where
2
i
s is the 
i-th diagonal element of the covariance matrix for (4). 
The statistical tests to detect outliers in linear models were 
the focus of a number of studies. Most of them were based on 
obtaining residuals standardized by their individual standard 
deviations [4]. A main advantage of this test procedure is its 
simplicity in regard to its general degree of application to any 
linear models without the necessity of a re-analysis of the 
suspected outlier either omitted or treated as missing. 
Determination of the exact percentage points of test statistics is 
based on the standardized residual ( )
i
s
i
r / . Tietjen et al [5] 
proposed a test procedure for the detection of a single outlier in 
a simple linear regression model and determined critical values 
of test statistics:               
                   
i
s
i
r
i
nR /max=                                      (7) 
using large-sized samples. Critical values of 
n
R for
significance levels 01.0,05.0,1.0=α  were given for a range of 
sample size up to n=100. We consider also here alternative 
statistics for the present case of BRDF linear model: 
.
B. Output Coefficients 
The classical work in field of computerized data screening 
related to census data has been carried out by O’Reagan [6]. 
Later, there has been an expansion in the use of bases 
consisting of vectors of data following multivariate distribution 
[7]. This and other following papers were based on 
implementation of the generalized likelihood ratio T statistics 
of Hotelling [8]. We used here a similar statistical procedure to 
reveal strange BRDF model coefficient patterns. Let the vector 
b represent a set of observations distributed in accordance to 
the normal law )(
b
Ȉ,bN . As we obtained some sample of 
BRDF coefficient sets, it is easy to compute the estimates for 
both of them: vector of means b  and covariance matrix 
b
Ȉ .
So, we may assume that b  and 
b
Ȉ  are known. We also 
suppose that after simple transformation b and 
b
Ȉ  have been 
scaled to zero means and unit variances. Let ebb +=
~
 be the 
input vector to be tested. Here e  is a vector of data capture 
errors. Then the screening of b
~
consists of a test of null 
o
H hypothesis 0e =:
o
H . One possible alternative hypothesis 
to  is 0e ≠:
1
H : it means that an arbitrary error vector is 
present. In this case the test statistic indicated is the generalized 
likelihood ratio T statistics: 
                  bȈb
b
~~ 1
⋅⋅=
−T
T                                          (8) 
which has a good performance for a wide class of error vectors 
e  [8]. The preceding discussion is based on the implicit 
assumption that b and 
b
Ȉ are known. In practice, it will be 
rarely the case. Currently, we have available some a priori 
sample of N vectors, which have been verified manually and 
assumed to be accurate. From this sample we compute 
estimates b

and 
b
S  and use these estimates in place of b and 
b
Ȉ . A serious question then arises as to how large N must be 
for this substitution to yield acceptable accuracy in the 
distribution of test statistics. In the case of T, the distributional 
problem is well investigated [8]. In fact, if b

and 
b
S are used 
in place of b and 
b
Ȉ , then T is computed in accordance to (8) 
as )()(
1
bbSbb
b

−⋅⋅−=
−T
T  for an arbitrary incoming data 
vector b .
0-7803-7930-6/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE
0-7803-7929-2/03/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE 3906
III. COMPARISON OF INVERSION TECHNIQUES
The Least Square (LS) solution of (1) can be obtained by 
minimization of cost function 
)(
1
)(min ybAİȈybA
b
−⋅⋅
−
⋅−⋅
T
(see [3]), with IİȈ
2
σ= .
Bayes formulas for conditional probability permit to come to 
the generalized form for the cost function when we dispose of a 
priori statistics: 
)}(
1
)()(
1
){(
min
bbbȈbbybAİȈybA
b
−⋅
−
⋅−+−⋅⋅
−
⋅−⋅
TT
 (9) 
Minimum of (9) is a regularized solution of problem (1). 
Details on numerical algorithms related to (9) can be found in 
[9]. 
Hoerl and Kennard [10] suggested to use the ridge 
regression, as a procedure for dealing in the case of multi-
collinear columns of matrix A in a regression model like (1). 
Their ridge estimator of the standardized (see [8]) regression 
model coefficient vector is  
          yAI)AA)(b ⋅⋅⋅+⋅=
T-1T ββ (                     (10) 
where ȕ is a positive constant and AA ⋅T  is in correlation 
form [8]. The selection of parameter ȕ yields the major issue. 
Most studies on this subject suggested more or less empirical 
rules, according to the problem to be solved. Here, we use the  
acceptability conception as a background for more 
substantiated selection rule. One example of inversion 
technique comparison is presented at fig.1. It showed that 
ordinary LS solution (statistical inversion) provides unphysical 
solution for albedo retrieval and alternative methods: statistical 
regularization and ridge regression permit to obtain solutions, 
which are in reasonable agree with land surface measurement 
data.  
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
An innovative work has been presented in which routines 
were developed for control procedure to detect outliers at input 
and output stages of the BRDF model inversion based on both 
statistical and physical criteria. Two principal statistics 
frequently used in multiple regressions were considered: the 
model explained variance and the ratio Fisher statistics.
Another important step was the accumulation of BRDF model 
coefficients and albedo a priori statistics. This statistical 
information permit us to sort out a more sophisticated inversion 
technique. In fact, the filtering procedure for outliers is more 
specific to sensor characteristics than models. 
The ill-posed problem of kernel matrix inversion could be 
solved based on the ridge regression and other biased estimates 
in order to increase the reliability of biophysical parameters. It 
is worth noting that ill-conditioning does not only rely on 
restricted angular sampling but also occurs when co-linear 
kernels are considered. Further improvements in albedo 
retrieval will be to perform an optimal selection of kernels for 
composite model and to adapt SR method to composite model. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been performed in the framework of the Satellite 
Application Facilities (SAF) program, which is supported by 
the European Meteorological and Satellite (EUMETSAT) 
agency and by the National Meteorological Services. We also 
thank Météo-France for technical assistance. Oleg Pokrovsky 
and Igor Pokrovsky received a financial support from 
EUMETSAT as a Visiting Scientists at CNRM. Jean-Louis 
Roujean is with the Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique. This study was also supported by Russian Fond of 
Background Research grants 01-05-65283 and 02-05-64 757. 
REFERENCES
[1] Pokrovsky, O.M., and J.L. Roujean, 2002 , Land surface albedo retrieval 
via kernel-based BRDF modeling: II. An optimal design scheme for the 
angular sampling , Remote Sens. Environ., 84, 120-142. 
[2] Bicheron, P., and M.Leroy, 2000. BRDF signatures of major biomes 
observed from space. J. Geophys. Res.,v. 105, p.26669 - 26681. 
[3] Pokrovsky, O.M., and J.L. Roujean, 2002 , Land surface albedo retrieval  
[4] via kernel-based BRDF modeling: I. Statistical inversion method and 
model comparison., Remote Sens. Environ., 84, 100-119.. 
[5] Draper, N. and H. Smith, 1981, Applied regression analysis, second 
edition, N.Y., John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1981, 467 p. 
[6] Tietjen, G.L., Moore R.H. and Beckman R.J., 1973. Testing for a single 
outlier in simple linear regression. Technometrics, v.15, p.717-721 
[7] O’Reagan, R.T., 1969, Relative cost of computerized error inspection 
plans., Journal of American Statist.Assoc., v.64, p.1245-1255. 
[8] Gnanadesikan, R. and J.R. Kettenring, 1972, Robust estimates, residuals 
and outliers detection in multi-response data., Biometrics, v.28, p.81-
124. 
[9] Anderson, T.W., 1958, An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical 
Analysis, N.Y., John Wiley and Sons Inc., 548 p. 
[10] Pokrovsky O.M., 1984. Meteorological Remote  Sensing of the 
Atmosphere from Satellites.-Leningrad, Hydrometeoizdat , 287 p. 
[11] Hoerl A.E., and R.W. Kennard, 1970, Ridge regression: biased 
estimation for non-orthogonal problems., Technometrics, v.12, p.55-67.
0-7803-7930-6/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE
0-7803-7929-2/03/$17.00 (C) 2003 IEEE 3907
