REAL-TIME MONITORING AND CONTROLLING OF AN 
ALLEN-BRADLEY SLC 500 THROUGH THE INTERNET 
Fawzi A. Radwan and Terry W. Martin 
University of Arkansas, 3217 Bell Engineering 
Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA 
Abstract 
Remote access to control and monitor various devices in industrial and other environments is very important and big 
challenge for engineers and automation institutes. The Internet technology is providing this accessibility with great benefits to 
the industry. One such demand is to access an Allen-Bradley SLC 5OOfamily Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) through 
the Internet using any available standard web browser. This remote access capability provides real-time data acquisition to 
monitor and conhol devices that are connected to the Inputs/Outputs modules ofthe PLC. This paper presents a novel scheme 
to provide real-time accessibility to Allen Bradley PLC to conhol equipment without using any dedicated licensed software 
that runs as a tool for the web server. 
Microsoft .NET programming technologv has been used to implement the novel scheme. It involves two steps. The 
first step is to read and write datafrom the PLC SLC 5/03 using Visual Basic .NET (VB.NET) programming language. In the 
second step, the SLC 5/03 data is displayed on the web page “monitoring and controlling” as a HTML page, using Active 
Server Pages .NET (ASP.NETJ through the Web Services. The web server that has been utilized in this project is the Internet 
Information Services (IIS 5.0) under the Microsofr Windows 2000 Server. 
Introduction 
This paper presents the challenges of controlling and 
monitoring a manufacturing system equipments using a 
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) from anywhere in 
the world with high performance, quality, and cost 
effective techniques either locally or remotely through the 
Internet or Intranet so that engineers, executives and 
administrators can have special privileges to access their 
applications that provide remote visualization. The 
accessing of the “read or write data” can he done using any 
standard Internet browser as shown in Figure1 [I] .  
Figure 1. Connecting an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 to the 
Internet 
There has been very little effort by researchers or 
automation companies to address this issue in the [I]. In 
fact, the studies that were found used licensed software 
packages to fulfill their jobs. Therefore, in this project a 
different approach has been implemented. 
Most of the industrial companies when they configure 
and sale their products, they create a monopoly situation so 
that the customer has to use their software as well as their 
tools. This situation has led to many disadvantages such as 
requiring the user to purchase a license for each tool and 
limiting the use for these licenses that costs the user large 
sums of money. 
Pro jec t  Overview 
The objective of the study was to investigate and to 
implement a new methodology of accessing the Allen- 
Bradley SLC 500 family PLC through the Internet using any 
available standard web browser. Moreover, it’s not required 
to have a special connection between the PLC and the other 
end of the net. Furthermore, yon do not have to purchase any 
dedicated licensed software to runs a web server behind the 
SLC 500 PLC. 
There are at least three ways to implement SLC 500 
over the net; two of them use the Allen-Bradley’s software 
products, and the third one is what will he implemented in 
this project. Actually, the fust one uses the Rockwell 
software “Allen-Bradley’s” RSView 32 web server, ,which 
requires four of Rockwell Software packages working in its 
background, which are RSLinx, RSLogix 500, RSView 32, 
and RSView 32 web server, see Figure 2 [ I ] .  
The second method uses a combination of Allen- 
Bradley’s tools and web programming techniques such as 
Visual Basic (VB6), Active server pages (ASP), which 
running under the Internet Information Sever 5.0 (11s 5.0), 
see Figure 3[1]. These approaches have limitations, which 
0-7803-7852-0/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 387 IClT 2003 - Maribor, Slovenia 
are high cost of licenses as well as the limitations of the 
software use. Another disadvantage of this approach is that 
the routing of data from the PLC through the web and vice 
versa takes many steps, which affects the speed of 
representing the data over the net as a real-time aim as 
shown in Figure 3 
SLC 500 
Figure 2. Connecting an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 to the 
Internet using Allen-Bradley RSView 32 web Server 
SLC sw 
I 
Figure 3. Connecting an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 to the 
Internet using Allen-Bradley RSView 32 web Server 
The third method is demonstrated in Figure 4. The 
SLC 500 PLC is monitored and controlled over the net 
without using any Rockwell software package tools. In 
other words, no license is required. Moreover, the speed of 
monitoring and controlling is faster than the other methods 
due to the fewer steps of presenting and conveying data 
over the net, which uses .NET programming technology. 
These tools are Visual basic .NET (VB.NET), Web 
Services, and Active Sever Pages .NET (ASP.NET) [2]. In 
general, Visual Basic (VE) programming language is 
used in industries, especially in visualization systems such 
as Human Machine Interface (HMI) or SCADA system. 
Our objective in this study is using Windows 
Application (VB.NET) for reading and writing data 
k o d t o  the SLC 500 PLC’s memory. Furthermore, Visual 
Basic provides a graphic user interface (GUI) “objects” to 
display the exchanging data to the PLC such as Command 
Buttons, Textboxes, Combo Boxes, and Labels etc. 
Secondly, our aims in this study to interactive (dynamically) 
the data between the PLC memory in the field and the user 
over the Internet. 
The Active Server Pages (ASP.NET) or Web 
Application technique can fulfill this desire. In fact there are 
two ways to present data or documents on the Internet sites: 
a static web page and a dynamic web page. A static web 
page presents data, documents, products, services, and any 
other information for the visitors to access without doing any 
interactive job in the web server. Whereas, the dynamic web 
pages “ASP.NET” have to exchange the data with the web 
server such as online access to databases, e-business, 
collaborative contents, membership resume/jobs database, 
etc. ASP.NET can be developed as scripting language 
(VB.NET orjava script) in an HTML platform and be run in 
the web server such as Internet Information services (11s) 
PI. 
Figure 4 Connecting an Allen-Bradley SLC 501 
Internet using the .NET environment 
to the 
Finally, the link between the Windows Application and 
the Web Application is a Web Service. Web Service is a 
Web-based technology, which World Wide Web (WWW) 
inkastructure provides as a means for software to be 
connected to other software applications. It is a distributed 
server-side application component similar to common web 
sites. The Web Services components have no GUI and are 
not targeted with standard web browsers such as Internet 
Explorer. Web Services consist of reusable software 
components to be consumed by other applications, such as 
traditional client applications (VB.NET) and Web-based 
applications (ASP.NET). 
System Design 
A simulated spring water treatment and bottling system 
was used to illustrate monitoring and controlling through the 
Internet as shown in Figure 5. The PLC utilized in this study 
388 
is an Allen-Bradley SLC 5/03[3] with a serial connection 
(RS232) from the PLC to the workstation's serial 
communication port (Web Server). 
IIS 5.0 as was chosen to he the web server due to the 
Microsofi Windows system tools like VB.NET ASP.NET, 
Web Services, and Microsofi Frontpage. which are used in 
this project. 
Q 
Figure 5 Water Treatment System 
Visual Basic .NET (VB.NET) was selected to perform 
the read/write data transfer to/from the SLC 500 
processor's memory. For sending and receiving data to 
Allen-Bradley PLC through the serial communication 
ports, Rockwell Automation has granted permission to use 
two commands set. These commands are unprotected read 
and unprotected write to the PLC memory as shown in 
Figure 6. Therefore, this authorization does not require any 
license or certification horn Rockwell 
I 1  1 
Figure 6 VB.NET Serial Communication Program 
Configuration for Sending and Receiving Data to and form 
the Allen-Bradley SLC 500 PLC 
For online monitoring and controlling of the Allen- 
Bradley SLC 5/03 we used ASP.NET and Web Services 
method. With the next generation of the Internet, the 
programmable web site companies can expose their 
software as a service over the Internet to their business 
partners to fully leverage connected computing. Such 
services are called Web Service [537, VB.NET]. 
Web Services are object-based components of 
programmable logic applications that can he accessed using 
standard protocols such as XML and HTTP. These are two 
important protocols allow communication to the user through 
the "Web Browser", which are XML and Simple Object 
Access Protocol (SOAP). The XML provides a standardized 
language such as the VB.NET to exchange the data between 
the SLC 500 memory and the ASP.NET. SOAP is another 
form of XML-based protocol, which can be nm over HTTP 
protocol environments for exchanging information in a 
distributed system. 
SOAP = H T V  + XML 
Figure 7 illustrates the Web Service architecture. 
When the user (Client) wants to interact with the SLC 500, 
he can click on any command button or on any component in 
the web page. This request is then sent to the web service 
over the Internet in SOAP message format. In the middle, 
when the IIS 5.0 receives the SOAP message on the TCP 
port 80, the request will be routed to the ASP.NET script 
handler, which is located in the web service. In this case, the 
web service creates or passes the required data to the 
business component (VB.NET-Windows Application 
Program) to perform the appropriate operation with the SLC 
500 program. The SLC 500 ladder logic has previously been 
stored in the SLC 500's memory. Therefore, this business 
component "VB.NET-Windows Application Program" 
processes the requested data's instructions. If confmation 
is necessary, the data from the SLC 500's memory is 
returned to ASP.NET by the Web Services, which then packs 
it in a SOAP envelope and sends it back to the Client "web 
browser" web page as a HTTP-POST protocol 
Client 1 
Figure 7 Connecting an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 to 
Internet 
the 
389 
The Windows Application Program as shown in 
Figure 8 has been created to monitor and control the 
Allen-Bradley PLC SLC 500 based upon the case study as 
previously discussed and shown in Figure 5. The Widows 
Application Program is used here for many functions. The 
main function is a bridge for the Internet or for the web 
application functionality for sending and receiving the data 
to the SLC 500. Another function is for monitoring and 
controlling the SLC 500 in an off-line mode. It is also 
used for on-line mode operations with the SLC 5/03. 
There are two sections in the program: Offline and 
On-line Monitoring and Controlling SLC 500. In the fust 
section of the case study it represents the data as SCADA, 
HMI, and M I ) .  The second section is a Web Services 
Panel, which includes Web Services control and 
Authentication. The Web Services conaol is used here as a 
web server control, which has two control buttons: Start 
Web Service and Stop web Service. The Start Web 
Services button is used to allow the web application 
program (ASP.NET- web site) to interact with Windows 
application programs for sending and receiving the data. 
Second, the Stop Web Service is used to stop the PLC 
operation through the Internet. Status of the Web Service 
data will display on the large black display. 
The only way for Online-Monitoring and Controlling 
SLC 500 over the Internet is as dynamic web pages. 
Therefore, the only way to do this sort of job in the (11s 
5.0) environment is an Active Server page (ASP). In this 
project, we have created a number of interactive pages that 
make the SLC 500 virtually available over the Internet as a 
real-time accessing for monitoring and controlling 
purpose. 
The check status is used for accessing the web server 
before attempting to do any operation for reading or 
writing the data into the SLC 500. These are ONLINE and 
OFFLINE Status. If the web server (11s 5.0) is down or it 
has been shut-off the web browser page will show “The 
page cannot be displayes’ message. 
The data is acquired from the SLC 500 processor by 
clicking the Read button link. This data can be displayed 
in many different ways. In this work, two methods were 
adopted. First, all data are shown in a data table to shows 
all the status of the inputs, outputs, memory hits, timers, 
counters etc, in order to make the monitoring purposes 
easy and readable. Secondly, the data are displayed 
interactively, which is known as, the animated data. The 
animation program method is used to simulate the actual 
outside world actions, such as filling and draining tanks, or 
moving parts like motor motion and conveyer belt as 
shown in Figure 9. 
There are standard buttons that allow control of the 
SLC 5/03 virtually over the net. In other words, it sends 
data instantly from the Internet web browser to the SLC 
5/03 PLC. It can send data immediately, such as 
S t d a u s e  and StopIReset button etc. Secondly, check or 
option boxes allow us to collect data as often as needed and 
are sent to the SLC 5/03 processor at immediately, see 
Fig .e 10. 
__ .  . . .- 
,. .. 
Figure 8. Offline-Monitoring and Controlling SLC 500, User 
Authentication, and Clint Server Web Server. 
390 
Figure 9 Real Time-Data Monitoring and Filtering Animation 
Figure 10 Write Data as a Real-Time Data Controlling of the SLC500 
391 
Summary 
The objective was to investigate and to implement a 
new methodology of accessing an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 
family programmable logic controller (PLC) through the 
Internet using any available standard web browser. The 
work illustrates that real-time data acquisition for 
monitoring and controlling devices that are connected to 
the Inputs/Outputs modules of the SLC 500 without 
having a special connection and dedicated licensed 
software as a web server is possible. 
The technique used in this project is the Microsoft 
.NET programming technology. VB.NET was used for 
reading and writing data f rod to  SLC 5/03. Data from the 
SLC 5/03 was displayed on the web page by SP.NET 
through the clientlserver Web Services. The web server 
used in this project was the Internet Information Services 
(11s 5.0) under the Microsoft Windows 2000 Server. 
References 
[ I ]  Fawzi A. Radwan “Real-Time Monitoring and 
Controlling of an Allen-Bradley SLC 500 Through the 
Internet,” Thesis: University of Arkansas, August 2003. 
121 Product Overview “http:llmsdn. mic-rosoft.com/ 
netframeworWproductinfo /overview /default.asp,” 2003 
Microsoft Corporation, July 2002. 
[ 3 ]  SLC 500 Modular Hardware Style, “Installation and 
Operation Manual,” Publication 1747-6.2, Milwaukee, 
Allen-Bradley,a Rockwell Automation, January 1998. 
[4] Visual Basic .NET Technology Map, 
“http://msdn.microsoft,com/library/ def aukasp? 
url=/library/enusldndomet ihhnVtechmap-vbnet.asp,” 
Microsoft Corporation, 2003. 
392 
