Operation of “Big Ear” for Radar Scattering Measurements 
Jonathan D. Young 
The Ohio State University ElectroScience Laboratory 
1320 Kinnear Rd. Columbus, OH 43212 
Young.ZO@osu.edu 
Introduction 
In the early eighties, a confluence of some special new problems in radiation and 
scattering measurements along with an appreciation of the unique capabilities of the Big 
Ear created a new application: Cotnpact Range use at Big Ear. The problems involved 
diagnostic measurements of the scattering of large objects at UHF and VHF frequencies, 
ranging from 100 MHz to 2 GHz. Coherent measurements covering this Ultra-Wideband 
frequency range could ultimately produce images with good resolution, but required a 
true plane wavc illumination. Because of the robustness of its design, the Big Ear was 
adapted to this new purpose and produced some unique and interesting results. 
Modification of Range Geometry 
The nominal operation of Big Ear used a feed antenna on the central axis of the reflector 
system. Figure 1 shows a photograph of Big Ear with its feed antenna located on the 
central axis. However, apparatus for translating the feed antenna had been initiated during 
the late seventies in order to “track” the energy coming from a star of interest. The long 
focal length of the Big Ear geometry provided good performance when the feed antenna 
was offset from the center axis. 
Figure 1. The Big Ear Radio Telescope 
The offset feed location is the key to operation of the Big Ear as a compact range. An 
offset feed location at the focal distance produces a diagonal plane wave beam bouncing 
off of the parabaloidal reflector which can illuminate targets on the other side of the 
range center axis. Energy going beyond the target is reflected by the tilting reflector into 
0-7803-7846-6/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 853 
space, resulting in a low background level. Scattering measurements at small bistatic 
angles can also be performed using two antennas, displaced at different angles from the 
range central axis. 
A series of Ultra-Wideband antennas were built to achieve the required coherent 
operating frequency range. Figure 2 shows a photograph of a pair of rolled edge TEM 
horn antennas, mounted on axes offset from the central feed. (The radio telescope feed 
antenna on the central axis is also shown.) These large antennas were operated over the 
frequency range of 100 MHz to 2 GHz. A pair of scattering targets on the other side of 
the range central axis are also shown in the left comer of the photo. 
Figure 2. 
Measurement of large absorber panels 
A fixture was constructed to measure a 32 ft wide by 8 ft. high flat section of 8 ft. long 
absorber pyramids and wedges from various manufacturers. A photograph with one type 
of absorber attached is shown in Figure 3. The scattering from this panel was measured 
from 500 MHz to 2000 MHz, with a coherent, calibrated measurement system. Both 
backscatter and bistatic scattering were measured for a wide variety of azimuth and 
elevation (tilt) angles. Not only were calibrated no vs frequency obtained, but down- 
range images were produced to show the scattering phenomenology. Figure 4 shows a 
down-range impulse response at 75" from normal where specular responses can be 
observed, and Figure 5 shows the go data, for type of pyramidal absorber. 
Figure 3.  Photograph of Absorber Panel 
854 
Y P 
c 
5 
i 
-40 1 1 
Figure 4. Impulse Response of Pyramids 
at 75" incidence 
Figure 5 .  Spectrum of Pyramids 
at 75' incidence 
UWB Measurement of FOPEN Targets 
The frequency coverage of the Big Ear Compact Range permitted measurement of 
approximate impulse response FOPEN back-scattered radar signatures for several full- 
size vehicles. Figure 6 shows an ISAR image from the measured data covering a 20" 
azimuth angle range for a M35 army truck. The truck drawing is superimposed on the 
image, so that the locations of the scattering centers are clear. 
1 f mc-l 
I* X Y I I . * U * O a € C c . "  
Figure 6. UWB Scattering Image for M35 Truck 
Measurement of Foliage Penetration and FOPEN UWB Imaging 
Finally, the Big Ear served as a platform for a series of measurements of FOPEN Radar 
propagation and scattering behavior in a woods. Figure 7 shows a sketch of the 
experiment. A polarimetric array of UWB antennas was mounted to the 300 ft. long top 
rail of the Big Ear tilting reflector (100 ft. above ground level). The stable reflector 
permitted UWB SAR images to be generated of the woods. Several reference scatterers 
were placed at carefully documented locations in the woods. The Calibration Transfer 
Function vs angle for the antenna array was measured. Then UWB polarimetric images of 
the woods were created. From the images, processing produced data on UWB 
855 
propagation loss through the foliage, and also phase defect information. Figure 
one of the images. 
~~~~c :%%%NE 
8 shows 
1 
//' \\\ VANWNT*INWG 
Figure 7. Geometry for Big Ear Measurements of FOPEN Radar Scattering 
A2168 --Horizontal Polarization 
Figure 8. UWB SAR Image of the woods 
Summary 
The Big Ear was such a robust design that it was able to produce calibrated Ultra 
Wideband scattering signature data and ISAR images when used as an offset feed 
compact range. It also served as a platform for important measurements of FOPEN 
scattering signatures and FOPEN foliage propagation performance. For over 10 years, 
this system produced data of significance for the radar sensing community at UHF and 
VHF frequencies. 
856 
