  
 
“SMART” GOVERNMENT IN A 
LESS-ADVANTAGED 
COMMUNITY:  
Meeting the Challenges In 
Imperial County 
 
Breena E. Coates, Ph.D. 
School of Public Administration  
San Diego State University-IVC 
 
 
Abstract: The new tools of e-government have 
begun to address and diffuse the weaknesses of 
government service delivery in the 21st century.  
The state of California among other states has a 
strategic vision to add to its orderly, stable 
structures of bureaucracy, the virtues of speed, 
cost-effectiveness, and quality and quantity of 
response to citizens that e-government provides. 
Imperial County, California was chosen as the 
site for discussion of how less-advantaged 
communities in California are addressing e-
government.  One partnership between two 
governmental entities—The Imperial County 
Office of Education and the Imperial County 
Irrigation District, named Project EdNet—was 
chosen for this paper as the working example to 
examine how the issues of the digital divide, 
democracy and equity can positively impact the 
citizens of less-advantaged communities in 
California.    
 
 
I.INTRODUCTION: 
 
1.1.The Value-Added Impact of 
E.Government:  The toolbox of bureaucracy has 
expanded considerably in the information age.  
What implications do these new revolutionary 
tools have for government and its people?  For 
one thing the new tools are designed to provide 
better, cheaper, faster and more responsive 
service to citizens, thereby diffusing the long-
held beliefs that government is inefficient, 
expensive, slow and unresponsive to social 
needs. Heeks (1999) and others have suggested 
that the new refinements to bureaucracy from 
electronic sources arise principally in the areas 
of:  
 
• Speed of outputs 
• Quality and Quantity of 
outputs. 
• Cost-effectiveness of out-puts. 
 
Speed, Quality-Quantity, and Cost-
Effectiveness of outputs by use of IT serves 
modern bureaucracies in several key ways:  1) In 
its Bureaucratic Supporting Function—it assists 
human resource executed processes, such 
decisionmaking, communications, and decision 
implementation using data sources, data 
manipulators and organizers, etc.  2) In its 
Bureaucratic Supplanting Function—it 
automates (and may also eliminate) existing 
human resource executed processes, such as 
storing, processing and outputting information. 
3) In its Bureaucratic Innovating Function—it 
provides new IT-executed public services. IT 
technology provides these new and expanded 
services 4) to Internal Management—for its 
operational requirements, such as planning and 
budgeting; to 5) Public Administration 
Regulatory requirements, such as its legal, 
judicial and fiscal needs; 6) to Public Services—
such as education, health, transportation, public 
utilities, etc.; 7) to its Dissemination of Public 
Information requirements, such as press releases, 
government data collection  (such as 
demographics and statistics); policies, 
performance indicators, etc. (Heeks, 16, 1999). 
This paper relates primarily to issue #3, 
innovation; issue # 6, expansion of public 
service; and issue # 7, the dissemination of 
information. 
 
 1.2. E.Government Collaborations: 
The second thing that scholars have noted is that 
e.government lends itself to collaborative efforts 
across governmental entities.  This paper, using a 
model from local government addresses the issue 
of governmental collaboration in a local 
community—the Imperial Valley in 
California.There are several significant 
advantages to such collaboration: 
 
•  it brings communities of 
interest together in new and 
different ways; 
•  it permits better sharing of 
scarce resources, and  
enhances cost savings; 
•  it addresses important “digital 
divide” and democracy 
concerns; 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
  
• it enhances regional 
development; 
• it provides models for 
replication in other 
communities; 
• it builds bridges for future 
development; 
• it leads to a sense of shared 
communitarian values for 
technology                   
entrepreneurship; 
• provides empowerment to less-
advantaged communities. 
 
We see the above issues played out in 
an important coalition of governmental entities 
in the Imperial Valley of California. 
 
1.3. Imperial County ‘s Collaborative 
Venture Project: One intergovernmental 
entrepreneurial model likely to serve as an 
example for less-advantage communities is the 
Imperial Valley Telecommunications Authority 
(IVTA).  This is a joint-venture partnership 
between a governmental agency, the Imperial 
County Office of Education (ICOE), and a quasi-
governmental  entity, the Imperial Valley 
Irrigation District (IID). 
 
 Map 1.1:  Imperial County, 
California
 
 
 
 
The  project when completed will 
provide schools,  the Imperial Valley College, 
San Diego State University-Imperial Valley 
Campus, local city libraries and other public 
agencies access to this communication network.  
 
While the above represents the first 
phase of the project, the IVTA partnership is 
more ambitious than that.  The entrepreneurial 
model can accommodate other public agencies in 
the area beyond schools and education facilities.  
It is envisioned that member agencies from 
various public organizations will come on board 
once the system is in place. 
 
 This entrepreneurial venture satisfies 
the two important components identified by 
Everard, concerning governmental IT 
entrepreneurship: 1) provision of enabling 
technologies; 2) provision of a  network for 
communications (ibid, 23, 2000).  
 
 
 
II.THE IVTA MODEL OF INTER-
GOVERNMENTAL IT COLLABORATION: 
 
2.1. Government Without Bound-
aries:  A major innovation across this nation in 
the last decade was shown when governments 
integrated efforts across boundaries--  
geographic,  teleological, and economic--to share 
resources and assist each other in solving policy 
problems. The Joint Powers Agreement between 
IID and ICOE states this mission.  
 
On the  Federal and state levels  
governments have begun working together via a 
forum called “Government without Boundaries.” 
This group, developed by state Chief 
Information Officers (CIOs) brings more 
integration and standardization among levels of 
governments and their respective agencies 
(Governing, August 2001). Some local 
governments, e.g., Palo Alto, have become 
contractors and consultants for other cities. Palo 
Alto, which has high IT connections and 
capabilities, will bring in $200,000 from its 
contract to its neighbor, East Palo Alto alone.   
Similarly, states are contracting with each other 
to supplement services they lack, instead of 
buying a whole system for themselves.  Thus, 
Hawaii purchased at $11 million from Arizona 
for processing time that would have cost up to 
$40 million outside government. Arizona runs 
this project from its administration mainframe, 
with some programming modifications to fit 
Hawaii’s requirements.  It runs the program, 
however, staff that manages its own programs. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 As these types of intergovernmental 
relationships become more common they are 
being known as GSPs or government service 
providers.  Rather than contracting with a private 
company, cities find it easier to contract with 
GSPs who can better understand their 
governmental constraints and challenges.  
Governments are thus generating revenue out of 
marketing e.services.    
 
2.2. Addressing The State’s Mission 
for E-Government:  One important priority of 
California Governor Gray Davis has been to 
improve informational technology for 
governmental agencies in California.  The Little 
Hoover Commission, 2000, revealed the 
surprising fact that despite California’s fame as 
the birthplace of the electronics industry, it has  
lagged behind 41 other states in terms of 
applications to government. (See Appendix I). 
Overall across the national state governments are 
putting a priority on state colleges and 
universities to expand their capacity in IT 
education to develop future workers  (Little 
Hoover Commission. iv, 2000).  Both these 
needs are being addressed by the joint 
partnership between IID and ICOE in the 
Imperial Valley. 
 
2.3. Provides Empowerment for Less-
Advantaged Communities:  Imperial County 
has an unemployment rate of 33%--the highest in 
the state of California.  Joint tax returns for 
married people average $19,180, and are the 
lowest in the state.  Median income is $14,205, 
which puts this county as last among California’s 
58 counties.  The geographic location of Imperial 
County encompasses 4,282 square miles of 
dessert, cultivated land and rocky and barren 
mountains.  It has one of the lowest population 
densities in the state.  The county consists of 
three medium-sized cities, several small towns, 
and hundreds of square miles where there is no 
population. The population is 67% Hispanic.  
Sixty-two percent of the Hispanic population 25 
years and older do not have a high school 
diploma.  Almost 1/3 of the families living in the 
region receive Aid to Families with Dependent 
Children.  Nearly 40% of the minority children 
live below the poverty level. 
 
This area has been identified as a 
federal Enterprise Community.  The develop-
ment of an Empowerment Zone application 
endorsed by the school Superintendent’s group 
and local school boards, and through 
collaboration with city and government officials.  
IVTA’s efforts now provide for better meaning 
to the term “enterprise community.”  It will 
empower this community to learn, work, and 
compete in the next millennium with much 
needed technology resources and improved 
access to information.    
 
2.4. Digital Divide and Democracy 
Concerns: The geographic isolation, and limited 
economic resources of the Imperial Valley has to 
date been a factor in slower educational, 
economic and social growth of the region. 
Because of this there have always been concerns 
about lack of  access and opportunity in this less-
advantaged region compared with other 
California communities to the West and North.  
Indeed these are concerns that have preoccupied 
citizens in several significant ways in the last 
decade.  
Among these is the issue of  democratic access to 
information, and equality of access to 
information, for all citizens advantaged and 
disadvantaged alike. Here government, as the 
example shown by IVTA, is being responsive to 
these needs for its citizenry in the Imperial 
Valley. IVTA has noted: “Where a person lives 
should not be a deterrent to that individual’s 
opportunity for success.” (Project EdNet, 
September 2002.)  Another constitutional issue is 
the 14th Amendment’s  property and equal 
protection clauses.  By its efforts IVTA here sees 
itself as helping fulfill this important mandate of 
the U.S. Constitution.1 
 
2.5. Shared Resources & Cost-
Savings: The Imperial Valley Tele-
communications Authority came together in 
2001, to utilize  a multimillion donation of fiber 
opticware from IID.  The IID Board of Directors 
also passed a resolution to additionally provide 
the IVTA with no-cost access to their installed 
communication poles throughout the region, and 
no-cost access to other communications 
resources such as microwave tower facilities. 
This donation and grant funding obtained, helped 
the authority off to a good start.  Additionally, 
member agencies that are on board, or will  join 
in the future are expected to voluntarily 
contribute additional financial resources, cable, 
fiber and other personal property to the 
                                                 
1 Amendment IV:  asserts that no State shall 
deny any person of life, liberty or property, 
without due process, nor deny any person within 
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 Authority, which will then become the property 
of the Authority.  Each member local public 
agency will also contribute voluntarily technical 
expertise and time of their own employees to the 
Authority.  Savings will occur also via the cost-
sharing agreement related to the joint 
development, operations, maintenance and 
growth of the network by each member local 
public agency. 
 
2.6. Keeping Resources Within the 
Region: The existence of IVTA will help retain 
and recruit valuable resources within the 
Imperial Valley.  Thus the potential threat 
expressed across the nation that small, less 
advantaged communities might find their 
services being  outsourced—e.g., personnel 
management and financial services--to cheaper 
venues, outside the United States (such as in 
Asia) (O’Looney, 5, 2000). The IVTA has 
vaccinated itself against this threat by its efforts 
so far, and might well find it being a supplier of 
services,  rather than a buyer. 
 
2.7. Building Bridges for Future 
Development: In the case of the IVTA, one of 
its targets has been to create a “backbone” to 
public agencies who will be able to access 
telecommunications networks to assist them in 
providing their services to the public (Joint 
Powers Agreement).  As more public agencies 
are integrated into the fiber and aerial network, 
more citizen-customers of this county will, 
naturally be benefited, but it is also anticipated 
that with such a push from IVTA,  each agency, 
itself, will leap forward to additional creative IT 
cost-effect, reliable, customer-service efforts. 
  
2.7. System Integrity and Protections:  
A number of guidelines safeguarding the 
integrity of the system are in place.  Here the 
IVTA is concerned with protection of 
constitutional rights of privacy,  safeguarded by 
the 1st, 4th, and 14th Amendments.  These issues 
of privacy center around individuals as well as 
government itself.  With regard to the latter 
point, government information that has been 
inaccessible in the past is becoming more and 
more available—internal memoranda, records, 
executive meeting sessions, and other electronic 
files that may contain sensitive, confidential, or 
potentially damaging information.  Thus, the 
agency sees part of its mission as monitoring the 
system to see that it is not used inappropriately.  
Additionally, the agency is concerned with 
maintaining the integrity of the system itself.  In 
particular the agency seeks to provide 
precautions to ensure that the 
telecommunications network is not overloaded 
or excessively utilized.   The IVTA has set up 
guidelines to ensure that the applicable 
governmental laws and regulations are not  
violated.  The agency has also set up procedures 
for the removal of any member agency that has 
failed to meet its obligations under the agreement 
with IVTA.  
 
SUMMARY:  
 
Bureaucracy, which has been associated 
with stability, slowness, and limited outputs, has 
taken on its antithesis—flexibility, speed, and 
expansion of outputs in the electronic age. While 
criticisms still remain about issues like 
democracy and access in this less-advantaged 
community,  new focus on these issues by the 
IVTA will likely help to accommodate these 
vital values into 21st century local government in 
the region. 
 
 …. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY:  
Brannan, A., and C. Cornett, E-Government in 
California, California Legislative Analyst 
Report, State of California, January 24, 2000. 
 
Burris, B. H., Technocracy at Work, 1993, State 
University of New York, Press, Albany, N.Y. 
 
California Legislative Analyst Report, “E-
Government in California: Providing Services to 
Citizens Through the Internet,” January 24, 
2001. 
 
Castells, M., The Rise of the Network Society, 
Vol. I., 1996, Blackwell Publishers, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Colclough, G., and C.M. Tolbert, III, Work in the 
Fast Lane: Flexibility, Divisions of Labor, and 
Inequality in High-Tech Industries, 1992, State 
University of New York Press, Albany, N.Y. 
 
Dutton, W.H., Society on the Line: Information 
Politics in the Digital Age, 1999, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.  
 
Everard, J., Virtual States:  The Internet & The 
Boundaries of the Nation State, 2000, Routledge, 
N.Y. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
  
Frissen, P.H., Politics, Governance and 
Technology:  A Postmodern Narrative on the 
Virtual State, 1999, translated C. Emery, 
Cheltenham Publishers, U.K. 
 
Heeks, R., Reinventing Government in the 
Information Age, 1999, Routledge, U.K. 
Http:www.centerdigitalgov.com/center/Final-
Rank.doc. 
 
Isaac-Henry, K., “Management of Information 
Technology in the Public Sector,” in Painter, C. 
and C. Barnes, (eds.),  Management in the Public 
Sector, 1997,  International Press, London, U.K. 
 
Lefebvre, L.A., E. Lefebvre and P. Mohnen, 
Doing Business in the Knowledge-Based 
Economy, 2000, Kulwer Publishers, Boston 
 
Lefebvre, L.A. and E. Lefebvre, Management of 
Technology & Regional Development in the 
Global Environment, 1995, P. Chapman 
Publishers, London. 
 
Loader, B. D.,ed., Cyberspace Divide: Equality, 
Agency and Policy in the Information Society,  
1998, Routledge Publishers, London . 
 
 
NAPA,  Business Process Reengineering, 1994, 
National Academy of Public Administration, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
O’Looney, J., Local Government On-Line:  
Putting the Internet to Work, 2000, Management 
Association Publication, Washington, D.C. 
 
Schiller, H.I., Information Inequality:  The 
Deepening Social Crisis in America, 1996, 
Routledge Publishers, N.Y. 
 
Tan, M. and M. Igbaria, eds.,  The Virtual 
Workplace, Idea Group Publishers, Hershey, 
U.S.A. 
 
Tapscott, D., Growing Up Digital:  The Rise of 
the Net Generation, 1998, McGraw-Hill, N.Y. 
 
The Little Hoover Commission, Better.Gov: 
Engineering Technology—Enhanced Gover-
nment, State of California, November 2000.  
 
The Emerging Digital Economy II, U.S. 
Department of  Commerce,  June 1999. 
 
  ….. 
 
 
APPENDIX I: 
All states have some form of e-
government in place. States have been 
ranked by their digital readiness in a 
survey, the results of which are 
presented below.  This survey was 
conducted by three entities:  The Center 
for Digital Government, the Progress 
and Freedom Foundation, and 
Government Technology Magazine 
(http: 
www.centerdigitalgov.com/center/Final-
Rank.doc): 
 
State  Points Rank  
  
Washington     93.0     1   
Kansas                   89.0     2 
Alaska        84.1     3 
Illinois      81.5     4   
Utah       80.1     5 
New Jersey     79.1     6   
Georgia      78.8     7 
Wisconsin     77.3     8 
Maryland     77.1     9   
Texas      76.4   10 
Michigan     75.8   11 
Pennsylvania     73.4   12 
Idaho      70.4   13   
Nebraska     69.8   14   
South Dakota     69.8   15 
Virginia      69.4   16 
Arizona       68.0   17 
Louisiana     67.5   18   
Nevada      66.4     19   
Iowa      65.8     20 
Colorado     65.1   21 
Missouri     63.9   22   
Oregon      63.4   23 
West Virginia     63.3     24   
Florida      63.1   25   
Indiana     62.9   26 
Connecticut     62.4   27 
Massachusetts    62.4   28 
Kentucky     61.3   29 
Ohio       60.8   30 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 Arkansas    60.1   31 
South Carolina    59.8      32 
New York    58.4      33 
Montana    57.1   34 
Maine     57.0    35 
North Carolina    57.0   36 
Minnesota    56.1   37 
Mississippi    56.1   38 
Delaware    54.8   39 
Tennessee    51.0   40 
New Hampshire    50.9   41 
California    49.6   42 
Hawaii     49.6   43 
Okalahoma    47.1   44 
Wyoming    47.0   45 
Vermont    42.3   46 
North Dakota    41.1   47 
New Mexico    40.0   48 
Alabama    35.3   49 
Rhode Island    30.0   50  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
