Wavelet based Compression of Segmented Images using 
Baseline Non-segmented Approach 
Image 
Radoslav Vargic 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and 
Information Technology 
Slovak Technical University in Bratislava 
IlkoviEova 3, 8 12 19 Bratislava, Slovakia 
varni&ktl. elfstuba.sk 
+ Segments + DWT 
Abstract- We present an approach to compression of 
segmented images using wavelet transform followed by 
modified baseline coder. Baseline coder processes the 
spectral values from all segments in non-segmented 
style, Le. together in one big block. Proposed scheme 
has comparative results as existing methods and retains 
its effectivity as the number of image segments 
increases. 
1 Introduction 
For region and object oriented methods there are 
needed algorithms that can deal with arbitrarily shaped 
image regions, called segments. In this article we 
approximate the texture in segments using discrete wavelet 
transform (DWT) [4] defined on the rectangle 
circumscribing the given image segment. To partition the 
image into segments (see Fig. 1) we used an unsupervised 
segmentation method for color - texture regions used in [ 11. 
In [5] and [6] is each segment coded separately and 
with bit budget proportional to segment size using coding 
scheme on Fig. 2. The SPIHT [3] algorithm we can use for 
coding of segments in non iterative process [6] or iterative 
process 151 which yields about 1% better compression 
results. In the next we compare our results to the results 
presented in [5] which contain also a baseline approach [4]. 
C) d) 
Fig. 1: Original Baboon image a) and masks for b) 5 e )  12 d) 30 
segments 
0-7803-7852-0/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 
Jh Prochaska 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and 
Information Technology 
Slovak Technical University in Bratislava 
IkoviEova 3, 812 19 Bratislava, Slovakia 
prochaskakilktl. elfstuba. sk 
Fig. 2: Basic scheme for coding ofsegmented images 
Our approach uses the above coding scheme with major 
modification. The spectrums of all segments are “joined” 
before compression. This spectrum is then coded with 
modified baseline algorithm in one step. The “joining” 
process is discussed later. 
1.1 Baseline algorithm 
In Baseline algorithm [4] are the spectral coefficients not 
partially sorted like in SPIHT [3]. Algorithm relies on the 
natural fading of the energy of spectral coefficients across 
the subbands. The tendency to transmit the more important 
information fust is expressed also at the subband level The 
wavelet spectrum is quantized where each subband is 
handled separately. Entropic and run-length coder is used 
to code the resulting symbols. 
2 Modifications in Baseline coder for 
segmented images 
When we code the image segments using Baseline 
algorithm separately [6] the coding overhad grows linearly 
with the number of segments. Advantage of that approach 
is, that the segments are isolated, so we can decode them 
individually. Transmission errors are not spread between 
the segments too. 
To achieve higher coding efficiency for images 
with many segments we propose to join the spectral 
coefficients together according to their decomposition 
level. So input for the baseline algorithm are goups of 
Coefficients that express the image details at the same 
resolution. For coding pourposes we adapted the 
implementation available 60m [4]. 
First, set of coefficients are created 6om the subbands of 
each segment on the same detail levels. Example ofjoining 
three square-like segment spectrums (Fig. 3) is 
demonstrated in Fig. 5. 
Then are the DC components stored and detail 
coefficients passed to the Baseline algorithm, where they 
are quantized and entropy coded. 
955 IClT 2003 ~ Maribor. Slovenia 
Fig. 3 : Example of 3 segments with sizes 8xS,4x4 and 2x2 and joining of 
their L X  components 
Of course not all coefficients from each segment 
are enclosed to the joining process. Circumscribing a 
rectangle around each segment, results in black ares e.¶. in 
areas which a not point of interest in terms of current 
segment. 
To determine which spectral coefficients should 
be used in the joining process we have to choose the 
appropriate spectral coefficients, that spatially contribute to 
our image segments. For this purpose we used a spectral 
segment validity mask in the form depicted in Fig. 4, which 
has nonzero value for valid coefficients (coefficients that 
contribute to the segment). To produce the validity mask 
we can use the down sampling approach as in [2] or more 
rigorous and slower approach as in 161 which assures no 
information loss at this stage. 
We tested both approaches for creating the 
validity mask. It turned out that the approach from [Z] gives 
with proposed algorithm a little bit better results. 
3 Comparison and Results 
The SPIHT approach in [SI (further referred as SPIHT-S, 
which means SPlHT with separate block coding) was used 
without arithmetic coding. This gave always a better image 
quality than a baseline approach with completely separate 
coding of blocks. 
So we will compare our modified-baseline approach 
results to SHIHT-S. There was no interest to compare the 
absolute coding efficiency of both algorithms. We wanted 
mainly to test the behaviour of these two approaches as the 
number of segments grows and/or bit rate decreases. 
For “Baboon” and down sampled “Lena” image are the 
numerical results shown in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2. 
Fig. 4 : Segment “Baboon’s nod’ and it’s spectral segment validity mask 
L 
a) Joining of DC components 
L 
b) Joining ofdetails at level I 
I1 
Fig. 5 : Example of joining the DC coefficients and details at different 
decomposition IovcIs. Onb the biggest segment contributes to all detail 
levels. 
956 
Tab. 1. Resulting PSNR values for both methods when coding Baboon 
[256x256] image using various segment numbers and bit rates. Used DWT 
with FBI 917 filters 
524 8. 
U, 
[L 
23 2- 
I 0.15 I 0.25 I 0.5 I 1 I 
.................. SPIHT-S at 1 bpp 
ModEC at Ibpp 
SPItf-S at 0 15bpp 
ModEC at 0 I5bpp 
............ 
1 ModBC I 21.87 I 22.40 I 23.42 I 26.1 
Tab. 2. Resultine MSE values for both methods when codine imaee Lena 
[256x256] imageusing various segment numbers and bit rates. Used DWT 
with FBI 917 filters 
n 
0 --. ................... .x.. ......... .x 21.61 h z  
50 
201 
01234 IO 20 30 40 
number of segments 
Fig. 6. Coding of segmented baboon Image, both SPITH 
and BC have approximately the same behaviour when 
number of segments is increased or bit rate is changed 
When computing compression ration we take not in 
account the information amount needed to code segment 
boundaries. This amount is for both compared methods the 
same, thus irrelevant for comparison purposes. Some 
numerical results from Tab.1 are graphed in Fig. 6. The 
results show that modified baseline approach gains on 
performance against SPIHT-B as the number of segments 
grows. The decay difference in the sense of PSNR is most 
remarkable at the higher bit rates. Simulations on other 
segmented images showed similar behaviour. Fig 5: Example ofjoining the DC coefficients and details at 
different decomposition levels. Only the biggest segment 
contributes to all detail levels. 
957 
4 Conclusion 
In this article we modified the baseline algorithm [4] to 
effectively code the image segments using wavelet 
transforms. As the number of segments grows, PSNR falls 
down slower than in SPIHT-S algorithm. From certain 
number of segments (depending on image) is presented 
approach with modified baseline algorithm more effective, 
regardless of the initial advantage of SPIHT-S algorithm. 
References 
[I ]  [ l ]  T. Karlubkova et al., New Scheme for Region 
Approximation and Coding with Shape Independent 
Transform, Proc. Photogrammetric Computer Vision 
(PCV’O2). Graq Austria, 2002, ISPRS Commision 111, 
Vol. 34, Part 3B, ISSN 1682-1750, pp. 214-217. 
[2] [2] Y. Liu, S. Ranganath, X. Zhou, “Wavelet-based 
lmaee Seement Representation”, Electronics Letters, 
Vol. 38,No. 19,pp. 1091-1092,2002, 
[3] [3] A. Said, Pearlman, W., A. A New Fast and 
Efficient Image Codec Based on Set Partitioning in 
Hierarchical Trees, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and 
Systems for Video Technology, vol. 6, pp. 243-250, 
June 1996 .-- 
[4] G. M. Davis, ”Baseline wavelet transform coder 
construction kit,”, 1997, (www.cs.dartmouth.edu 
!-gdavis/wavelet/wavelet,hhnl) 
[5] Vargic, R. Wavelet-Based Compression of Segmented 
Images, Proceedings of EC-VIP-MC 2003, Zagreb, 
Croatia, 2003, pp.347-351 
[ 6 ]  Vargic, R., Prochaska J.: Zerotree and baseline 
approach for image segment compression , 
RTT2003,CastA-Pila. Slovak Republic, 2003, pp.263- 
265 
.. I . .: > ,...*-- 
958 
