Avoiding Deterministic Thinking 
Prof. Clinton J. Andrews 
E.J. Bloustein School of Planning & Public Policy, Rutgers University 
33 Livingston Ave #302, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901 USA 
tel +1-732-932-3822 x721, fax +1-732-932-2253 
c.j.andrews@ieee.org 
 
Abstract–Efforts to reduce crime and improve urban safety 
frequently falter because of deterministic thinking. A 
determinist—you’ll meet some here—simplifies reality by 
explaining results as entirely due to a single, influential factor. 
Environmental determinists, for example, assure us that they can 
design out crime with defensible spaces and lots of foot traffic, 
while ignoring contributory socioeconomic factors. Social 
determinists call for fairer public policies and doubt that better 
technologies and urban designs really can make a difference. 
Technological determinists instead assure us that innovations 
such as networked video surveillance are imminent and 
inevitable, regardless of their desirability. Yet they often gloss 
over unresolved analytical, data sharing, and privacy issues that 
will delay implementation by years. Advocates of disparate 
solutions talk past one another. 
This paper presents reasons for avoiding the trap of 
deterministic thinking in urban safety discussions, and ways to 
do so. In brief, simplified explanations and specialized efforts are 
necessary for implementing improvements, but so is a balanced 
view of the big picture. Integrated and coordinated approaches to 
crime prevention can help bring that big picture into view. 
Additionally, we need to focus constructive attention on the limits 
to our solutions, tempering our enthusiasms without inducing 
paralysis. I mine well-established literatures on determinism in 
social studies of science and technology, in urban planning, and 
in decision science for additional useful insights. 
 
Social studies of science and technology have evolved from 
the technological determinism of Ellul’s Technological 
Society, through the critical ethos of Winner’s Autonomous 
Technology, to the socioeconomic determinism of Florman’s 
Civilized Engineer, and beyond to a recognition that social, 
economic, political and technological factors interact and 
intertwine to produce the outcomes we see on the ground. The 
prescriptive literature currently focuses on better ways to 
assess technologies, where “better” has both substantive and 
procedural meanings. 
Substantively, we now recognize that new technologies are 
always embedded in existing sociotechnical systems, that the 
time scale of change is often slow, that both public policy and 
private entrepreneurs play key roles in the innovation and 
diffusion process, that the life cycle stages of an innovation 
have distinct sectoral and geographical impacts, and that there 
are always unintended consequences. Procedurally, the votes 
of consumers in the marketplace are crucial, but strategic 
financial, political, and legal decisions also affect the success 
of an innovation. Transparent technology assessment efforts 
involving lay citizens and experts to characterize unintended 
consequences could beneficially supplement old-fashioned 
market analyses for innovations. 
Urban planning emerged as a field from roots in public 
health, infrastructure development, and urban design, with its 
early practitioners coming mainly from the ranks of 
architecture and civil engineering. These planners were 
typically very design oriented, and as such, they had much 
faith that their designs could unilaterally improve the human 
condition. A parallel group of social reformers endorsed the 
means of planning, albeit for more utopian ends. As the urban 
renewal experiments of the 1940s-60s unfolded, appreciation 
grew that larger social and economic forces often constrained 
or indirectly affected urban design outcomes. In response, as 
the Journal of the American Planning Association has 
documented, social scientists began to infiltrate the ranks of 
urban planning professors, and today, urban planning is often 
seen as a form of applied social science, with a dash of urban 
design thrown in. In the security dimension, Jacobs’ design-
oriented prescription for “eyes on the street” now shares 
planners’ attention with Young’s social-theoretical call for 
“differentiated solidarity.” The pendulum may have shifted 
too far away from design, and the planning academy is 
beginning to redress the balance. Hopkins nicely characterizes 
the essence of urban planning today as involving 
interdependent, future-oriented decisions by both public and 
private interests. In other words, design decisions are always 
nested within policy decisions and particular cultural, social, 
political, and economic contexts. 
Design, policy analysis, and decision support are all 
intellectual activities that simplify reality to make problems 
tractable. The challenge is to simplify appropriately for the 
decision context. Once again, there are both substantive and 
procedural aspects to the challenge. Theory and experience 
prescribe the following: seek broad input early, evaluate a 
wide range of alternative solutions against multiple criteria, 
develop synergetic packages of options rather than single 
solutions, design adaptability into solutions so that they can 
respond to changing circumstances, and exhibit humility 
because there is so much we don’t know about our world and 
the preferences of our fellow citizens. 
Taken together, these literatures support a skeptical view of 
any deterministic claims, while acknowledging that we still 
need to rely on simple models to make practical decisions. I 
close with specific recommendations for the crime prevention 
community: expect surprises; build stronger links among the 
technological, urban design, and social science communities; 
  
and better balance the procedural and substantive dimensions 
of proposals. 
REFERENCES 
Andrews, Clinton (2002) Humble Analysis: The Practice of Joint Fact-
Finding, Praeger, Westport, CT. 
Ellul, Jaques (1964/1950) The Technological Society, Alfred Knopf, New 
York. 
Florman, Samuel (1989) The Civilized Engineer, St. Martins Press, New 
York. 
Hopkins, Lewis (2001) Urban Development: The Logic of Making 
Plans, Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Jacobs, Jane (1962) The Death and Life of Great American Cities, Cape, 
London. 
Winner, Langdon (1978) Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-control 
as a Theme in Political Thought, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Young, Iris Marion (2000) Inclusion and Democracy, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
