Introduction to the Minitrack on Data Warehousing 
 
Barbara Wixom 
McIntire School of Commerce, The University of Virginia 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
bwixom@mindspring.com 
 
Paul Gray 
.School of  Information Science, Claremont Graduate  University  
Claremont, CA 91711 
paul.gray@cgu.edu 
 
Hugh J. Watson 
Terry College of Business, The University of Georgia 
Athens, GA 30602-6256 
hwatson@arches.uga.edu 
 
Data warehouse repositories and their applications 
offer great potential for understanding and managing 
customer relationships, uncovering important patterns and 
trends n corporate data, and supporting comprehensive 
performance measurement systems, such as Balanced 
Scorecards. The papers in this year’s data warehousing 
minitrack investigate how data warehousing can be used 
to support these kinds of initiatives and how data 
warehousing can be made more effective technically.  
In “Method for Demand-Driven Information 
Requirements Analysis in Data Warehousing Projects,” 
Robert Winter and Bernard Strauch present a 13-step 
methodology for analyzing the requirements of data 
warehousing projects. Expert interviews were conducted 
and used to develop the methodology, and parts of the 
methodology were applied successfully in data warehouse 
projects. 
Steven Hanes investigates approaches and tools used 
to collect, manage, and deliver institutional metrics to the 
senior command of the United States Marine Corps in his 
paper, “Institutional Metrics for the United States Marine 
Corps.” The paper explores current performance 
management strategies and tool architectures, with 
emphasis on the balanced scorecard approach and the 
commercial, off-the-shelf software that supports it. The 
initial evaluation framework is presented. 
The third study in this minitrack focuses on customer 
relationship management and describes a customer-
oriented architecture for data warehousing. Hans-Georg 
Kemper and Phil-Lip Lee describe two kinds of customer 
relationship management initiatives – analytical and 
operational – in “The Customer-Centric Data Warehouse 
– An Architectural Approach to Meet the Challenges of 
Customer Orientation.” They suggest how the 
incorporation of an operational data store into a data 
warehouse environment helps to support combined 
analytical and operational needs. 
 As applications for data warehousing continue to 
grow, the amount of data that organizations must 
manipulate and store increases. The next two papers 
address some of the challenges with large volumes of 
warehoused data. The first paper, “Ad-Hoc Association 
Rule Mining Within the Data Warehouse” by Svetlozar 
Nestorov and Nenad Jukić, offers a new data mining 
framework that is tightly integrated with data 
warehousing technology. The framework analyzes star 
schema organized data; leverages the processing power of 
the data warehouse; queries data across the data 
warehouse; and incorporates varying levels of data 
aggregation. 
 A second way to manage large volumes of data is 
through virtual data marts, an approach presented by 
Leslie Hodge and Charles Milligan in “Managing Virtual 
Data Mart(s) With Metapointer Tables.” Hodge and 
Milligan describe a data management method that enables 
users to access relevant subsets of large data populations 
that reside in different data warehouses.  
 It is challenging for academics to stay abreast of 
changes to teach and research effectively in the data 
warehousing field. Teradata, a division of NCR, working 
closely with academics, recently introduced its Teradata 
University Network (TUN) initiative. TUN is a website 
that academics can use to find materials for data 
warehousing, DSS/BI, or database classes; to access 
knowledge and training materials from subject matter 
experts; and to connect with colleagues in the academic 
and business communities.  In the final presentation in 
this minitrack, Hugh Watson, Director of the TUN 
Advisory Board, will describe the resources available on 
TUN and how academics can benefit from its offerings. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
