A Web Based Training System 
Applied to the Critical Microelectronic Design Discipline 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) 
W. John*, L. Krahn*, B. Erdem", M. Raeisi**, R. Bruning- 
'Fraunhofer JZM - Advanced System Engineering - Technologiepark 34 - D - 33100 Paderborn - Germany 
**Zuken GmbH - EMC Technology Center - Vattmannstrasse 3 - D-33100 Paderborn - Germany 
Abstract 
,Today, the design of IC, subsystems and 
systems dealing with electromagnetic problems 
(EMC) is often based on insufficient data and on 
assumptions of design constraints. 
The term EMC (Electromagnetic Compatibility) 
includes , as generally might be known, all 
actions intended to eliminate electromagnetic 
interference in electronic systems. Growing 
complexity, denser design and higher clock rates 
all lead to a substantial increase in EMC 
problems and design time. 
EMC is not commonly accepted in micro- 
electronic design. Microelectronic designers have 
the opinion that EMC has to do with electrical and 
electronic systems and mandatory product 
regulations instead of requirements to the 
integrated circuit they are designing. 
Therefore, design under EMC-constraints is a big 
challenge and requires highly skilled engineek. 
The high processing speeds and integration 
densities lead to effects like reflections, crosstalk 
on transmission lines, delta-l-noise (ground 
bounce, simultaneous switching, current spike) 
as well as to electromagnetic radiation and 
irradiation, which have to be considered when 
applying microelectronic components. Due to the 
package complexity of systems and components 
not all EMC-effects can be observed during the 
development process by measurement. 
Furthermore, measurement techniques for EMC 
analysis are greatly limited by engineering and 
financial constraints. Besides, the consideration 
of international and national standards, of legal 
and company internal requirements, considering 
EMC-constraints in the development of electronic 
products becomes vital for quality and time to 
market. Due to the complexity of the basic 
physical theory and the transformation into 
design methods and tools there is a lack of 
practical training material which is accepted by 
industry. 
In this contribution a problem specific net based 
training system applied to signal integrity analysis 
on printed circuit boards will be introduced and 
presented. The training system gains its 
particular relevance within the actual frame of life 
Iong learning (L3) initiatives. It will also be pointed 
out that for employing new development 
strategies and enviroments most effectively and 
adequate training system can be introduced in 
parallel. 
introduction 
Within the realm of the application of new 
technologies, the availability of the most recent 
knowledge is mandatory and therefore the 
intervals within acquired knowledge bases have 
to be updated become shorter and shorter. It is 
well known that EDA (Electronic Design 
Automation) tools and systems become more and 
more sophisticated, and the learning expenditure 
for the personnel is growing accordingly. This 
tendency has struck major parts of the electrical 
and electronic industry where quest for qualified 
workforce already manifests itself in the designer 
crisis. One may resume that the compound of the 
functionality of new tool generations, change of 
application areas of relevant methods due to 
technological progress and the improvement of 
the information exchange facilities lead to 
increased requirements with respect to further 
professional training. 
In order to support the professional training a 
Web based training system (WbT system) allows 
for the conservation of the existing knowledge but 
also for the extension of the knowledge base with 
respect to new problem areas. 
For obtaining the upmost flexibilty a training 
system equipped with an EDA tool interface and 
an Web based user interface has been 
developed. Therefore, the resources provided by 
the lntranet and internet infrastructure may be 
used via conventional client sewer concepts. 
Engineering efforts in order to guarantee ;he 
signal integrity of microeiectronic systems have 
been drastically aggravated due to an ever 
increasing demand for higher performence. In 
order to meet economic requirements like w x t  
reduction<< and dime to market=, new 
approaches have to be employed. The compound 
of constraints one is confronted with can only be 
' 
accounted for safisfactorjly by a systematical 
consideration of the signal integtity objectives at 
all design stages of new development strategies. 
Therefore, the fundamentals of the WbT system 
presented in this paper concentrate on the 
treatment of signal integrity issues on printed 
circuit boards as a part of an EMC-adequate 
system design. As mentioned above, the training 
environment has a user interface allowing for an 
instant call of complex numerical EDA tools - 
simulators - without requiring any simulator 
specific knowledge. Hence the user can focus on 
the effects, neither familiarity with the numerical 
methods nor with the handling is required. 
Tedious and time consuming writing of 
appropriate software input is not necessary. 
Although, in order to use the material as a self 
training course a basic mathematical as well as 
electrical understanding as provided by general 
education is required. Examples and exercises 
used within the WbT system start with the most 
simple cases and lead up gradually to cases of 
practical relevance. 
Based on the open concept and the experience 
gained with this WbT system with its underlying 
training concept dedicated towards the layout and 
circuit designer community as well as quality 
engineers, an equivalent training system 
encompassing the field of system cabling in 
automotive applications may be set-up. By the 
application of this system, cost and time 
expenditures caused by the introduction of the 
new tool environment proposed in [5] can be 
significantly reduced. 
It will be pointed out that for employing new EMC 
development strategies most effectively an 
adequate WbT system can be introduced in 
parallel. 
Support of Efficient Signal Integrity Analysis 
by a Web Based Training System 
Since for modern day product development EDA 
more and more intrudes into the EMC domain, in 
parallel to employing new development strategies 
181 the introduction of new training methodologies 
is essential in order to the effectiveness of the 
overall microelectronic system design. 
The problem specific training environment as 
discussed in this paper was developed mainly as 
a web based user interface allowing for the call of 
complex numerical EMC tools exclusively from 
the respective actual task (Figure 
Accordingly no previous knowledge 
operation of these complex simulation 
tools is necessary. 
1 - 7). 
for the 
software 
I "Z - I=--- 
I [&A-* a*lar-irJ.Ok+-*- 
Figure 1: Entrance page of EMC WbT system 
The part of the WbT system existing thus far 
focusses exclusively on topics from the signal 
integrity analysis on printed circuit boards. Next 
to e.g. mechanical and thermal aspects, the SI 
analysis represents a fundamental part of the 
physical design of digital high speed systems. 
The physical design is viewed as part of the 
development phase logic design, simulation and 
validation. 
The presented training concept is trageted 
towards layout and circuit engineers as well as 
quality ensurance engineers. The basics of the 
signal integrity problems on printed circuit boards 
are covered and some relevant design and 
analysis methods introduced. 
Tasks focussing on practically relevant issues 
provide an immediate reference to industrial 
product development. In order to use the 
software as a self training course only basic 
mathematical and electrical knowledge is 
required. 
Involved numerical software, e.g. field solver, 
which require excessive computing power may 
be provided via client server concepts, i.e. 
lntranet and Internet. These features constitute 
quite important issues for a successful 
establishment of this "new method within the 
physical system design. 
The following two pictures give an impression of 
the possibilities of the developed WbT system. 
At the entrance page (Fig. 1) one can select 
between the topics =Basics., ,>Signal Integrity.(< 
and ,)Design Rules< for example. Relevant topics 
from transmission line theory (Fig. 2) in particular 
with regard to the EMC effects ,>Reflection<<, 
0-7803-7779-61031$17 .DO 02003 IEEE. 1171 
.Crosstalk<< are taught, fundamental concepts of 
radiated emission and immunity introduced. 
si- 
U% 
~rsL&w 
**4r t * r v v b r  Irr 
++,-+a 
Figure 2: Excerpt of a theory example 
From the theory sections one may branch to 
supplementary pages, e.g. from the transmission 
*-mm - ea-rrrw-?w9RFirrqP?p-$m m 
-**w*e- 
EC1wI-i +-.I-hmbLIIIII 3 W 
Figure 4: Influence of the cross section 
tn the section >rPractice. the design 
methodologies may be applied to instructive 
examples and learned knowledge may be 
secured. The received results may be compared 
with those from the application. 
- 
parameters,- e.g. geometrical cross-secticin, 
dielectrics, -characteristic impedance, propagation 
velocity/defay, etc. 
.-- 
h&--*-- ha-**- 
lqsc .% paa-rnd%Turrt 
B.d.4 
Figure31 hteractive calculation of transmission line 
parameters 
1173 
Figure 6: Circuit behaviour before improvement 
Figure 7: Circuit behaviour after improvement 
Depending on the actual state of the knowledge 
of the user it is possible to switch between the 
section and thereby skip or review parts thereof. 
At'any time the section ,rPraCticect may also be 
extended by further examples, in particular 
individually with respect to company specific 
topics (classified material presented by a so 
called ,,Virtual Competence Center<<). 
Knowledge Representation and Web Based 
Training System 
In the following a WbT system (training 
environment) is understood as a combination of 
repiesentation possibilities of knowledge units, 
learners' facilities for navigation and content 
specific integration of external tools (e.g. EOA 
tools). The access to such a training environment 
focussed on EDA opens IC and system 
designers, R & D staff, and also students the 
chance to be trained, reactivate and enhance 
their design expertise whenever and wherever 
they want to do so. It should be highlighted that 
the Web based training process is guided 
depending on the user's individual level of design 
competence. 
To meet the minimum standards needed for the 
necessary functjunalify and moddarjty, the 
knowledge representation has to OCCUF in the net 
and standalone (CD-ROM), respectively. Clearly, 
users may locally compile knowledge units via 
the DownLoad procedure, and a PrintOnDemand 
component is also required. 
In addition to an acceptable usability and 
integrated in the training enviroment, naturally, 
the users may expect a powerful assistance via 
an OnLine tutorsystem as well as an OffLine 
certification. 
Actually, these requirements are not supported 
by today's learning platform providers [1]. The 
available platforms are neither connected to 
design environments nor provided with the 
performance needed for training activities aimed 
at mastering critical design flows. 
Composition of a WbT System 
The composition of a Web-based Training (WbT) 
system covers the complete administration of 
Web sites including the necessary functionality 
for organising the teamwork of involved parties. 
To avoid inconsistencies, and to make authors' 
interactions as easily as possible, the main goal 
of the W b f  composition is focussed on an 
automated preparation of knowledge units (text, 
graphics, videos). 
Learner 
Server rutor 
Teaching. 
supenrisillg 
Figure 8: Concept of ?he WbJ sys?em (applied for EDA 
purpose includes tool interface) 
For that, the authors require powerful tools to 
optimally accomplish their tasks, e.g. content 
preparation, WbT system compatible designs 
with suitable navigation features. 
Figure 8 shows the architecture of the conception 
which is based on a trinity of training provider, 
tutor and user. Responsible for the working flow 
is the provider. He takes care of offering 
professional courses, and their guarantee, 
maintenance, certification and also hotline 
support of them. The content provider is only 
responsible for updating and upgrading the 
content of courses. 
The tutor supervises interactively the success of 
the learner. 
Based on the learners’ feedback to course 
assistance requested from the users, the tutor is 
also involved in content preparation and 
upgrading. 
Figure 9 shows the architecture of the WbT 
system. The content editor represents content 
providers’ interface to the WbT. 
It is used for generating, processing and editing 
the content. An entry for online modification and 
updating, respectively, enables to guarantee the 
topicality of knowledge and reduces the individual 
effort. So, a much faster creation of new pages is 
achieved and the transaction for a page is 
simplified (HTML-independent). 
Basically, a WbT development platform is class 
concept based. This concept is relied’on clear 
patterns for content structuring. In this sense, the 
classes form the basis for the content generation. 
Actually, new content can be created fast by a 
multiple use of already available classes. In this 
way, the required extendibility of the system will 
be obtained. 
t 
Figure 9: Architecture of the WbT development platform 
The CuntentClass editor is used for the 
generation, the changing and the deletion of 
individual classes. It gives the Web master the 
possibility to access the class database and to 
make necessary changes. 
The Web designer creates content independent 
styles which define the appearance of the 
finalized web pages. 
1 
t 
tl 
1 
1 
E 
V 
S 
C 
s 
C 
C 
tl 
5 
E 
‘0 compose and/or change the styles of already 
!xisting classes, the WbT development platform 
)as been provided with a Style editor. Therewith, 
he globally homogeneous appearance is 
varranted (usability). 
tool Based Content Preparation 
‘o development eff icisntly a dedicated WbT 
;ystem is only possible with a sufficiently detailed 
locumentation and an adequate authoring 
;ystem. This becomes clear if the possible new 
:ontent structure (planned for a new and 
:omplete prototype of a training environment in 
he frame of the LIMA project [ZJ) has been 
inalysed (partly reuse of the exsisting WbT 
;ystem content and new content preparation): 
b 
_ .  
b 
b 
0 
General Overview 
Introduction 
Signal Integrity Issues (OnChip/OffChip) 
EMC-Analysis of Digital PC8 and Further 
Requirements (Offchip) 
EMC-Analysis of IC and Further 
Requirements (OnChip) 
Setected Practical Examples 
(OnChip/Off Chip) 
Selected Problems on PCB (EMC/SI) 
Transmission Line Parameters 
Verification of Calculated Electrical 
Parameters of Line Structures on PCB 
Measurement of EMC Characteristic of IC 
and Transmission tine Parameters 
Signal Integrity Analysis 
Introduction to the Practical Treatment of 
Reflection and Crosstalk Problems 
Practical Example (Clock Net) 
Practical Example (Backplane) 
EMC- Adequate Layout Synthesis 
Rule Development 
Methods and Tools 
EMC-Adequate System Design 
PCB Design Under EMC-Constraints as a 
Part of System Development 
Selective Aspects of EM1 
Signal Integrity OnChip LevelDefinition 
Evolution of Interconnect 
(R increase, Csub decrease, C, increase, L 
increase) 
Propagation Delay 
Crosstalk 
Crosstalk Delay 
On Chip Oscilloscope 
EMC OnChip Level 
Basic Principles 
EMC Issues 
- Measuring Emission and Susceptibility 
- IC Floor Plan for Improved EMC 
- Models for EMC Simulations 
- Interconnect Design on Chip Level. 
At the moment, there is no comprehensive 
authoring system with distributed preparation of 
content units, structure editors for composing 
modularly usable knowledge units, and 
administration facilities. However, only an 
authoring system with these features is 
sufficiently flexible and allows the ’ ‘preferable 
division between both, the content to be created 
didactically correct and the layout to be adapted 
didacficalty acceptable (usability). 
In particular, for distributed author teams a 
software-based support has to be guaranteed. 
Basically, the authoring system needs the 
flexibility to comfortably adapt a dedicated 
application scenario to an identified target 
audience. That means, the facilities for 
knowledge presentation (navigation system, 
knowledge density, etc.) have to be available in a 
variable manner. For instance, only a restricted 
navigation may be possible for beginners. In this 
case the retrieved content is provided via a 
stronger restricted sequence of the training steps 
than in the case of a free navigation for users 
with an advanced knowledge background. Con- 
sequently, the knowledge units for beginners and 
advanced users, respectively, can be quite 
similar from the content point of view, whereas 
the didactic preparation of the knowledge transfer 
and its presentation show clear differences. 
The knowkdge generator of the WbT 
development platform has to settle the demanded 
functionality mentioned above. Provided with the 
facilities of transferring multimedia-based 
applications, at least, it generates the knowledge 
presentation expected from the user. 
An other useful additive to support the content 
preparation efficiently is the introduction of a so 
called taxonomy 121. 
For a better understanding during the work to set 
up new training units the tasks which have to be 
fulfilled are typically divided into subtopics. This 
subdivision can be mapped onto a so called 
taxonomy. 
Content topics as given above can for instance 
look like the example of a taxonomy shown in 
figure 10. They are further subdivided into theory 
and parametric analysis. Then the subtopics 
fol(ow, which more or less supplement each 
other. 
0-7803-7779-6/03/$17.00 2003 IEEE. 4 175 
The structure is flexible and can optionally be 
extended during the advancement of a training 
envirGment, e.g. a subdivision into items 
concerning the respective new training unit ~n 
be carried out. Also the development of complety 
new WbT systems (inhouse use with classified 
content parts for example can profit from the 
existing taxonomy because the basis is the 
same). For this the taxonomy has to extended 
respectively. 
This taxonomy also forms the frame for the 
training platform. From the viewpoint of the 
update of a training platform it will be possible to 
acquaint oneself with new and existing topics 
faster and more comfortably. Authors which are 
not directly involved into the update process thus 
can intervene and help with the update work 
within a short period of time. Thus, bottleneck 
situations can be decreased or even prevented. 
Reusabbparts can be used in other dedicated 
training platform with low efforts only requiring a 
few changes. 
EDA Tool integration 
This section describes the basic structure of the 
EOA tool component of the system, and the 
detailed way in which various parts of the WbT 
system application will interact with the EDA 
tools. 
The following diagram shows the way to use EDA 
tools as part of the dedicated WbT system. 
The EDA tool input data would typically be a 
sampte description of a typicat circuit 
configuration, with values defined by the user. 
The output would be a set of results values, or a 
picture showing graphical results of the operation. 
The EDA tool input data may be generated in one 
of the following ways: 
4 8y  the client-side program, using an 
internet-standard downloadable program, 
such as one written in java. 
By the client-side program, using a plug-in 
program, such as a Visual Basic or 
Visula C++ program, which has been 
previously downloaded and installed on 
the client machine. 
By the client program generating 
parameterised data and sending this to 
the server-side program for processing 
into the EDA tool input format. 
The EDA tool output data would be generated 
from the EDA tool and processed by the sewer- 
side program to create the relevant output page 
for display on the client program. 
. . . . . . . . . .. .. 
Figure 10: Example of a typical taxonomy 
This would normally take the form of numerical Conclusion 
values, tablesor pictures of results. The high performance required for advanced 
electronic systems can often only be achieved 
with IC-based solutions. The high processing 
speeds and integration densities lead to parasitic 
effects like reflections, crosstalk, etc. as well as to 
m ~ f * ;  dam W ~ T  Syst" electromagnetic radiation and irradiation. To 
Devs,opr(s) come up with marketabte products these effects 
have to be considered within the design process. 
Due to the complexity of the theoretical basics 
and the problems to assimilate them to the 
design methods and tools, the design under - - - - - - - - - - - - - electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) constraints 
is a great problem and requires highly skilled 
engineers. Indeed, practical training and material 
mature to be accepted in industry are missing. 
Therefore, for the application of new technologies 
with ever shorter lifecycles, the availability of the 
most recent knowledge is mandatory. The 
Responsibllity of 
WbT 
fromERAfo0l 
~spons~llityofml 
EDATool kveropefls) 
Figure 11: EDA tools as part a dediated WbT system 
intervals within which acquired knowledge bases 
therefore have to be updated, become shorter 
and shorter. It is well known that software 
development tools and systems are getting more 
and more sophisticated, and the learning 
expenditure for the personnel is growing 
accordingly. This tendency affects major parts of 
the electrical and electronics industry where 
demand for qualified workforce already manifests 
itself in the designer crisis. The combined effects 
of the increased functionality of new fool 
generations, the change of application areas of 
relevant methods due to technological progress 
and the improvement of the information exchange 
facilities lead to increased requirements with 
respect to further professional training. 
The microelectronic industry and related business 
sectors are extremely innovative and knowledge 
based. Students, engineers, scientists and others 
need to develop, transfer and share knowledge. 
References 
Forrbildung im Nee Computer Zeitung Nr. 48, 
30. November 2000, p. 33 (in German) 
Proposal No. IST-2000-30140 (LIMA) 
www.eurotraininu.net 
www.medeaplus.orq 
W. John; EMC Anaiyss and Design of Micrwlectronk 
System, X. International Symposium on Theoretical 
Engineering; September 6 - 9, 1999, Magdeburg, 
Germany 
D. Vbllmecke, W. John, L. Krahn, M. Ramme, Profolyp 
einer rechnergestutzten Schulungsumgebung fur den 
8ere;ch Signal-lntegri@-Anaiys% EMV 1998 - 6. 
lntemationale Fachmesse fur Elektromagnetische 
Vertraglichkeit; February 10 - 12, 1998, Diisseldorf, 
Germany (in German) 
K .4 .  Diener, G. Elst, W. John, L. Krahn, T. Ostermann, 
A. Sauer , P. Schwarz; e-Training for Critical 
Micro8lectmnic Disciplines over the Fraunhofer 
Knowledge Network; ICL- Workshop; Villach, 
September 25 - 27,2002, Austria 
W. John; Microelectronic EMC System Design for High 
Density Interconnect and High Frequency Enu;runmenl; 
2003 IEEE lntemational Symposium on EMC, Istanbul, 
May 11 - 16 , 2003, bstanbul, Turkey (submitted for 
review) 
Acknowledgement and European Relations 
This work was supported by the Fraunhofer project FKN and 
the EU IST project LIMA (No. 30140). 
A relation to the European initiative EUROTRAINING [3], a 
successor of EUROPRACTICE in the 5" Nv programme, is 
installed by Fraunhofer Gesellschaft. FKN will benefit from 
the offer of this programme. 
Several partners of' Fraunhofer Gesellschaft have started the 
IST Accompanying Measure project LIMA (Learning 
Platfom in Microelectronic Applications) under the co- 
ordination of FhG. 
Since the partners were involved in some MEDEA projects 
and are now involved in MEDEA+, FKN could also be used 
within the Eureka programme MEDEA+ (Microelectronic 
Development for European Application, for the -coming 8 
years - 2000 to 2007). MEDEA+ is committed to cover two 
areas which are part of FKN: Education in engineering 
sciences, and Web based training. 
The White Book of the programme of MEDEA+ is available 
under [4]. 
With these connections the Fraunhofer Knowledge Network 
and the LIMA project tries to contribute to EU policies: High 
quality skills (brainware) are the basic resources of the 
Information Society. Investments in education and training 
with a massive use of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), multimedia and lntemet represent the 
strategic areas of investment for industry and government. 
Skill shortage is the major barrier for participating in a 
competitive way in ICT. 
- 
0-7803-7779-6/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE. 1 -i77 
