Introduction to the Minitrack: Data and Knowledge Management in Health Care 
Donald J. Berndt 
Information Systems and Decision Sciences 
College of Business Administration 
University of South Florida 
dberndt@coba.usf.edu 
James Studnicki 
Health Policy and Management 
College of Public Health 
University of South Florida 
jstudnic@hsc.usf.edu 
 
The delivery of health care involves a myriad of 
stakeholders, including patients, direct health care 
providers, researchers, managed care organizations, and 
third-party payers.  These stakeholders often have 
considerable differences in objectives, concerns, priorities 
and constraints, making data management in health care 
organizations a challenging endeavor.  The Data and 
Knowledge Management in Health Care Minitrack 
focuses on the evolution of the database infrastructure 
required for handling clinical, managerial, and 
population-based data in the health care arena.  The 
adoption of electronic commerce models in health care is 
making data management technologies even more critical.  
The ability to support both business-to-business and 
business-to-consumer efforts often rests on a foundation 
of database systems, along with evolving standards and 
networking infrastructures. 
This year, we have accepted seven papers from among 
ten submissions dealing with a cross section of data and 
knowledge management topics.  The first paper, “Data 
Mining in Healthcare Information Systems: Case Study of 
a Veterans Administration Spinal Cord Injury Population” 
by M. Kraft, K. Desouza, and I. Androwich, uses a neural 
network model to estimate the length of stay associated 
with spinal cord injuries.  Artificial neural networks are 
being used for many medical applications, so it is 
particularly appropriate for this session.  A unique aspect 
of their work is the use of nursing diagnosis data, which 
requires a great deal of data staging and cleansing effort.  
Typically, more readily available, but less rich clinical 
data may be used for such a project. 
The second paper, “Storage Model for CDA 
Documents,” by Z. Liang, P. Bodorik, and M. Shepherd, 
considers several design and implementation issues 
involved with handling the Health Level 7 Clinical 
Document Architecture (CDA).  In particular, the authors 
contrast an object-relational approach with a more 
traditional relational database design for storing clinical 
documents.  These types of document repositories provide 
the necessary infrastructure for efficient document 
retrieval, supporting higher level analytic and data mining 
applications. 
The third paper, “Measuring Healthcare Inequities 
using the Gini Index,” by D. Berndt, J. Fisher, R. 
Rajendrababu, and J. Studnicki, explores the use of 
economic measures of inequality in a health care data 
warehouse environment.  While the Gini index and 
related measures have been used in the health care arena, 
this work focuses on using these measures for community 
level analysis, rather than the more typical macro-level 
perspective.  The paper includes ZIP code level Lorenz 
curves for several key health status indicators in Florida. 
The fourth paper, “Does the Extended Technology 
Acceptance Model Apply to Physicians,” by W. Chismar 
and S. Wiley-Patton, considers a popular model of 
information technology adoption in the health care 
context.  This work included significant data collection in 
the field, focusing on the acceptance of Internet-based 
applications by pediatricians in Hawaii.  The results 
partially confirm the general model, but the authors 
include an interesting discussion of specific issues 
surrounding the use of the model with physicians, and 
possibly other professional users. 
The fifth paper, “Development of a Hand-held Real-
time Decision Support Aid for Critical Care Nursing,” by 
P. Fortier, S. Jagannnathan, H, Michel, N. Dluhy, and E. 
Oneill, reports on their initial efforts to provide real-time 
access for nurses to evidence-based medical knowledge, 
standardized practice guidelines, and clinical algorithms.  
The goal is to help the nurse clinician work “faster and 
smarter.” 
Similarly, the sixth paper, “An Interactive Software-
Agent Smoking Quit Program” by T. Shimoda, reports on 
initial efforts to use intelligent agent technology to tailor 
messages in smoking cessation efforts. 
Lastly, the seventh paper, “A Self-Disclosure Model 
for Examining the Role of Information Technology in 
Acquiring Socially Sensitive Personal Health 
Information” by L. Kam and W. Chismar, proposes a 
model of self-disclosure that makes explicit several of the 
critical motivating factors.  Understanding the willingness 
to disclose personal health information is important for 
designing medical Web sites and other computer-assisted 
data collection efforts. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
