NOAA's GOES R - Next Generation Satellite 
Eric J. Miller., Michael Madden**, Robert Reining**', John Linn."', and Lauraleen OConnor"'* 
ABSTRACT - NOAA's next generation Geostationary 
Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) beginning with 
GOES R is the follow-on to the GOES N-P series. GOES R 
is being developed for launch in the 2012 time frame to meet 
new requirements validated through a rigorous screening and 
verification process. It presents an opportunity to explore new 
instruments, satellite designs, and system architectures. 
NOAA's National Environmental Satellite, Data and 
Information Sewice (NESDIS) will explore if an alternative 
distributed architecture might be more cost-effective than 
continuing the current philosophy of combining all instruments 
onto one big spacecraft. 
GOES R improvements in environmental sensing instruments 
include an Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI); a Hyperspectral 
Environmental Suite (HES), capable of providing soundings 
and imagery; an Enhanced Solar X-ray Imager (ESXI); a 
Space Environment Monitor (SEM); and a Lightning Mapper 
(LM). NOAA is also investigating other possible operational 
instruments, such as a coronagraph solar Imager, and 
microwave sounder. NOAA will analyze the different 
architectures (distributed vs. consolidated), instruments (ABI, 
HES, SEM, SXI, LM) and orbits (GEO vs. MEO) to determine 
the optimal constellation coverage and communication 
configuration. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The mission of NOAA NESDIS is: l o  provide and ensure 
timely access to global environmental data and information 
services from satellites and other sources to promote, protect, 
and enhance the Nation's economy, security, environment, 
and quality of life." (NOAA NESDIS Mission Statement, 2000) 
The GOES R CONOPS document is designed to give an 
overall picture of the "who, what, where, when and why" for 
the next generation of geostationary satellites. This document 
is a system-level piece of the NESDIS 2012 - 2020 CONOPS 
(Figure 1). The CONOPS and system architecture are 
conceptual documents that provide a discussion on the 
missions being addressed, a system description 
(characteristics and capabilities), and a breakdown of 
operational criteria to include: 
userneeds 
launch, sustainment, and on-orbit operations of space- 
based platforms 
ground system operations 
data ingest 
product generation, analysis and dissemination 
archive, access, and scientific stewardship of 
environmental data 
The GOES R CONOPS uses the same structure as the 
NESDIS 2012 - 2020 CONOPS to highlight linkages between 
segment level concepts and specific concepts for future 
geostationary 
AB1 and HES sensors Will Support CONUS Coastal Waters 
(CW) and estuaries with timely imaging and sounding. The 
CW zone is defined as the ocean waters 400 miles adjacent 
to CONUS as well as all estuaries. HES will S U D D O ~ ~  coastal . .  
water ocean color and ocean optical properties at a resolution 
of 300 meters. AB1 will support long wave IR measurements 
of sea surface temperatures (SST). 
Currently, ABi formulation studies are underway with three 
contractors. Overall systems concepts are under study 
following a Request for Information (RFI) from contract 
sources and meetings with industry regarding the overall 
approach. In the summer of 2003, procurement activities for 
concept studies for the HES were initiated with several 
contractors. Similar activities will be inaugurated for other 
instruments, ground systems and spacecraft concepts. This 
paper provides the latest status of these activities as well as 
an update on its Concept of Operations (CONOPS). 
NESDIS CONOPS 
Obrervatianrlcailections 
GOES R CONOPS 
Data Archive 
Figure 1 Enterprise Hierarchy 
A. GOES R Concept 
The GOES R system will build on the NESDIS data collection 
sewices core competencies (acquisition, archiving and 
Torresponding author address: Eric J. Miller, NOAAINESDIS, assessment), expanding capabilities and functions as 
SSMCI. 1315 East-West Highway, Silver Spring MD 20910; necessary to meet user needs. The NESDIS Strategic Plan is 
e-mail: eric.miilerbnoaa.aov the road map guiding this effort. ensuring cohesiveness with 
*'Current Affiliation: UTA, Arlington VA other NOAA and NESDIS initiatives, as well as the need to 
provide for system integrity and security to ensure homeland '*'Current Affiliation: MITRE, Mclean VA 
security needs are met. **'*Current Affiliation: Mitretek Systems, Falls Church VA 
As NESDIS moves in to the future, it is also exploring new 
partnerships with industry, other U S and foreign agencies 
with the GOES R program. 
0-933957-30-0 1573 
II. OPERATIONAL NEED 
The GOES R system goals are 
Maintain continuous. reliable operational environmental, 
and storm warning systems to protect life and properly 
Monitor the earth's surface and space environmental and 
climate conditions 
Introduce improved atmospheric and oceanic 
observations and data dissemination capabilities 
(increased spatial, temporal and spectral resolution) 
Develop and provide new and improved applications and 
products for a wide range of federal agencies. state and 
local governments, and private users 
The following sections describe the operational needs and the 
requirements process, including the known shortcomings of 
the current GOES system and emerging user requirements. 
A. Shortcomings of the Existing GOES Systems 
keep-out zone period coincides with the peak of the Atlantic 
Hurricane season (see tigiires 2 and 3) 
In the following sections the shortcomings of the current 
GOES I-M and GOES N series systems are identified as a 
basis for why the GOES R system development is necessary. 
The shortcomings, covering both the space and ground 
segment. include: mission continuity; data losses; 
simultaneous hemispheric, synoptic, and mesoscale imaging; 
and data latency/timeliness. 
1. Mission Continuity 
Replacement satellites are required to sustain US 
geostationary capabilities beyond 2012. Expected mean. 
mission duration for the GOES I-M and GOES N series will 
support full mission availability through -2018. Currently 
available instrument capabilities are inadequate to meet many 
emerging requirements, necessitating the development of new 
technologies. 
2. Data Losses 
Data losses occur for several hours each day during the 
weeks around each equinox (eclipse); This i s  a result of the 
viewing geometry of the current geostationary satellites, which 
allows sunlight impingement on the optical path of the sensing 
instruments. This direct sunlight may cause a degradation of 
the radiometric response accuracy and potential permanent 
damage to the Earth-viewing detectors. To avoid such 
damage, data is not sensed nor provided during these periods 
-termed the "keep out zones." The combined impact on the 
current GOES I-M and GOES N series is a 3 to 4 hour loss of 
data for 10 to 12 days before and after each eclipse 
(around the spring and fall equinox). 
During these keep out zones.and periods, there is significant 
loss of data for National Weather'Sewice (NWS), which 
impacts critical forecasting and modeling operations. The 
spring eclipse and keep-out zone period coincides with the 
beginning of the tornado season while the.fall eclipse and 
TORNADOES BY MONTH 
-SPRING ECLIPSE 
OUT 8000 
e 
c 
6 4000 
b 
E 2000- 
'JAN M4R MAY JUL SEP NOV 
I U S  
F4&5 F2h3 FOhl 
Figure 2 Spring Eclipse and keep-out-zones 
superimposed on the toirnado season 
Atlantic Tropical Storm Formation 
Numberor storm. 1885 - 1996 
Figure 3 Fall Eclipse and keep-out-zones superimposed 
on the hurricane season. 
Periodic spacecraft maneuvers are required to adjust the drift 
and orbit of the geostationary satellites and to counteract the 
gravitational forces from the sun and the moon. The time 
needed for the current GOES I-M satellites and the GOES N 
series to return to normal operations afler such maneuvers 
may be up to 9 hours. This excessive delay is unacceptable 
for forecast and modeling operations that require and depend 
upon timely satellite data input. 
3. Simultaneous Hemispheric, Synoptic, and 
Mesoscale linaging 
The current GOES I-M and GOES-N series cannot provide 
simultaneous Hemispheric (Full Disk), synoptic (CONUS 
Regional) and Mesoscale (Rapid-Scan) imaging. They are 
unable to provide Soul:hern Hemispheric images during 
Rapid-Scan operations (invoked to support severe weather 
outbreaks) and cannot meet the temporal requirements for 
Full Disk and CONUS updates. Imaging and derived high- 
density wind products below the equator are also required 
during Mesoscale imaging. The current lack of wind 
measurement degrades performance of global forecast 
models by as much as teri percent. 
1574 
4. Data Latency (Timeliness) 
Product delivery must be done in near real-time to capture 
rapidly changing, relatively short-term events. (e.g., severe 
weather, thunderstorms, and flash floods). The usefulness 
(forecast value) of the current GOES imagery is greatly 
diminished if the images are not available for analysis by the 
forecaster before ttie start of the next image, i.e. in near real- 
time. Data latency sometimes exceeds two hours from the 
time measured until available for use at national forecasting 
centers. Reducing data latency will allow more timely and 
accurate warnings and forecasts. 
8. Improvements of GOES R 
The GOES R system is planned to operate for a period of at 
least 14 years, providing a remote sensing capability to 
acquire and disseminate regional environmental imagery and 
specialized meteorological, climatic, terrestrial, 
oceanographic, solar-geophysical and other data to central 
processing centers and distributed direct users. This section 
provides a description of the proposed system. However, the 
GOES R architectural elements identified in the following 
subsections may vary depending on the final system 
architecture concepts. Regardless of final system design. the 
following functional elements must be addressed: 
' 
Capacity. Address how the system will optimize assigned 
resources, support mission growth, handle large data 
volume, and meet contingency requirements. 
Command, Control, and Communications (C3). Address 
how the system will integrate into the existing command 
and control structure, and how it will evolve with the C3 
challenges of the future. 
Operability and Flexibility. Address how the system will 
maintain continuity of operations to assure mission 
accomplishment. Address to what extent the system will 
be self-contained. 
Survivability and Endurability. Address the level of 
disasterlconflict the system will survivelendure to assure 
mission accomplishment. 
Standardization and Interoperability. Address how the 
system will be standardized and interoperate with existing 
infrastructure. both within and outside of NESDIS. Identify 
procedural and technical interface standards to be 
incorporated into the system or operational design to 
ensure the required degree of interoperability between 
the system and operation. A system will be designed to 
conduct normalized operations and maintenance 
consistent with the mission and responsibilities delegated 
to it. Areas to address may include how standard 
commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and software 
may be utilized for mission execution and for enhancing 
commonality of replacement parts with other like units. 
Address considerations for government-off-the-shelf and 
non-developmental item (NDI) hardware and software. 
This commonality of hardwarelsoftware will enable 
systems with compatible andlor similar missions to share 
the same resources. 
Reliability, Maintainability, and Sustainability. Address 
any reliabilitylmaintainability issues that may include 
single point failures, common maintenance support, and 
operation & maintenance (O&M) or life cycle costs. 
Manpower, Basing, and Program Management Structure. 
Address basing and manning constraints and identify 
expected program management structure. Areas to 
consider may include automation to minimize manpower 
requirements and cooperation with other government 
agencies to take advantage of economies of scale. 
Facility considerations must also be addressed. 
Product Development. Data and Product Distribution, 
and Archive and Access of saved data, products and 
user interfaces. 
From an architectural perspective, the GOES R system will 
consists of six segments: 1) Space; 2) Launch Support; 3) 
Command. Control, and Communications (C3); 4) Product 
Generation and Distribution (PGGD); 5) Archive and Access; 
and 6) User Interface. While the GOES R Space, Launch 
Support, and C3 Segments will be new assets and unique to 
GOES R, the PG&D, Archive and User Interface Segments 
will build on existing operational segments that will be 
modified to support the GOES-R series. Applied research will 
interface with all of the above segments. Figure 4 provides a 
GOES R Segment overview 
036ERVATONS h 
NEEDS CtKLrmONS 
GOES R 
Conrtellatio" 
M I S T ,  WTA PROWCT 
OE*Ewnow a d  'U DiSEU!JUWM m H m  a ACCW C l V  ,/<, 5 ", P ,. 
Figure 4 GOES R Segment Overview 
111. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
A. Distributed Architecture 
One of the possible differences with this next generation 
satellite will be the distributed architecture concept. GOES R 
could benefit from a new more flexible distributed system 
1575 
architecture. Distributed architecture differs from the current 
consolidated architecture, as sensors, communications and 
services are deployed across numerous satellites. Distributed 
architecture would enable NOAA to realize the benefits of 
prolonged satellite life. Satellites equipped with one as 
opposed to two frontline sensors (AB1 and HES) would have 
longer mean mission durations (MMDs) because fewer 
components allows for greater reliability. In addition, 
separating components (sensors. communications, and 
services) increases technology infusion flexibility and 
improves sparing strategy. In the event of a sensor failure or 
an infusion opportunity. N O M  would replace only those 
components requiring replacement. 
The optimal GOES R architecture will be evaluated by a 
twelve-month, industry led, architecture study. Options 
include varied communications alternatives. Figure 5 depicts 
an example of the GOES R distributed architectures. The 
inclusion of Mid Earth Orbit (MEO) for communications and 
services is also a consideration and would enable GOES R to 
support other missions and provides transition to NOAA's 
concept of a Global Observing System. 
WEST EASl 
comm 
Figure 5 Distributed Architecture example'with separate 
comms 
I. Space Segment 
The Space Segment will consist of the spacecraft and its 
meteorological, oceanographic, terrestrial, space, solar, and 
environmental monitoring sensors. in addition to other 
systems for surface data collection/location/distribution and 
search and rescue. All sensed data will be transmitted at its 
optimum resolution to the Command and Data Acquisition 
(CDA) sites, delivered to the NESDIS Product Generation and 
Distribution (PGBD) Segment and retransmitted for direct 
readout users, under the control of the C3 Segment. The CDA 
segment will geo-locate and calibrate the raw data  to^ Level 
IB. Ancillary data and other satellite data will.be merged to 
create Level 2 data products. The PGBD will distribute level 
IB, Level 2 and higher data to both users and archive facilities 
as required. Real-time data will ' also be continuously 
rebroadcast to direct readout users within the satellite field of 
view. In summary, the Space Segment could support the 
following sensors, equipment, and functions: . . 
Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI) 
Hyperspectral Environmental Suite (HES) 
Space Environment Monitoring (SEM) 
o Sounder and Imager 
Enhanced Solar X Ray Imager (ESXI) 
Instruments of Opporlunity (100) 
. Lightning Mapper (LM) 
o CoronagraphSolar Imager 
o Microwi,ve Radiometer 
o Data Cc'llection System (DCS) 
o GOES Fle Broadcast (GRB) 
o Search ,and Rescue (SAR) 
o 
o Emergency Manager's Weather Information 
. Services 
Low Rate Information Transmission (LRIT) 
Network. (EMWIN) 
Other federal, state and local agencies, academia, and 
industry, on a worldwide basis, will be able to access GOES R 
series real-time broadcast: data. Broadcast capabilities of the 
GOES R series are currently under study. The issue of how 
to-perpetuate the current policy of global broadcasting of all 
processed data has not been resolved. Ending the global 
broadcast from GOES would reduce the RF requirements and 
alter the satellite design, but would severely impact low end 
users. Commercial comrrlunications satellites and the use of 
landlines are also being considered. 
C. Sensor Improvemerits 
1. Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI) 
The Advanced Baseline Imager is a new state of the art, 16- 
channel imager covering :? visible bands (0.47 pfn B 0.64 pm) 
and 14 IR bands (0.86 pin to 13.3 pm). Spatial resolution is 
band dependent. 0.5 km at nadir for broadband visible, 1.0 km 
for near IR and 2.0 km for IR. AB1 will provide three imaging 
sectors; Full Disk (FD). CONUS, and Mesoscale. Full Disk 
includes the full Earth view from space. The CONUS sector 
covers a 5000 km x 3000 km area and Mesoscale covers a 
1000 x 1000 km square at nadir. The larger AB1 field of view 
will provide additional Eaith coverage as compared to current 
GOES. Figures 6 and 7 compare the coverage between the 
current (GOES I-P) and filture (GOES R) constellations. The 
inner ellipses on Figure 7 represent HES coverage: the outer 
ellipses represent AB1 coverage. 
W Operational Spacecraft 0 On-Orbit Storage 
Figure 6 Current GOES (GOES I-P) coverage 
1576 
3. Enhanced Solar X Ray Imager (ESXI) 
The ESXI is a broadband imager capable of operating in the 
sofl X-ray to Extreme Ultra Violet (EUV) wavelength range. It 
provides full-disk solar images at high cadence around the 
clock, except for brief periods during orbital eclipse seasons. 
Available combinations of exposures and filters allows the 
coverage of the entire dynamic range of solar X-ray features, 
from coronal holes to X-class flares, as well as the estimate of 
temperature and emission measure. The operational goals 
are to: locate coronal holes for geomagnetic storm forecasts, 
detect and locate flares for forecasts of solar energetic particle 
(SEP) events related to flares, monitor changes in the corona 
that indicate coronal mass ejections (CMEs). detect active 
regions beyond east limb for forecasts, and analyze active 
region complexity for flare forecasts. 
4. Space Environmental Monitor (SEM) 
The SEM suite monitors the near-Earth particle and 
electromagnetic environment, as well as the solar EUV and X- 
ray output. Its instruments include a three-axis vector 
magnetometer, energetic particle sensors (EPS), an extreme 
ultraviolet sensor (EUVS), and a solar X-ray sensor (XRS). 
The entire set of instruments is designed to provide real-time 
measurement of solar activity, the charged particle 
environment, and the Earth's magnetic field. In addition, the 
Solar X-ray imager (SXI) and the coronagraph provide 
continuous images of the solar disk in X-ray and white light 
images of the solar corona, respectively. All SEM instruments 
shall be capable of operating and transmitting data during 
eclipses, and each [nstrument shall be capable of 
independent operation. 
5. Lightning Mapper (LM) 
The LM shall continuously map the intensity, frequency and 
location of lightning discharges over both hemispheres and 
CONUS. A GEO based LM with high spatial resolution and 
detection efficiency will be an invaluable tool in severe storms 
forecasting. LM can detect storm formulation and determine 
maturitylseverity over both land and oceans. Threshold 
hemisphere horizontal resolution shall be 8 km (with a 
objective of 4 km for CONUS). The mapper will image 500 
frames per second and capable of detecting in excess of 50 
lightning strikes per second. The mapping accuracy should 
be 1 km (goal: 100 m). The measurements would be 
disseminated in real time (within 1 min) and could thus be 
related on a continuous basis to other observable data, such 
as radar returns, cloud images, and other meteorological 
variables. 
D. Applications 
The increased resolution of GOES R (spatial, spectral and 
temporal) should benefit ocean obsewations and ocean 
sciences. Hyperspectal sounding and CW imaging will 
improve the detection of atmospheric inversions, cloud 
properties, landlsea surface properties and moisture 
gradients. Figure 9 illustrates the spatial improvements in 
hurricane coverage expected with GOES R. Table 1 
summarizes GOES R observational requirements. 
Figure 7 Increased GOES R coverage 
ABI has two imaging modes; Mode 3 and Mode 4. Mode 3 
imaging can provide 1 Full Disk Image, 3 CONUS and 30 
Mesoscale images every 15 minutes. Mode 4 can provide 30 
Mesoscale images every 15 minutes as well as a Full Disk 
every 5 minutes. Figure 8 compares GOES R Mode 4 FD 
coverage (lefl) against current GOES (right). Current GOES 
(I-Pb provides a Full Disk every 30 minutes, thereby providing 
116' the GOES R coverage in five minutes. 
Figure 8 GOES Rand current GOES 5 minute coverage 
2. Hyperspectral Enviromental Suite (HES) 
The HES is a multi channel imager and sounder instrument 
suite with three threshold tasks. HES will provide high- 
resolution Hemispheric Disk Soundings (DS) and Severe 
Weather Mesoscale (SW/M) soundings and Coastal Waters 
(CW) imaging: 
HES DS provides 10 km IR resolution from 3.7 pm to 15.4 pm 
with a one-hour refresh rate of the full disk, 62" local zenith 
angle. Visible resolution will be 1 km from a single broadband 
channel (0.4 pm to 1.0 pm). SWIM will cover a 1000 x 1000 
km square at 4 km resolution for IR and 1 km for visible from a 
single broadband channel for cloud detection. DS and SWIM 
may utilize the same IR and Visible focal planes. The total 
number of channels is still TED but will exceed 1000. 
HES CW task will provide at least 14 channels coverage from 
0.4 pm to 1.0 pm, with a 300 m visible resolution and a 1-hour 
refresh rate. CW has a goal resolution of 2 km for IR imagery. 
Coastal Waters are defined as the 400 km zone adjacent to 
CONUS. 
1577 
Fig 9 -Hurricane Coverage From GOES R vs. GOES 
~WMbl iCnWrds  
Table 1 GOES R Observational Requirements 
AB1 and HES sensors will support timely marine hyperspectral 
imaging and sounding of the following areas: CONUS; 
Hemispheric; Mesoscale; and Offshore/CONUS. CONUS is 
defined as the contiguous US., approximately 3000 km N/S by 
5000 E N .  Hemispheric coverage extends from 0 degrees 
meridian to 150 degrees East. Normal Mesoscale covers 
1000 x 1000 km, while Mesoscale over ocean covers 1000 km 
x 400 km. The Coastal Water (CW) zone is defined as those 
waters within 400 km adjacent to CONUS. Open Oceans 
(00) lies beyond the Economic Exclusion Zone (200 nautical 
miles) and Offshore/CONUS coastal and estuary waters 
covers from the shore line up to the EEZ. 
1. GOES R Ocean Requirements 
GOES will satisfy the following ocean requirements; currents, 
ocean color, optical properties, ice age and concentration, as 
well as sea surface temperatures 
a) Ocean Currents 
GOES R will measure ocean currents for Mesoscale, 
Hemispheric and CONUWOffshore. Resolution will be 2 km 
with 0.75 km mapping uncertainty over the range of 0-1.8 
kmlhour. Date Latency will be approximately 60 minutes with 
refresh rates between 3 - 6 hours. Mesocale ocean covers 
an area of 1000 km x 400 km while Hemisphere covers from 
to 0 to 150E. 
b) Ocean Color 
GOES R will meawre Ocean Color properties 
(Turbidity/Chlorophyll/Refli?ctance) in the coastal region 
(inside the EEZ). Resolution will be 300 m with 300 m 
mapping uncertainty over the range of 0-1.8 kmlhour. Data 
Latency will be 1- 3 hours hours with a refresh rate of 3 hours. 
c) Optical Properties 
GOES R will measure Ocean Optical Properties (Particulate 
absorption, Backscatter, fluorescence) in the coastal region 
(inside the EEZ). Resolution will be 300 m with 300 m 
mapping uncertainty over the range of 0-1.8 kmlhour. Data 
Latency will be 1- 3 hours hours with refresh rate of 24 hours. 
d) Sea & Lake Ice Age 
GOES R will contribute to Sea & Lake Ice Age determination 
in Hemispheric and CONUS. Resolution will be 2 km with 
0.75 km mapping unosrtainty. Date Latency will be 
approximately 3 hours with a refresh rate of 3 hours. 
e) Sea 8 Lake Ice Concentration 
GOES R will contribute to Sea 8, Lake Ice Concentration. 
determination in Hemispheric and CONUS. Resolution will be 
between 10 - 25 km, with 10 - 25 km mapping Uncertainty. 
Date Latency will be approximately 3 hours with a refresh rate 
of 3 hours. 
f) Sea 8 Lake Ice Surface Temp 
GOES R will contribute to Sea & Lake Ice Surface 
Temperature determination in Hemisphere and CONUS. 
Resolution will be 2 km with a 1 km mapping uncertainty. 
Date Latency will be apprt3ximately 3 hours with a refresh rate 
of 3 hours. 
g) Sea Surface Temp 
GOES R will contribute to Sea Surface Temperature 
determination in Coastal Zone. Resolution will be 300 m with 
a mapping accuracy less than 300 m. Date Latency will be 
approximately 3 hours with a refresh rate of 1- 3 hours. 
GOES R will contribute to Sea Surface Temperature 
determination in Hemispheric, Mesoscale and CONUS. 
Resolution will be 2 km with a 0.75 km mapping uncertainty. 
Date Latency will be appiuximately 15 minutes with a refresh 
rate of 1 hour. 
IV. SUMMARY 
The GOES R system will transition from and begin replacing 
the GOES N series beginning circa 2012. Based on new 
architecture concepts and system designs, the GOES R 
series will continue to me,st and exceed GOES mission goals. 
As part of the process to ensure that these goals are met. 
NOANNESDIS is develolsing the GOES R CONOPS to follow 
1578 
the lines of an Enterprise CONOPS. This work is a 
conceptual living document that provides linkage to the 
system-element of the 2012 - 2020 NESDIS CONOPS; to the 
N O M  and NOAA Line Office Strategic Goals; and to the 
NOAA User community's requirements. 
Sensor improvements will enable more timely ocean and 
atmospheric forecasts. Additional hyperspectral bands and 
increased spatial resolution will enable improved tracking and 
discrimination of surface temperatures, precipitation and cloud 
cover. The increase in GOES R latency will improve 
forecasts and climatelhydrology monitoring. The inclusion of 
a GEO based Lightning Mapper will provide co'ntinuous 
lightning detection over land and water. Storm seventy and . ,  
maturity knowledge will be improved by the ability to track 
lightning intensity, frequency and location from space. 
GOES R HES will measure ocean colors and ocean optical 
properties. HES will provide high-resolution (300 m) coverage 
of the CW region. AB1 will detect cloud cover, storms, and 
hurricanes. AB1 will measure currents and sea surface 
temperatures. The synergy of ABI, HES and other NOAA 
sensors will increase overall understanding of ocean 
phenomena. 
For additional information, please visit NoAA's GOES R 
webpage at http://www.osd.noaa.gov/goes_R/index.htm, 
GOES R requirements are listed in the Performance 
Requirement Document listed at fto:/iftD.osd.noaa.aov/Goes- 
R/PRD 
, 
A. References: 
Consolidated Observations Requirements List (CORL). 
Version 0.1, June 2002 
Mission Requirements Document, - l A  Draft, (MRD1). NOAA 
GOES Program Office, July 2003 
NESDIS, A Strategic Approach for the New Millennium, 2001 
NESDIS Mission Observations Requirements List (MORL), 
Version 0.1, June 2002 
N O M  NESDIS Satellite Data Pmcessing Center, 
Comprehensive Large Array-data Steward-ship System 
(CLASS) Archive and Access Requirements, July 20. 2001 
Program Requirement Document - 1 Final Draft, NOM, 
(PRDI). June 2003 
1579 
