Prorredings of the 2003 IEEE 
Internations1 Canreerenee on Robotics &Automation 
Taipei, Taiwan, September 14-19,2003 
The development of the advanced carrier system by IDC 
(Intelligent Data Career) 
M. SAMESHIMA and NKAWAUCHI T. OOMICHI 
Takasago Research & Development Center 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, LTD 
2-1-1 SHMHAMA AMI-CHO ,TAKASAGO HYOGO 676-8686 
Dept. of Machine Eng., Faculty of Science and 
Technology 
Meijo Univ 
Shiogamaguchi, Tenpaku, Nagoya 468-8502 
Japan Japan 
ABSTRACT. - This paper shows propose the 
inexpensive and flexible carrier system with the 
AGV(Automated Guided Vehicle) which is practical 
in the manufacturing process, making use of IDC 
(Intelligent Data Career) with the big capacity data 
and two-way communications. The characteristics of 
this system are “the simple and easy change of AGV 
route and number”, “easily coexistence with a 
person”. In order to verify the possibility of the 
system realization, we developed an algorithm of 
AGV traffic rule on our new concept and confirmed 
the effect of proposal system by computer simulation. 
1. Introduction 
The flexible rearrangement of the production line 
is indispensable to cope with the diversification of 
the consumer needs in recent years and the rapid 
change in the market. A forklift, a handcarfthe AGV 
(Automated Guided Vehicle) which reads the tape on 
the floor with an optical sensor, and a conveyer belt, 
and so on are used for the present carriage. But, it has 
the following problem. 
*The high personnel expenses is necessary to the 
handcart and forklift which can cany flexibly. - The AGV with an optical sensor and the conveyer 
belt make change of the line hard. 
The advance of the manufacturing process such as 
CIM and FMS needs heavy investment in a plant 
and equipment. But the flexibility will lower. 
So, we should realize the carrier system which 
1) New infrastructure of the factory should be as 
small as possible. (The use of the existent 
equipment). 
2) The factory has the equipment such as a 
forklift and a cart owrated by a human being 
satisfies the following requirement. 
2. Concept 
2.1 System Concept 
This system is composed of AGV controlled based 
on the traffic regulations, IDC put on the course, and 
the monitor. The basic construction of this carrier 
system is shown in Fig.1. This system is made up of 
the IDC on the course, the observation computer 
(PC), wireless system (PHS of the premises), AGV, a 
car such as a forklift driven by a person. 
The functions of the system and the abstract of the 
construction are shown in Fig.2. We explain each 
function and characteristics as follows. 
2.2 The function of IDC and characteristics 
Because IDC is able to reaawrite a data by 
non-touch, we can use it for the following function. 
IDC records the information of way such as a 
crossing and stop-point to its memory. 
IDC stores the data of velocity of a passed AGV 
and passage time of AGV and so on, in its memory. 
IDC transmits the memory data to AGV passing 
through it in a moment. 
1 PHS BW station] , 
“AGV has 
approached from 
A virtual running the right.” 
.line 
\.. 
\..J 
together, and the new equipment-in a part of facto6 \ is effective.. / 
As a carrier system which satisfied the above /,nfomation in the 
requirement, we propose the inexpensive and flexible TAG passage 
carrier system with the AGV which is practical in the 
manufacturing process, making use of IDC 
(Intelligent Data Career) with the big capacity data 
and two-way communications. 
0-7803-7736-2/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 2860 
Fig.1 The next generation carrier system by IDC 
Communication //-I1 p*~ 1 / 1 1  
AGV condition 
AGV condition indication 
MAP screen indication 
1 Traffic I! ' F Y d  11 
Parameter 
I I Aresult of vehicle reference 
~ ~ ~ ~~~~~ .. ....... .......... 
~ r a f i c  inramation acquisition 
Running 6 4  
Control L ~Gvmovingplm I 
Function 6 t  
AGV position estimation 
6 
3 AGV c o m m u n i c a t i o n L  
I F  I 11 
1 I Movement 
IDC communication 
Data exchange for AGV 
IDC data input 
Fig.2 The function of the system and the outline 
2.3AGV 
AGV is controlled along the running course (it is 
the address of IDC) established in advance. 
The control device of AGV has a running rule 
based on the traffic regulations and find out the 
direction of running way under the information of 
IDC. 
AGV reads the running way information such as a 
crossing, a righdturning left point and so on, every 
time it passes. Running information such as the 
velocity and time of AGV that passed in the past is 
read at the same time. And, because of shortage of 
information only with IDC information, AGV 
requires information on vehicles around itself to the 
observation PC. Then, AGV chooses the way along 
the course based on the trafic rule of it. 
2.3 Observation PC (0-PC) 
The observation PC (0-PC) estimates the position 
of vehicles and manages the position of each. Each 
AGV, a forklift and a handcart reports a position to 
the 0-PC with PHS communication at present every 
time it passes through IDC. The 0-PC records the 
position of vehicles in its map data, and sends back 
the estimated position and velocity of vehicles to the 
required vehicle. Then, the position of AGV is 
estimated by 0-PC until the next position data is sent 
from AGV. 
2.4 A wireless system (PHS) 
0-PC does not communicate with AGV in the 
constant period, hut communicates only when AGV 
passes through the crossing. 
3. Main management function 
We explain a few main management function 
called "the map data processing"," the AGV running 
control"," the IDC data processing" in this system 
3.1 Map data processing function 
A map data processing function is carried on the 
observation PC, and composed of the function shown 
in the flowchart of Fig.3. 
1)Parameter input function of the running: It is the 
function which transmits the running course to 
AGV, and a parameter such as the running start 
time and position are inputted. 
I ObservationPC I 
U 
I1 
I II 4 Communication to AGV I + I  
AGVcon ition 
information file disDlav file 
A position ofAGV gmen 
MAP display function 
Running way 
Y . l - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - >  
' ' AGV ~--------- - - - - - - - - - -~ 
Fig.3 The map data processing function 
2)Observation of AGV: "AGV position estimation" 
estimates the position of AGV by using the 
parameter of the velocity vector and the sampling 
period of the computer. "Vehicles search function" 
looks for a vehicle around the AGV, which required 
it. The latest position of AGV at the time of this 
requirement is used for the adjustment of estimation 
in the above "AGV position estimation". 
.?)Situation display function: The result that it was 
2861 
calculated with the AGV position estimation is 
recorded in the AGV state information file and the ' 
condition display file. AGV is indicated in the MAP 
display function, using the whole chart of the 
running course data and the AGV position data. 
will be able to overtake it or not. 
AGV can control it safely and efficiently by using 
a traffic rule, even if several vehicles exist in the 
running course. A part of the main running rule is 
shown in the Table. I .  
depending on the situation. 
----------------...____________________ 
Observation PC 
3.2 AGV running control function 
AGV running control function is composed of the 
function shown in the flowchart of Fig.4. The 
principal function is as follows. 
1)Running information acquisition: This manages the 
running parameter and input and output of the 
information on IDC. 
2)AGV running plan function: This function decides 
the running movement of AGV according to the 
traffic rules, using data of IDC about the running 
way and a past AGV, the information it requests to 
the observation PC about the vehicles around itself 
Rest omission 
Collision avoidance management and 
Overtaking management 
I When going straight mns, pass the side with no 
there IS vehicle which obstacle to go slowly, stopped in front ofit. 
When there is an obstacle Do not pass the vehicle in 
around it. front of itself. 
Overtaking is ossible out pass it, 
until the next &C. 
Ove+cim is not ossible Run at a velocity of AGV 
out until tfe next &c. 
Rest omission 
in front. 
IDC 
Fig.4 The AGV running control function 
3) AGV position estimation: This calculates the 
position of AGV, using the number of rotation of 
the wheel of AGV, the velocity at a comer, and the 
sampling time. 
We apply the traffic rules in the above-mentioned 
AGV running plan function. And the AGV is 
managed according to this rule as follows. 
AGV has to be slow in front of the left/right turn 
and the crossing, has to keep a distance in order to 
prevent the avoidance, AGV has to judge whether it 
' 
3.3 IDC data processing function 
IDC data processing function is composed of the 
function shown in the flowchart of FigS. The 
principal function is as follows. 
l)A data processing function for AGV When AGV 
demands a data to IDC, this function transmits the 
running road data and the past passage information 
of other AGV. And this memorizes the passage time, 
velocity of AGV that passed at present. 
IDC processes the following data, 'the running way 
information' as the characteristics of the course, and 
'the running information' which is about the past AGV. 
Some component of the above data is shown in the 
Table.2. 
4. Simulation verification 
In order to verify the above function and the 
possibility of the system realization, we substituted 
personal computer for all of IDC, AGV and so on, 
and did numerical simulation. 
It is a basis that each function is in working as the 
carrier system. But, it isn't practical if it takes excess 
time of transport because of this function, 
So, We compared the arrival time ofAGV with the 
standard time and evaluated the dispersion of the 
2862 
Matter 
t 
I Give/Take data to AGV I I 
The 
number Note 
I , I I 1  
of cases 
c angeo Num er: units 
kehnumberf caSe Ve$ty: ??i&h, %?)6 
velocity and UnltS 
Course: three kinds (AGV 6 )  
!nddforklik% iGyw3 
A person’s random occwrence 
. the course 
an cart: 
An 6 case 1-3 units each. factor 
I Input of IDC data 
A compound 
condition in 
the actual 
factory 
I I I I I 
3 case 
3 case which AGV and a 
handcart and a forklift are 
mixed in and a person occurs 
at random. 
case 
information 
FigS The IDC data processing function 
a processing place in the factory of 60m*35m 
width, the entire length of the course of AGV is 
about 36001. 
(2) System specifications: It was constructed in the 
computer system of specifications shown in the 
Table.3. A network communicates with five 
personal computers in Ethernet as shown in each 
of the Fig.6. And, each AGV- PC can simulate 
each four AGV’s. 
machine 
TYPE:PC?OOPL Slim Watch PC:one unit 
Manufacturer:IBM 
CPU:PentiumllI 5OOMHz AGV PC: three units 
Memory:l28MB Ethernet connection in 
lOh4bps between each 
0S:WindowsPS 
Condition watch PC 
lOMbps Ethernet 
I 
Table2 The structure of the IDC data 
Contents 
Course condition 
Course connection 4bit*4 
Course mask (obstacle, 
Position address IDC-PC AGV-PCI AGV-PC2 AGV-PC 
Fig.6 Network communicates 
of 
way (it is 
equivalent dead end) 4bit8 (READ) 4.2 Test case and collection data 
sign.) 
AGV i _&;/veIociiy 1 ”‘I 1 
Running Counter 4bit 
information Date Time 24bit 
(three past Car seed, Form 4,24bit 
Velocity 16bit 
inf?rmation) Movement direction (4bif 
(the next,front) 4bit) 
RJW 
Write 
(READ/ 
arrival time on each condition. The standard time is 
based on the arrival time of one AGV. 
The standard time is the arrival time, that is “Tt” 
when one of AGV runs in condition not obstructed 
around it. We compare “Tt” with “Ta” of the average 
arrival time taken in this system under the condition 
of the change in the number and course for AGV.. 
That is, we evaluated the effect of this system 
under each condition by using the rate of change dT 
for the difference dTa between Tt and Ta. 
- Running rule 
-The number, velocity, and course of vehicles are 
-Person who appear unexpectedly 
4.1 Verification condition 
changed. 
(1) factory environment : There are a warehouse and 
I 
4.3 A result of verification 
(1) Evaluation of change of the AGV number, 
velocity and course 
A rate of change dT is shown in the Table.5. 
Rate of changes dT were from 11.2% to 13.6 % 
and dispersion of dT is within 3%, except for running 
by AGV 12 units, We estimate the cause of increase 
of dT in case of AGV twelve units as follows. 
2863 
1.3% resDectivelv. Therefore, we found that the 
Case 
Fig.7 Simulation screen 
Condition (A person appears at random.) 
Handcart vel0city Forklift 
Number I (%J:f Number I dT % 
-The increase in the stop number of times that it 
faces AGV of the left priority in the crossing. 
-The increase of reduction number of velocity for 
another AVG which reduces the velocity at the 
turning right/lefi, the trifurcate road and the 
crossing. 
(2) Evaluation to the external factor 
A rate of change dT is shown in the Table.6 
I 
2 
3 
A" " 
2 3 I D 3.3 
2 5 I D 1.3 
2 3 1 E 1.5 
Case 
Condition 
Handcart AGV Forklift dT% 
Number I Number I Number 
(Ikmm) (3kmrn) ( 5 k m h )  
1 1 I I 13.9 
- 2  2 2 2 13.1 
3 3 3 3 13.9 
2864 
