Intranet-based Management of Satellite Control Center 
Operations 
Emmanuelle Maite Estroff and Duane R. Rogers 
INTELSAT 
3400 International Drive 
Washington D.C 20008 
2029447653 
emmanuelle.estroff @intelsat.int 
duane.rogers @intelsat.int 
Abstract - Operational management of a multi-vendor fleet 
of satellites requires the ability for satellite controllers and 
subsystem engineers to be thoroughly trained in each unique 
spacecraft as well as having the ability to quickly access 
accurate operational procedures and technical data. This 
challenge is especially critical within the Satellite Control 
Center at INTELSAT. 
INTELSAT owns and operates a global communications 
satellite system providing capacity for voice, video, 
corporate/private networks and Internet services to more 
than 200 countries and territories. INTELSAT owns 17 
geosynchronous satellites, and currently operates another six 
for other companies. The INTELSAT Satellite Control 
Center (SCC) operates satellites made by five different 
manufacturers, creating a unique environment in the 
management of day-to-day and launch operations. 
The Satellite Control Center Training and Intranet Services 
group is responsible for information management and 
operational system solutions to support the specific needs of 
both operations and engineering personnel. Utilizing state- 
of-the-art Instructional Systems Design models and taking 
advantage of the significant improvements in Internet 
browser capabilities, HTML, Java Script, C++, and other 
web-development tools, we provide services, tools, and 
configurable software to simplify the management of 
satellite operations. Consistent with the INTELSAT 
Concept of Operations, the Training and Intranet Services 
department has provided Intranet access over the past five 
years to support the following key operational areas: 
Control Segment Operations, Space Segment Operations, 
and Launch Operations. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
INTRODUCTION 
USERS’ NEEDS 
INTRANET-BASED SOLUTIONS 
CONCLUSIONS 
BIOGRAPHY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The International Telecommunications Satellite 
Organization (INTELSAT) owns and operates a global 
communications satellite system providing capacity for 
voice, video, corporate/private networks and Internet in 
more than 200 countries and territories. It is an international 
consortium formed by treaty in 1964. INTELSAT currently 
owns 17 geosynchronous satellites consisting of four 
different series types. In addition to its own satellite fleet, 
INTELSAT also operates another six satellites, resulting in 
a total of 23 satellites to operate. Five of the twenty-three 
satellites are owned by New Skies Satellites N.V. (NSS); 
these spacecraft are operated by INTELSAT on a temporary 
basis under contract with New Skies, in accordance with 
INTELSAT’s arm-length relationship with New Skies. In 
addition, another one of the twenty-three satellites 
INTELSAT operates is owned by GE American 
Communications. The Satellite Control Center (SCC) at 
INTELSAT is responsible for maintaining the health of all 
spacecraft, helping to ensure reliability and quality of 
telecommunication services. The SCC’ s responsibility 
begins with launch operations, continues through the life of 
the satellite, and ends with spacecraft decommissioning. 
Over the past five years, Training and Intranet Services has 
provided assistance in information management and 
operational readiness training for the SCC and supporting 
groups. 
The management of information and training services is 
critical in the operation of this large multi-vendor fleet. 
With technology enabling the move from a paper based 
system to an intranet based system, training material and 
documents have been customized to take advantage of web- 
based tools such as HTML, Java-Script, and CGI. The 
combination of intranet-based management and 
Instructional Systems Design (ISD) simplifies operations 
Ensuring a high level of reliability of critical documents 
and training needed for operations 
Automating processes, keeping information concurrent 
with the speed of operations 
Facilitating maintenance and management of 
documentation and training to make the process more 
efficient 
Reducing the amount of resources required for 
operations training 
467 
e) Centralizing training material, reference documents, 
and operational procedures for an immediate search and 
response to situations 
It is also important to note that the customized support 
Training and Intranet Services provides has some 
constraints under which it works, involving network 
security and reliability. Even under these constraints, this 
intranet-based management provides a focal point to fully 
integrate many components of operations, therefore 
ensuring safe undertaking of the spacecraft. 
2. USERS’ NEEDS 
The unique operational environment in the SCC at 
INTELSAT dictates a special set of user needs which the 
Training and Intranet Services group addresses. 
INTELSAT currently operates 23 satellites (the most 
INTELSAT has simultaneously operated is 27 satellites) 
which are part of five different satellite series, each with 
unique characteristics. This multi-vendor fleet consists of 
satellites produced by Ford Aerospace, GM Hughes, 
GWRCA, SS/Loral, and Lockheed Martin, and represents 
both spin stabilized and three-axis stabilized designs [I]. In 
addition to major differences among series, there are also 
variances within series, which further complicates operation 
of these satellites. With the introduction of each series, new 
(and different) operating and ground network systems were 
implemented. As a result, not only are there differences in 
the satellite fleet itself, but also in the ground network 
systems used to operate the fleet. Currently these different 
systems are being consolidated in a system where these 
components interface in a single integrated network. 
In addition to interacting with the satellites themselves, the 
SCC must interface with many other groups. One example 
is the six Telemetry, Tracking, and Commanding (TT&C) 
Earth Stations positioned around the world in Perth, 
Australia; Beijing, China; Pamaulu, Hawaii; Clarksburg, 
Maryland; Fucino, Italy; and Raisting, Germany. In 
addition to Earth Stations, engineers, software developers, 
ground network groups, and the INTELSAT Operations 
Center (IOC) all interface and coordinate with the SCC in 
order to ensure that satellite equipment is running smoothly. 
The SCC is a focal point for problems and solutions 
occurring in a real-time environment, and so it is critical that 
satellite controllers have the knowledge and resources to 
quickly respond to a variety of situations. 
At the core of the SCC are controllers who work on a 
rotating shift schedule to oversee all satellites 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year. Currently there are four rotating shifts 
which are responsible for maintaining spacecraft health, 
including day-to-day operations, maneuvers, eclipse season 
activities, and communications equipment. SCC personnel 
also assist with launch support, for both INTELSAT 
launches and outside vendor transfer orbit activities. In 
accordance with INTELSAT’s philosophy of centralized 
resources, Operations and Engineering personnel are trained 
to monitor and respond to all satellite problems, irrespective 
of series (as opposed to having series specialists). 
Therefore, SCC controllers’ consoles are the central location 
for all operations of all spacecraft, and need to have all 
supporting documentation, training and reference material 
close to their work areas. 
In addition to the satellite controllers at headquarters, there 
are also other groups who use training and supporting 
documentation produced by Training and Intranet Services 
needed for coordination. These users may include ’ Earth 
Station personnel, satellite engineers, the launch mission 
team, outside vendors, and ground network personnel. In 
order to ensure smooth coordination among groups, these 
other supporting groups need to be instantly aware of the 
most current practices, while also having a high level of 
conftdence in the material accessed. For all users, it is 
important to ensure reliability and quality of documents 
without compromising simplicity and facility of retrieval. 
3. INTRANET-BASED SOLUTIONS 
Five years ago, several alternatives for enhancing 
communication and operational readiness were examined 
within the SCC. The first option was to improve the 
existing paper-based documentation system to provide more 
control over the constantly changing procedures. A second 
option was to provide a centralized LAN-based repository 
for all SCC-related documents and training, providing 
access to necessary documentation on an as-needed basis. 
The third option was to develop an intranet to utilize the 
online tools and browser capabilities to incorporate all SCC 
procedural documents and training material. 
Selection of the third option, developing an intranet, was 
chosen over the other two options because it is more user- 
friendly and has more flexibility and portability. After 
many years of experience with a paper-based environment, 
the first option was quickly removed as a consideration. 
However, a LAN-based file system had many of the same 
advantages that an intranet would have. The Training and 
Intranet Services group developed both ideas enough to 
make an educated decision. Through both experience and 
questionnaires, a few critical limitations of the LAN became 
apparent. Most importantly, the file directories were not as 
user-friendly to navigate and search for needed documents 
and applications. Until recently, file naming conventions 
were limited to eight characters for Windows-based 
systems. In addition, flexibility, portability, and access 
control of the LAN was not as easy as with the intranet. 
The LAN was restricted to a single operating platform, 
whereas intranet browsers were not; this feature was 
especially important for the SCC since controllers primarily 
use Unix consoles, whereas other supporting groups 
primarily use PCs. In addition, Earth Stations and outside 
vendors did not have access to the internal LAN, and 
security was harder to control for each user. Therefore, due 
to the critical limitations of the other options and the 
468 
consensus of the users, the intranet was chosen for training 
and documentation. The following paragraphs elaborate on 
the advantages of the intranet which Training and Intranet 
Services developed five years ago. 
Online documentation has many benefits over paper-based 
documentation. This method of managing supporting 
documentation allows developers and all users to follow the 
real-time speed of operations; changes and updates can 
easily and immediately be implemented. In the hardcopy- 
driven days, immediate changes were handwritten on paper, 
and immediate notifications were made. This practice 
became a time-consuming notification challenge, which 
sometimes led to confusion between not only different shifts 
(for example at shift change over) in the SCC, but also other 
supporting personnel. With intranet-based management, 
procedural updates can be transparent to the user. In other 
words, users do not have to worry about obtaining the most 
current version or release of a document; in the worst case, 
they can simply print from the web browser directly. If in 
doubt, controllers can verify a hardcopy document against 
the master document online, reducing confusion among all 
users and groups about the validity of the documentation. 
In addition to increasing confidence in the material, the 
intranet allows for a logical centralization of documents 
which are simultaneously accessible by multiple users. This 
centralization along with html and scripting languages allow 
for a quick search (using a search engine), as opposed to 
assuming where the file resides. When a situation arises, 
controllers no longer need to search for current copies of 
procedures or other material in binders on a bookshelf; they 
can easily and quickly search the desired information 
through a few clicks from their consoles, reducing the time 
to respond to a potentially critical problem. In a 
contingency scenario, it is vital that everyone can quickly 
reference their roles and the responsibilities of other groups. 
This confidence and ease of access is important for both 
standard operating procedures and contingency procedures 
which are time critical and require an immediate response. 
Web-based tools are not only important for emergency 
situations, but also for day-to-day operations because these 
increase automation of tedious standard activities. Web- 
based calculators such as the Julian Date Converter, Sun 
Interference Prediction Calculator, Uplink to Downlink 
Converter, and the TTC Database Utility minimize the time 
otherwise needed to do labor-intensive work. The logbook 
minimizes the amount of time needed for controllers to 
make necessary notifications and file paperwork. 
The third major component of intranet-based solutions is 
enhanced operational readiness through modular-based 
training. When training material is prepared, it is put online 
as training (and later reference material) for all users to 
view. Online material drastically reduces the time necessary 
for distribution, therefore keeping up with the time demands 
of INTELSAT’s operational environment. Technology has 
also enabled the implementation of self-based training and 
assessment, through interactive applications which require 
less resources to deliver. For example, training packages 
may include web-based tests students can take to either 
evaluate their own understanding, or for management to 
monitor students’ proficiency in the given material. 
The portability and universal accessibility of all above 
intranet-based components is especially important in the 
operations environment for geographically dispersed users 
and rotating shifts who can not always attend classroom 
training. More importantly, transferability is important for 
continuing operations despite system problems in the SCC; 
all supporting groups have access to the knowledge and 
supporting resources required to continue operations 
regardless of servers problems. Through automated backing 
up of files to the backup server and backup facility, users 
have constant access to training and documentation from the 
Earth Stations, engineers’ homes, and at the backup 
operational facility. 
The above benefits of the Intranet have improved 
INTELSAT’s Concept of Operations. The Concept of 
Operations defines the work flow of INTELSAT, including 
the SCC, because it is a model for the organization’s work 
processes. The SCC has three major components of the 
Concept of Operations driving satellite control operations: 
a) Control Segment Operations 
b) Space Segment Operations 
c) Launch Operations. 
Figure 1. Satellite Control Operations and Concept of 
Operations 
Using ISD models for task analyses, the Training and 
Intranet Services Group has improved characteristics in each 
component of the Concept of Operations by using online 
documentation, web-based tools, and web-based training. 
The following sections will explain in detail how the above 
web-based solutions impact the three areas of Concept of 
Operations driving SCC operations. 
469 
Control Segment Operations 
Control Segment Operations provides the infrastructure and 
defines the processes necessary to conduct operations. The 
types of services provided by control segment operations 
include operating procedures (both standard and 
contingency), personnel management (notification trees, 
phone listing of on-call staff), coordination with other 
groups, and training of various scenarios and applications 
used in the control center. 
The Intranet supports Control Segment Operations by 
providing reference material of current operating practices. 
For example, controllers have a quick reference toolbar 
providing integral and often-frequented information such as 
the alert notification list, phonebooks for all on-call 
personnel, and upcoming project and launch status. If a 
problem arises during non-standard working hours which 
needs to be addressed immediately, controllers can retrieve 
the on-call schedule and request assistance from on-call 
engineers and personnel. In addition, there is a depository 
of all current operating procedures for dissemination. In 
conjunction with procedures, some tasks have associated 
checklists which can be submitted in a completely paperless 
environment (in Figure 2, note the marked checkboxes in 
the excerpt of the procedure below, steps 1-3). 
Figure 2. Example of completely paperless checklist 
Another integral part of the intranet’s role in Control 
Segment Operations is the web-based Logbook application. 
It is used worldwide to record significant activities, whether 
standard or critical. The logbook provides the SCC and all 
other supporting groups real-time situational awareness, to 
assist in coordination and troubleshooting when problems 
arise. Users can simply retrieve a report to view the 
activities for the time period of the previous shift, day, 
week, etc. The logbook is used simultaneously by all users 
around the world, to address both emergency situations and 
everyday occurrences. In the near future, the logbook will 
be integrated with other applications and tasks, making all 
related processes more automated. Currently, various 
monitors issue alarms for which the controllers manually 
respond. Soon, these monitors will issue alarms and 
immediately log significant events directly from the 
monitor. To further automate the trouble-shooting process, 
certain events will be flagged and automatically linked to 
the trouble-ticket system which will notify the 
corresponding subject matter experts to fix. This 
automation will allow controllers to focus their attention on 
other important tasks, since the integrated logbook will 
minimize the need for controllers to manually intervene, 
record activities, and notify the appropriate personnel. 
- -  
Simple (Office Access) 2 1 
Figure 3. The SCC Logbook 
In addition to reference material and tools, control center 
ground network and software application training is another 
important aspect for Control Segment Operations and 
operational preparedness. Satellite controllers need to have 
an in-depth understanding of how the applications are used 
and how they work in order to ensure smooth operations. 
However, the challenge in training occurs when the users 
need to be trained before the system is deployed for 
operational use. Therefore, training must be done using test 
software in a test environment. The problem is worsened 
because remote users do not have access to test 
environments present at headquarters. This problem can be 
eased by simulated web-based material to encourage 
distance learning and “hands-on” training. For example, 
Flight Dynamics and Commanding (FDC) will be a major 
component of the ground network system which controllers 
use to command, track, and monitor satellite telemetry. An 
extensive web-based training package was developed, which 
included simulations of the applications’ navigation. Using 
HTML and other web-development tools, the user can 
physically “mouse-click” through the GUIs in the 
applications and see how to perform certain tasks. Another 
potentially valuable tool for web-based training considered 
is the use of software to record animations, including 
navigation. 
Space Segment Operations 
470 
Space Segment Operations ensures that equipment from the 
antenna to the satellite and back to earth is working 
nominally. With the unexpected obstacles residing in the 
number and variety in the fleet which INTELSAT operates, 
it is imperative to have support documentation and training 
for efficient, reliable operations. In order to perform Space 
Segment Operations, the SCC controllers need to receive 
training in spacecraft familiarization for new spacecraft, 
maneuvers (and certification programs), contingency 
resolution of situations which jeopardize spacecraft health, 
and knowledge of day-to-day maintenance of satellites and 
supporting components. The need for this skill set is 
addressed through training programs, reference material, 
and various web-based tools. Reference material includes 
dynamic schedules (i.e. antenna coverage, maneuver 
schedules, thruster selection, sun interference) which are 
available for immediate access from each controller 
workstation, meeting the scheduling demands of the 
operational environment. 
Customized web-based calculators and conversion utilities 
such as a Julian Date Converter, the Uplink to Downlink 
Conversion Utility, Sun Interference Prediction Tool, and 
TTC Database Utility minimize the amount of time needed 
to respond to a situation, and allow controllers to focus on 
other tasks. For example, the TTC Database Utility is used 
by satellite operators in the SCC when there are problems 
with either the assigned primary or backup antennas. The 
tool locates either an available antenna, or a network 
configuration so that each antenna has an spacecraft which 
is available and visible to each spacecraft. 
TT&C Database Utility 
Outages: Stations Okay _rJ 
Query by Satellite: Query by Site: Query by Antenna: 
E 3  
Macro: 
Get any 
necessary 
reassignments 
Figure 4. The TTC Database Utility 
In addition, the Sun Interference Prediction table calculates 
interference for a particular antenna at TTC Earth Stations. 
Controllers can review the predicted table and based on the 
output indicated, move to a nominal configuration for 
antenna coverage during the outage. The Uplink to 
Downlink Conversion is also a useful tool for the 
controllers, facilitating communication between the 
INTELSAT Operations Center (who handles 
communications traffic) and the SCC when troubleshooting 
for communications interference. 
Launch Operations 
Launch Operations incorporates many characteristics of 
Control Segment Operations and Space Segment 
Operations, but is differentiated by the launch environment. 
The SCC provides launch support for both INTELSAT 
launches and outside customer launches. In addition to 
standard operations support personnel, there is also a 
mission team and outside vendors associated with the 
launch vehicle and spacecraft being launched. Customer 
Launch Support Services (CLASS) involve yet another 
participant: the company for which INTELSAT is providing 
services. Therefore, for launch support, there are many 
more relevant personnel both within the existing 
INTELSAT structure and outside customers, who need to 
have access to launch operations documents in order to 
coordinate activities. All resources need to have the 
flexibility to be configured per launch (INTELSAT 
provided or per company’s CLASS launch) using the 
minimum amount of administration by the Training and 
Intranet Services group. This criteria led Launch Operations 
intranet-based support to be configurable per user (including 
permission controls), in order to protect INTELSAT’s 
potentially sensitive information from individual vendors 
and among vendors. 
The types of assistance Intranet and Training Services 
provides to the SCC are the timeline and sequence of events, 
launch logbook, procedures, launch rehearsal training, and 
mission network planning I network coordination. The 
launch logbook is kept separate from the operations log in 
order not to congest one log, and as an additional safeguard 
for information security. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Intranet-based management has helped fulfill a critical need 
in the unique challenges in the operations environment of 
the Satellite Control Center: to fully integrate the distributed 
components of operations. INTELSAT’s Satellite Control 
Center currently operates 23 spacecraft from five different 
satellite series, giving the operations center special needs to 
which the Training and Intranet Services group caters using 
intranet-based documentation, web-based and ISD method 
training, and web-tools. The technology which has enabled 
the move from a paper to a paper-less environment has 
resulted in the following management solutions: 
a) Higher level of confidence in documents, ensuring the 
most current version release, and resulting in less 
confusion 
b) More efficient administration of documents and training 
c) Automation of routine or tedious tasks 
d) Portability and constant simultaneous accessibility of 
reference material for multiple users 
e) Less resources are needed to disseminate information 
The above management solutions are particularly important 
for the unique environment in INTELSAT’s Satellite 
Control Center because these: 
a) Simplify operations by centralizing fragmented 
components of operations, the result of a large fleet 
471 
composed of many different types of satellites with 
many different characteristics. 
Ensure safer and more consistent operations by aiding 
coordination among and within the many groups 
working at different times of the day around the world. 
Automate and make operations more efficient by 
allowing controllers and other users to focus their 
attention on higher priority tasks. 
Maintain the speed of operations by not being hindered 
by the distribution of policies, practices, procedures, 
and other training and reference material. 
Aid flexibility in operations, by facilitating the 
continuation of operations at other facilities, in the case 
that the SCC systems at INTELSAT headquarters 
encounter problems. Also, on-call support personnel 
can help respond to critical situations during non- 
working hours by accessing necessary information at 
home. 
Despite the benefits that the move from paper-based to 
intranet-based administration has provided, there are still a 
few challenges which the Training and Intranet Services 
group faces: 
Due to the heavy reliance of on the intranet for 
operations, hardcopy backups must still be generated of 
all material, which leads to some document 
management issues. 
Some personnel have difficulty solely relying upon 
soft-copies of documents; when performing tasks, paper 
is sometimes preferred. Reasons for this include paper 
sometimes being easier to read than on a computer 
screen, or a controller wanting to makes notes on a 
piece of paper. 
Ease of availability versus security: due to the 
sensitivity of the information and the number of people 
who need to access it, there are multiple firewalls, 
passwords, and secured physical areas within 
INTLESAT buildings which the intranet is contained 
within. Therefore, access to information from outside 
can be a challenge. The SCC is currently forced to 
maintain two sites: one within the firewall and one 
outside the firewall. These sites result in administration 
challenges, regular maintenance, and decreased 
efficiency for the Training and Intranet Services group. 
EFERNCES 
[ 13 Enriquette Horer, “An Integrated Ground Network 
System: The Key to Operating a Multi-Vendor Fleet 
Successfully”, Space Ops 98 Conference, Tokyo 
Japan, August 1998. 
Emmanuelle Estroff is President of EMAN Inc., providing 
consulting support in the Aerospace industry. For the lasl 
two years she has provided Training and Intranet supporl 
472 
for satellite control operations in INTELSAT’s Satellite 
Control Center. She will finish her BS in Mechanical 
Engineering at Brown University in the fall of 2000. 
Duane Rogers “Skip” is President of D.R. Rogers 
Associates and specializes in progranz managenzent and 
technical training development. He holds a B.A. in 
Behavioral Science ji-om San Jose State University and an 
M.A. in Clinical Counseling from University of Santa Clara. 
He has been on contract with INTELSAT’s Satellite Control 
Center working in the Training and Intranet Services group 
for the last five years, the last two years as the Supervisor. 
Mr. Rogers has an extensive background in Instructional 
Systems and over the last 20 years has provided consulting 
services to many major organications including IBM, GTE, 
CONTEL, and Burroughs. 
