Monitoring Biomass Using Polarimetric 
Multi-Frequency SAR 
A.K. Milne', R.M. Lucas', N. Cronin', Y. Dong? and C. Witte3 
'School of Geography, 2School of Geomatic Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW, 2052, 
Australia. 
3Forest Ecosystem Assessment and Planning, Queensland Department of Natural Resources, Resource Sciences Centre, 80 
Meiers Road, Indooroopilly, Queensland, 4068, Australia. 
ABSTRACT 
Classification of radar images remains a challenge due 
largely to the effects of speckle. In general, classification 
based routines based on information provided by individual 
pixels rarely produce satisfactory results. Classifications 
based on area-analysis can be expected to be more accurate 
as a uniform area consisting of multipixels provides reliable 
measurement statistics and texture characteristics. 
However, area analysis methods require the partioning of an 
image to be performed first. 
In this paper the classification of radar images is 
accomplished in two steps. First, an image is partioned into 
uniform areas or segments and second, these segments are 
then classified into information classes. Both segmentation 
and classification are achieved by using the Gaussian 
Markov random field model. 
The results of segmentation and classification routines 
applied to the woodland areas in Queensland using both 
spaceborne and airborne S A R  image data are presented. In 
terms of segmentation, regions whose mean differences are 
as small as 0.5dB and with ratios of the standard deviation 
to the mean as high as 0.35 are separated with accuracies 
approaching 90%. In terms of classification, there are more 
ambiguities in single-band data. Multi-band polarised data 
on the other hand provided better results. 
Relationships established between component biomass and 
the backscatter coefficient at all wavelengths and 
polarisations indicated a strong correspondence (r2>0.80) 
between AIRSAR L- and P-band backscatter and above 
ground, branch and trunk biomass. 
The highest correlation between component biomass and 
backscatter using JERS1 related to the estimation of stem 
biomass leading to the conclusion that more reliable 
estiamtes of total and component biomass will require 
multiband-multipolarimetric data. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Australian eucalypt species are not well characterised in 
terms of biometric models which allow the relative 
components of green foliage and woody biomass to be 
determined or to be predicted reliably. In forest and 
woodland analysis there is a strong reliance on developing 
better field based measurements. Also, as a result of the 
Kyoto Protocol and Australia's commitment to meet carbon 
emission levels under the UN Framework Convention on 
Climatic change, there is an increasing need to develop 
spatial extrapolation procedures that provide accurate 
estimates at both the local and regional level of changes in 
vegetation cover. 
The potential of SAR to map the distribution of forests and 
woodlands and to monitor long term developments in these 
ecosystems, as well as to contribute to an understanding of 
global change, depends on the ability to unravel the 
relationships that exist between the microwave backscatter 
of the return signal and the physical characteristics of trees 
and forests. 
To use the radar parameters of wavelength, polarisation, 
phase difference and incidence angle to maximum effect to 
discern differences within forest environments, backscatter 
and linking models need to be developed that allow the 
biophysical properties of trees to be determined. In respect 
to temporal studies, such models must not only take into 
account structural components such as tree height, trunk 
diameter, branching pattern and canopy characteristics, but 
also incorporate the impact of changing environmental 
conditions such as prolonged wet and dry periods and the 
impact of stress caused by factors such as disease, fire and 
human interference, and the underlying slope of the land 
surface. 
The first established empirically based relationships 
between radar backscatter and field measurements of 
selected tree parameters in tropical Australian forests that 
demonstrated multi-polarimetric SAR responds to 
differences in vegetation structure (eg. total biomass, leaf- 
area index, branch swface/volume ratio etc.) in predictable 
ways were presented by Imhoff et.al., (1997). These results 
showed radar sensitivity to floristically induced structural 
changes, indicating that given appropriate algorithms, the 
physiognomic classifications of trees and community 
typology might be possible with radar. Also, in associated 
research at the same site the vegetation structural changes 
identified in the radar analysis were shown to be 
significantly related to avian habitat quality thereby 
demonstrating the potential of SAR for studying 
biodiversity and habitat change. 
More recent work reported in this paper shows a direct 
relationship between total above ground biomass and SAR 
backscatter for two sites in Queensland. At Injune in 
Central Queensland, a significant non-linear correlation 
245 
between trunk biomass and JERS-1 single band SAR data 
was obtained with an I? statistic of 0.72. Strong 
relationships between multi-band SAR data and component 
biomass (ie branch, trunk, leaf and total biomass) were 
recorded for eucalypt woodland sites at Talwood in 
Southem Queensland. Here r2 values of 0.91 were obtained 
for P-band SAR and total biomass. 
The ability to derive estimates of tree stand parameters 
directly from SAR depends on the development of inversion 
models that facilitate prediction based on radar scattering 
characteristics alone and which include a means of 
extrapolating tree characteristics to areal measurements. 
The correlative relationships referred to above between 
biomass and floristic induced structural changes and radar 
backscatter have been analysed using wavelet transform 
techniques to suppress speckle noise in the imagery and a 
segmentation routine based on a Gaussian Markov Random 
Field Model has been developed to classify and spatially 
extrapolate the distribution of different stand densities and 
land cover types. These techniques are described in this 
paper in relation to their application to the Injune and 
Talwood study sites. 
2. S A R  AND BIOMASS ESTIMATION 
A number of studies suggest that, due to the penetrative 
capacity of microwaves, the total biomass of vegetation may 
be estimated using single polarized data, although C, L and 
P band data have been shown to saturate at a biomass of 
approximately 20-40 Mg ha", 60-100 Mg ha-' and 150 Mg 
ha-' respectively. However, by employing multi-band 
polarimetric data, the range of biomass detected by SAR can 
be extended. For example, by relating different SAR 
frequencies and polarisations to different components of the 
biomass, Dobson et al. (1995) and Kasischke et al. (1995) 
were able to estimate biomass up to 250 Mg ha-' (+ 16 Mg 
ha-') and 400 Mg ha-' (+ 80 Mg ha-') respectively. Other 
studies (e.g., Beaudoin et al., 1994; Harrell et al., 1997) 
have also indicated that polarimetric data may be used to 
estimate the component biomass of vegetation. 
3. USE OF SAR IN AUSTRALIA 
The majority of studies investigating the use of SAR data 
for biomass estimation have focused largely on coniferous 
forests in the northern hemisphere, particularly in North 
America and Eurasia (e.g., Sader, 1997, Wang et al., 1994; 
1995, Harrell et al., 1997; Baker et al. ,1994, and Green, 
1998). A few studies have also concentrated on mixed 
forests in boreal (Fransson and Israelsson, 1999), temperate 
(e.g, Bergen et al., 1998; Ranson et al., 1997) and tropical 
regions (Luckman et al., 1997; Foody et al., 1998). 
In Australia, the use of both spacebome and airbome 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) for quantifying forest 
biomass has not been rigorously investigated. This is 
despite the availability, since 1991, of SAR data from a 
range of airbome and spacebome sensors. These include 
the European Earth Resources Satellites (ERS-1 and ERS- 
2), the Canadian RADARSAT, the Japanese Earth 
Resources Satellite (JERS-1) Synthetic Aperature Radar 
(SAR), the Space Shuttle Imaging Radars (SIR-B and C) 
and the NASA JPL AIRSAR. This lack of research and 
development is surprising given the increasing 
demonstration intemationally of the potential of SAR for 
biomass estimation. 
The use of SAR data for estimating the biomass of 
Australia's vegetation should be advocated for several 
reasons. 
0 The majority (124 million ha) of Australia's 155 
million ha of forested area is represented by woodlands, 
the biomass of which rarely exceeds 100 Mg ha-' and is 
especially low in areas of regeneration. Therefore, the 
biomass of most woodland areas should be quantifiable 
using, as a minimum, single polarised L band data as 
most of the biomass is below the threshold of 
saturation. 
A large proportion of the Australian continent receives 
little rainfall compared to many regions of the world 
and the moisture content of vegetation and soil, 
particularly in the dryer areas supporting woodland, is 
unlikely to vary substantially. 
Much of the landscape is relatively flat and the 
influence of the terrain on the SAR backscatter is likely 
to be minimal. 
4. KAKADU WORLD HERITAGE REGION 
The analysis of P-, L-, and C- band SAR data collected 
during the first NASNJPL AIRSAR Campaign in Australia 
in 1993 over a section of the South Alligator River in 
Kakadu demonstrated the usefulness of SAR in identifying 
changes in woodland vegetation types occasioned by both 
structural and floristic differences. Statistically significant 
changes were evident where (1) a melaleuca woodland 
changed in structure from a tall, closed canopy to a more 
densely stocked formation of smaller trees of the same 
species, and (2) where the melaleuca were replaced by a 
mixed eucalypt woodland that characterises the drier 
uplands of Kakadu National Park. The best correlations 
between bole biomass and surface aredvolume ratios were 
achieved between C-HV, L-VV, P-VV, C-VV, L-VV AND 
P-VV respectively (Imhoff et a1 1997). 
5.  QUEENSLAND STUDY SITES 
The following sections outline two more recent case studies 
that provide a further demonstration of the use of SAR for 
estimating the biomass of Australian woodland vegetation. 
The first considers the use of JERS-1, L band HH data for 
quantifying the biomass of woodlands near Injune, in 
Central Queensland. The second examines the use of 
NASA JPL AIRSAR polarimetric data for quantifying the 
component biomass (i.e., leaves, branches, trunks) of 
woodlands near Talwood, Southem Queensland. 
Natural vegetation and land use 
Both sites are located in the Southem Brigalow Belt (SBB), 
a biogeographic region of southeast and central Queensland 
(Figure 1). More than 50 % of clearing in Queensland has 
occurred in the SBB, with over 40 % occurring on freehold 
rather than leasehold land (Carter et al., 1998). Wholesale 
clearance of vegetation in the region has been extensive, due 
largely to the establishment of cattle pasture, the expansion 
of the wheat farming and, more recently, the formation of 
cotton fields. Partial clearance of vegetation has also been 
commonplace in the pastoral areas, whereby most of the 
woody vegetation has been removed or poisoned whilst the 
herbaceous plants have been retained. Due to the complex 
nature of land use and management practices, the landscape 
246 
consists of a mosaic of cleared fields and forest and 
woodland communities in various stages of degradation 
andor regeneration. 
Most of the SBB receives an annual average rainfall of 
between 500-750 mm, with between 60 % and 70 % 
occurring in the summer months from October to March. A 
detailed description of climate regimes, soil types and plant 
community composition for both sub-regions is provided by 
Neldner (1984). Within the Injune and Talwood regions, the 
gently undulating country supports white cypress pine 
(Callitris glaucophylla) stands on the sandy hills. The more 
alluvial clays in the valleys are dominated by eucalyptus and 
acacia woodlands, comprising mainly Poplar Box (E.  
populnea), Silver-leaved Ironbark (E.  melanaphloia) and 
Brigalow (A. harpophylla). Common understorey species 
include Wilga (Gezjera parvzji'ora) and Sandalwood Box 
(Eremophila mitchelli). At Talwood, C. glaucophylla is at 
the southern end of its range although Belah (Casuarina 
cristata) is common. 
2110 0 21111 400 lii1omrtar -
Figure 1: Location of the Southem Brigalow Belt and the 
Injune and Talwood study areas. 
6.  CASE STUDY I: INJUNE 
Field data collection and estimation of stand biomass 
In July, 1997, field data were collected from 70 plots 
located in a range of disturbance and regeneration classes 
within the major woodland types. The selection of sample 
sites was based largely on existing vegetation mapping and 
descriptions (Neldner, 1984). Landsat TM and aerial 
photographs were also used to delineate broad forest types 
and growth stages and to assess structural homogeneity 
within the delineated stands. 
At each of the 70 sample sites, data on individual species 
and diameter at 1.3 m were recorded using the prism sweep 
method (Beers and Miller, 1965; Dilworth and Bell, 1971). 
The method uses a critical angle from a central location to 
determine the inclusion or exclusion of individual trees 
within the sample. The critical angle is determined using 
wedge prisms of variable size. The GPS coordinates of the 
centre of each sweep (up to five per site) were also obtained 
with an accuracy of k 10 metres. 
For each plot, and using the allometric equations outlined 
above, the above ground and component (leaf, branch and 
trunk) was estimated. The subsequent scaling up of the 
measurements to a per hectare basis was based on the 
assumption that each tree selected within each plot had the 
same basal area and component biomass per unit area 
(Dilworth and Bell, 1971). 
Acquisition and processing of remotely sensed data 
For the study area, a 1995 Landsat TM channel 3 (red), 4 
(near infrared) and 5 (mid infrared) image, acquired through 
the SLATS (Statewide Land Cover and Trees) project, was 
georeferenced to Ah4G coordinates using control points 
located with differential Global Positioning Systems (Collett 
et al., 1998; Kuhnell et al., 1998). Two overlapping JERS-1 
L channel HH scenes were acquired for August and 
September, 1994 and were each registered to the Landsat 
TM data using ground control points (GCPs) located in both 
images. The root mean square (r.m.s) errors for all 
transformations were within k 1 pixel and the resampled 
pixel size for the JERS-1 data was 25 m. The JERS-1 data 
were calibrated to the backscatter coefficient (CY", m2 m-*), 
defined as the average radar cross section per unit area of 
the individual scattering elements. For display purposes, CY" 
was expressed in decibels (dB). Speckle suppression 
within the JERS-1 data was based on consecutive 
applications of a 3 x 3 Lee Sigma, a 5 x 5 Lee Sigma and a 5 
x 5 Local Region Filter. 
For each of the 70 sites and using the GPS coordinates for 
each of the sweep centres, a polygon was produced by 
connecting the centre coordinates and buffering the joining 
lines by 50 metres. The actual distance from the sweep 
centre of trees that are included for measurement depended 
upon the size of the prism used and the diameter of the 
individual stems. A distance of 50 metres ensured that the 
majority of trees fell within the polygon. As most sites were 
located well within particular woodland classes, there was a 
minimal chance of overlap between the created polygon and 
adjacent woodland classes. For each of the 70 polygons 
generated, the average (and standard deviation) JERS-1 
SAR 0" data values were extracted and related to the 
estimates of total and component biomass. 
Results 
The estimates of total above ground biomass ranged from 34 
Mg h i '  to 156 Mg ha-', with a mean biomass of 71.5 +: 29.9 
Mg ha-'. The larger estimates of biomass were associated 
with woodlands dominated by C. glaucophylla. As younger 
regrowth was not measured, the range of biomass from 0 to 
34 Mg ha-' was not represented, although a number of 
locations representing pasture were identified. 
L HH values for woodland areas ranged from -7 to -15 dB. 
Where pasture sites were excluded, relationships between L 
HH and both l$af and branch biomass were barely 
significant with r- values of 0.09 in both,cases (Table 1; 
Figure 2).  By including pasture sites, the r- values defining 
the relationship between LHH and leaf and branch biomass 
increased to 0.26 and 0.53 respectively. The strongest 
relationship was observed between L HH and trunk biomass 
with r2 values of 0.49 without pasture sites and 0.67 with 
247 
pasture sites. Relationships between L HH and both stem 
(trunk and branch) and above ground (trunk, branch and 
leaf) were low. A strong relationship between L HH and 
above ground biomass was, however, observed (I-' = 0.62) 
when pasture sites were included although saturation 
occurred at an above ground biomass of approximately 80 
Mg ha-'. 
Table 1: Relationships (2) between L HH (dB) and the log of component biomass, without and with pasture sites 
(p < 0.001) 
Biomass component Without pasture (r') With pasture (r') 
leaf 0.09 0.26 
branch 0.09 0.53 
trunk 0.49 0.67 
stem 0.35 0.61 
ground biomass 0.34 0.62 
Log Leaf Biomass , 0:O 0:2 0;4 0;6 0;8 
-20 -I 
Log Trunk Biomass , I;" 1:6 1:8 2:O 
-20 4 
0 
6 -5 
E 
I 
I -10 : Y -15 
-20 
Log Branch Biomass 
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 
e 
e 
r 
0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 
JERS-1 
SAR Backscatter 
Figure 2: Relationships between JERS-1 L band HH (0" dB) and (a) leaf biomass, (b) branch biomass, and (c) trunk 
biomass (without pasture sites). The relationship between L HH o" (m' m-') with total above ground biomass (including 
pasture sites) is shown in (d). 
7. CASE STUDY II: TALWOOD the centre of each sweep (up to five per site) were obtained 
with an accuracy of f 10 metres. Fixed area plots were 
preferentially established in areas of younger regeneration. 
wees < cm in diameter were identified species, 
counted and the height estimated. 
Field data collection 
In October, 1998, field data were collected from 29 fixed 
and variable area plots sited in woodlands at varying states 
of degradation andor regeneration. The GPS coordinates of 
248 
Variable area plots, sampled using the prism wedge method, 
were established in the older regenerating woodlands and in 
intact, albeit degraded, woodlands where fixed area plots 
were considered to be overly time-consuming. Within these 
plots, all included trees were identified to species and the 
diameters at both 30 cm and 130 cm were recorded. For the 
understorey species E. mitchelli and G. pawiflora, 
relationships were established between tree height and 
diameter (at 30 cm), as both parameters could be used as 
input to the equations of Harrington (1979). For all trees, the 
component biomass was estimated using the allometric 
equations outlined above and scaled up to a per hectare 
basis using standard procedures (Dilworth and Bell, 1971). 
Acquisition and pre-processing of remotely sensed data 
On the 12" November, 1996, AIRSAR data were acquired 
over a 10 x 60 km strip of the study area. In this overflight, 
AIRSAR topographic and interferometric SAR (TOPSAR) 
data were acquired for the generation of digital elevation 
models (DEMs). TOPSAR data are effectively polarimetric 
S A R  with the horizontal components used to generate 
DEMs, leaving only single polarised C VV and L VV and 
polarimetric P band (HH, VV and HV) available for 
analysis. 
Landsat TM data of the sub-region had been acquired 
previously for July, 1995, through the Statewide Landcover 
And Trees Study (SLATS; Queensland Department of 
Natural Resources, 1997) and were georeferenced to AMG 
coordinates. The AIRSAR image was then registered to the 
Landsat TM data using GCPs located in both images and 
resampled, using a nearest neighbour algorithm, to a pixel 
resolution of 12.5 metres. The AIRSAR C, L and P band 
intensity data were calibrated to the backscatter coefficient 
(GO,  m' m-'). Speckle was removed from all S A R  data by 
applying a 3 x 3 Lee Sigma, 5 x 5 Lee Sigma and a 5 x 5 
Local Region Filter. 
Results 
For the Talwood site, the above ground biomass ranged 
from 22 Mg ha-' (young regenerating woodlands) to 138 Mg 
ha.' (mature C. cristata woodlands) with a mean biomass of 
57 Mg ha-'. Pasture sites were assumed to support no 
woody biomass and a leaf biomass of 1 Mg ha-'. 
Relationships between 0" and component biomass were 
established by first extracting C VV, L VV and 
multipolarimetric P band data from a 3 x 3 pixel window 
centred on each plot location and second, establishing a 
linear regression between the log of 0" (dB) and the log of 
component biomass. The r2 values for the regression are 
shown in Table 2 whilst selected relationships between C 
VV 0" and leaf biomass, L VV 0" and branch biomass, and 
P band 0" and both branch and trunk biomass are illustrated 
in Figure 3. The relationships established included data for 
low biomass pastures. 
Table 2: Relationship between C, L and P band 0" and component biomass, expressed as the correlation 
ccoefficient (?). 
~ 
SAR backscatter coefficient (dB) 
PHH PVV PHV PTP LVV CHH 
Log Branch 0.85 0.80 0.83 0.84 0.83 0.64 
Log Trunk 0.81 0.75 0.80 0.80 0.78 0.55 
Log Leaf 0.36 0.33 0.35 0.36 0.41 0.46 
Log Total 0.9 1 0.83 0.91 0.89 0.88 0.69 
249 
a) 
Log Leaf Biomass 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
c- -5 1 
Ba 
-25 1 
Log Trunk Biomass 
0 
~~ 
Log Branch Biomass 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 1 -25, 
I -50-1 
Log Branch Biomass 
Figure 3: Relationships between a) C band HH and leaf biomass, b) L band VV and branch biomass, c) P band HH and 
trunk biomass and d) P band HH and branch biomass, Talwood study region. (Pasture sites woodland plots 0)  
The strongest relationship with leaf biomass was obtained 
using C HH data, with backscatter ranging from -12 to -20 
dB. The relationship was similar, although slightly weaker, 
with L VV data (range -15 to -23 dB) and was least with P 
band data (all polarisations). 
The relationship with branch biomass was relatively weak 
using C HH data but was of similar magnitude for both L 
VV and P band (all polarisations), with 3 ranging from 0.80 
to 0.85. C HH was least related to the trunk biomass whilst 
a strong relationship (3 > 0.75) was observed using both L 
W and P band data. 
Significant relationships at the 95 % confidence level 
between above ground biomass and oo (dJ3) at all 
wavebands and polarisations was observed, although the 
strongest relationship (3 = 0.91) was observed using P HV 
and HH data. However, the range of values for P HV was 
27.4 (-18.5 to - 45.9 dB) which was far greater than the 
range for P HH and VV which was 22.57 (-9.56 to -32.1 
dB) and -18.8 (-12.0 to -30.8) respectively. Saturation of 
the C, L and P band data occurred at approximately 20-30 
Mg ha-', 60 Mg ha-' and 80-100 Mg ha-'. 
8. AREAL ESTIMATES OF BIOMASS 
The classification of S A R  data is often based on the 
information contained within individual pixels. Such 
classifications are unlikely to provide satisfactory results 
due to the large amount of image speckle that results from 
coherent processing. A more reliable classification can 
generally be obtained using statistics of clusters rather than 
individual pixels. Simple averaging with an n x n pixel 
window centered on pixels of known interests is an example 
of this approach. 
The image segmentation algorithm developed by Dong et al. 
(1997) uses a Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF) 
model to separate the S A R  image into disjointed regions (or 
segments) that correspond to objects, or parts of objects, 
which differ from their surroundings. The GMRF model is 
based on a normal or Gaussian distribution of the 
probability density function (pdf). SAR data are generally 
processed using multi-look averaging techniques to reduce 
the level of speckle and it has been shown that the pdf 
corresponds more to a K, or Gamma, distribution. 
However, according to the Central Limit Theorem in 
statistics, such distributions can be approximated to a 
Gaussian distribution with acceptable limits of error thereby 
allowing the application of the GMRF model. An 
advantage of the assumption of a Gaussian distribution is 
250 
that mathematical descriptions for such distributions are 
more complete and the difference between segmentation 
results based on the Gaussian and Gamma distribution is 
small. Objects are segmented on the basis of the regional 
distribution of data values and their spatial relationships are 
described using first and second order statistics. 
The GMRF model considers two regions to be separate if 
one or more of the following conditions is true: 
The first order statistics (i.e., the means for a single 
frequency image or the mean vectors for a multi- 
frequency image) differ. 
The second order statistics (ie., the variances for a 
single frequency images or the covariance matrices for 
a multi-frequency image) differ. 
The spatial textures differ. 
Recent studies have shown that regions whose mean 
differences are as small as 0.5 dB (lo%), and the ratios of 
the standard deviation to the mean are as high as 0.35, can 
be separated to an accuracy exceeding 95%. Subsequent 
classification of the segmented image is then based on a 
user-defined categorisation of information distributed across 
all segments. The segmentation procedure can be applied to 
single frequency, single polarisation or multi-frequency, 
multi-polarisation SAR images. Examples and maps 
derived from these techniques are presented in Dong, et al, 
1999. 
9. OTHER DATA 
Under the Global Rainforest Mapping experiment (GRFM) 
being conducted as part of the JERS-1 Verification 
Program, large scale mosaics of Amazonia, Central Africa 
and South-East Asia using L-band imagery have been 
prepared under the auspices of the National Space 
Development Agency of Japan. A preliminary version of 
the Noah Australian portion of the South-East Asia mosaic 
has recently become available. The mosaic is made up of 
50 satellite passes collected over Australia during 1996/97. 
Resampling and compression of the image data has resulted 
in 100 metre pixels with matching positional accuracy. 
Analysis of the radiometric variation between neighbouring 
swaths and thematic interpretation of the data have yet to be 
concluded. Very preliminary investigation of this data 
shows discernible patterns within the distribution of forests 
and woodlands of Northern Australia suggesting a potential 
for identifying regional land cover changes and for 
assessing environmental gradients within the vegetation 
biomes of Northern Australia. 
10. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The case studies reported in this paper are unique in that, for 
the f i s t  time in Australia, the potential use of both single 
band and multi-band polarimetric SAR for quantifying the 
above ground and component biomass of woodlands has 
been demonstrated. Using JERS-1 SAR and AIRSAR data 
for woodland sites in south and central Queensland, the 
study has demonstrated that: 
JERS-1 L HH backscatter was related to the trunk 
biomass, but provided limited information on branch 
and leaf biomass. 
A strong relationship between L HH and above ground 
biomass was obtained when low biomass pasture sites 
were included. 
AIRSAR L VV and P band backscatter (all 
polarisations) from woodlands were related to both 
trunk and branch biomass, due largely to the similarity 
in the size distribution and orientation of these 
components. 
AIRSAR C band backscatter may be related to leaf 
biomass, although time and site specific measurements 
of leaf biomass, that were coincident with a S A R  
overpass, would be required to confirm this 
relationship. 
Saturation of C, L and PI band data occurred at 
approximately 20-30 Mg ha- , 60 Mg ha-' and 80-100 
Mg ha". 
The biomass of woodlands in Australia may exceed 150 Mg 
ha-' and the establishment of relationships between different 
components of the biomass and C, L and P band data may 
be necessary to estimate biomass with confidence. 
However, as much of the vegetation cleared is of low 
biomass (Burrows, 1990), the use of L band data alone may 
be sufficient, although other polarisations other than L HH 
(i.e., L HV) may be required. 
Further research should be aimed at obtaining a better 
understanding the interaction of microwaves of different 
length and polarisation with components of vegetation 
canopies, determining the influence of the ground layer and 
assessing the consistency of relationships between and 
within sites and using different airborne and spaceborne 
sensors. The synergistic use of optical data for estimating 
leaf biomass should also be investigated. 
In mid-2000, AIRSAR POLSAR and TOPSAR data will 
again be acquired at sites across Australia and, under an 
Australian Research Council (ARC) grant, site and time 
specific estimates of vegetation biomass will be obtained for 
Injune. This study will therefore allow the use of 
polarimetric C, L and P band data and also S A R  
interferometry for quantifying both the biomass and 
structure of the biomass of Australia's woodlands to be 
further investigated From the early 2000s, also, the satellite 
borne ENVISAT ASAR, LightSAR and JERS-2 S A R  are 
scheduled for launch and will be acquiring polarimetric data 
at C and L band. The ARC study will therefore provide 
some insight into the most suitable sensors for spatially 
estimating biomass on a regional basis. 
In closing, it is hoped that the study encourages State and 
Federal agencies to re-examine the potential of SAR data for 
rangeland assessment and management and for better 
understanding the carbon dynamics of Australia's 
woodlands. 
11. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the Bureau of 
Resource Sciences and Environment Australia for partly 
251 
funding the two case studies and Dr. Bill Burrows for 
providing the allometric equations. 
12. REFERENCES 
Australian Greenhouse Office (1999). 
httr,:llwww.meenhouse.gov.au, Canberra, Australia. 
Beers, T., and Miller, C. (1965). Point Sampling: Research 
results , Theory and Applications. Purdue University, 
Agricultural Experiment Station Lafayette, IN. Research 
Bulletin. Aug. 1965, No. 786 
Bergen, K.M. , Dobson, M.C., Pierce, L.E. and Ulaby, F.W., 
(1998). Characterising carbon in a northern forest by using 
SIR-CK-SAR imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment. 63: 
24-39. 
Beaudoin, A., Le Toan, T., Goze, S., Nezry, E., Lopes, A., 
Mougin, E., Hsu, C.C., Han, H.C., Kong, J.A. and Shin, R.T.( 
1994). Retrieval of forest biomass from S A R  data. 
Intemational Journal of Remote Sensing. 15: 2777-2796. 
Bureau of Resource Sciences (1 999). 
httr,:llwww.brs.nov.adland&waterl 
landcovlalcc-results. html 
Collett, L.J., Goulevitch, B.M., Danaher, T.J. (1998). 
SLATS radiometric correction: A semi-automated, multi- 
stage process for the standardisation of temporal and spatial 
radiometric differences. Proceedings, gh Australasian 
Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry Conference, pp. 
1561-1580. 
Dilworth, J.R. and Bell, J.F. (1971). Variable probability 
sampling - variable plot and three P. (Corvalis: OSU Book 
Stores). 
Dobson, M.C., Pierce, L.E., and Ulaby, F.T. (1995). 
Knowledge-based land cover classification using ERS- 
11JERS-1 SAR composites. IEEE Trans. Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing. 
Dong, Y., Forster, B.C., Milne, A.K, and Morgan G.A. 
(1998). Speckle suppression using recursive wavelet 
transforms, Intemational Joumal of Remote Sensing, 19, 2, 
3 17-330. 
Dong, Y., Forster, B.C., and Milne, A.K. (1999). 
Segmentation of radar imagery using the Gaussian Markov 
random field model, International Joumal of Remote Sensing, 
20,8, 1617-1639. 
Fransson, J.E.S. and Israelsson, H. (1999). Estimation of 
stem volume in boreal forests using ERS-1 C- and JERS-1 L- 
band SAR data. International Joumal of Remote Sensing. 20: 
Foody, G.M., Green, R., Lucas, R.M., Curran, P.J. and 
Honzak, M. (1997). Observations on the relationship 
between SIR-C radar backscatter and the total biomass of 
regenerating tropical forests. International Joumal of Remote 
Sensing, 18: 687-694. 
Green, R.M. (1998). Relationships between polarimetric 
SAR backscatter and forest canopy and sub-canopy 
123-137. 
biophysical properties. Intemational Joumal of Remote 
Sensing. 19: 2395-2412. 
Harrell, P.A., Kasischke, E.S., Bourgeau-Chavez, L.L., 
Haney, E.M., and Christensen,N.L. (1997). Evaluation of 
approaches to estimating above ground biomass in southern 
pine forests using SIR-C data. Remote Sensing of 
Environment. 59: 223-233. 
Harrington, G. (1979). Estimation of above ground biomass 
of trees and shrubs in Eucalyptus popubzea F. Muell. 
Woodland by regression of mass on trunk diameter and 
plant height. Australian Journal of Botany. 2: 135-143. 
Imhoff M. L., Sisk T. D., Milne A., Morgan G., Orr T. 
(1997). Remotely Sensed Indicators of Habitat 
Heterogeneity: Use of Synthetic Aperture Radar in Mapping 
Vegetation Structure and Bird Habitat Remote Sensing of 
the Environment. 60: 217-227 
Kasischke, E.S., Christensen, N.L and Bourgeau-Chavez, 
L.L. (1995). Correlating radar backscatter with components 
of biomass in loblolly pine forests. IEEE Transactions 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing. 33: 643-659. 
Kuhnell, C., Goulevitch,B., Danaher, T., and Harris, D. 
(1998). Mapping woody vegetation cover over the State of 
Queensland using Landsat TM. Proceedings, qh 
Australasian Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry 
Coizference. pp. 3201-3223. 
Luckman, A., Baker, J., Kuplick, T.M., Yanesse, C. and 
Frery, A.C. (1997). A study of the relationship between 
radar backscatter and regenerating tropical forest biomass 
for spaceborne SAR instruments. Remote Sensing of 
Environment. 60: 1-13. 
Neldner, V.J. (1984). Vegetation survey of Queensland 
South Central Queensland Queensland Botany Bulletin, 3, 
Queensland Department of Primary Industries, Brisbane. 
Queensland Department Of Natural Resources. (1997). The 
Statewide Landcover and Trees Study (SLATS). 
Queensland Department of Natural Resources Interim 
Report, 37pp. 
Ranson, K.J., Sun, G., Weishampel, J.F and Knox, R.G. 
(1997). Forest biomass from combined ecosystem and radar 
backscatter modelling. Remote Sensing of Environment. 59: 
Sader, S.A. (1987). Forest biomass, canopy structure, and 
species composition relationships with multipolarization L- 
band Synthetic Aperture Radar data. Photogrammetric 
Engineering and Remote Sensing. 53: 193-202. 
Wang, Y., Davis, F.W., Melack, J.M, Kasischke, E.S., 
Christensen, N.L. (1995). The effects of changes in forest 
biomass on radar backscatter from tree canopies. 
International Journal of Remote Sensing. 16: 503-513. 
118-133. 
12. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Anthony Milne is Professor of Geography and Director of 
the Office of Postgraduate Studies, at the University of New 
South Wales. His research interests lie in the use of 
synthetic aperature radar for vegetation mapping and 
biomass estimation. He is Co-Chainnan of the NASNJPL 
sponsored Pacific Rim Deployment of AIRSAR in April- 
June 2000. 
252 
