Design and Development of a Multi-Gigabit WDM 
Network for use in the Aerospace Environment 
Andrew J. McLaughlin, J. Stewart Aitchison, John H. Marsh 
[A.McLaughlin, JSA, J.Marsh] @elec.gla.ac.uk 
Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, 
University of Glasgow, Rankine Building, 
Oakiield Avenue, Glasgow G12 SQQ, UK. 
Robert D. Gardner", Ivan Andonovic, David K. Hunter 
[r.gardner, i.andonovic, d.hunter] @eee.strath.ac.uk 
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, 
University of Strathclyde, Royal College Building, 
204 George Street, Glasgow G1 lXW, UK. 
Optoelectronics Research Group, Optoelectronics Division, 
* corresponding author. 
Abstract-Photonic networking technologies have the 
potential to revolutionise future military aircraft data 
communications, delivering substantial improvements in 
networking performance, reliability, cost and security. 
Wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), in particular, 
can provide a huge bandwidth-to-weight ratio as well as 
enhanced routing flexibility, connectivity and network 
survivability. In this paper, the design and development of a 
multi-gigabit, broadband WDM network architecture, 
specifically designed for use in the aerospace environment, 
is discussed. A key element in the system is the arrayed- 
waveguide grating (AWG) wavelength multiplexing 
component, which has been designed to allow operation 
over the full military temperature specification (-55°C to 
+125"C) without additional environmental conditioning. 
The paper describes the design of prototype AWG devices, 
which use multi-mode interference couplers to provide a flat 
spectral response, and presents preliminary results of their 
operation. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODWTIOY ............................................................... 1 
RECWIKEMENTS OF A >$LIT W Y  AVIONICS 
DATABUS & RATIONAL BkHINI) U \ t  Of- M'DM ............. 1 
ROBUS . THL ROHWT BUS AKCHITLCTCKE ................. 3 
DESIGN OF AV ARRAYED-W AVEGIJIDE GRATING 
FOR THE AEROSPACE ENVIRONMENT ............................. 5 
PRELLR.ILhJARY FABRICATION ~IiT.4lL.S ............................ 8 
SUMhlARY 4kD C'Or\;CL.USlOltS ....................................... 8 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Within the aerospace industry, it has been predicted that in 
the near future the bandwidth demands of aircraft 
communications will require the introduction of an optical 
network system employing fibre optic and, potentially, 
photonic waveguide components [1,19]. Such photonic 
technology has the potential to revolutionise future military 
aircraft data communications, delivering substantial 
improvements in networking performance, reliability, cost 
and security. More particularly, wavelength-division 
multiplexing (WDM) can provide a huge bandwidth-to- 
weight ratio as well as enhanced routing flexibility, 
connectivity and network survivability [24]. 
Although WDM is a rapidly maturing technology in the 
telecommunications sector, and a growing number of 
components are commercially available, the stringent 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
requirements of aerospace systems, and the unique 
restrictions imposed by the hostile operating environment, 
dictate that a direct mapping of telecommunications WDM 
technology is not possible. The reliable connection of thin 
single-mode optical fibres is a particular problem but more 
significant is the temperature sensitivity exhibited by WDM 
devices which, without environmental conditioning, can 
result in crosstalk between adjacent communications 
channels. 
In this paper, progressive stages in design and deyelopment 
of a multi-gigabit WDM network (the PHONAV project), 
specifically designed for use in the aerospace environment, 
are discussed. A brief overview of the envisaged functional 
and operational requirements of next-generation avionics 
communications systems is first given, setting the context 
for a brief description of a new high performance, high 
connectivity, IMA compliant photonic network architecture 
based on WDM technology. 
Subsequently, the WDM component technologies are 
discussed in detail, showing how full military specification 
temperature stability can be achieved using techniques in 
broadband wavelength-division multiplexing without 
additional environmental conditioning. The design and 
fabrication of three prototype 1550nm waveband 4x4 AWG 
(or PHASAR) wavelength division multiplexers is 
described, including a standard 400 GHz PHASAR, a 400 
GHz PHASAR with input and output tapers, and a 
broadband 400 GHz PHASAR incorporating multi-mode 
interference (MMI) sections at the input and tapered array 
waveguides. The processed devices have been tested at 
room temperature using a tuneable IR laser source, and their 
operation characteristics such as frequency relation between 
input and output ports and spacing between wavelengths 
validated the design parameters. 
2. REQUIREMENTS OF A MILITARY AVIONICS 
DATA~US & RATIONAL BEHIND USE OF WDM 
The requirements of an avionics databus can be broadly 
grouped into the categories physical, functional, 
environmental and cosfife-cycle. 
Physical Requirements 
The physical requirements specify the size, weight and 
power constraints of the networking equipment, as well as 
safety considerations relating to its operation and 
maintenance [1]. Hazards include eye damage from 
accidental viewing of coherent light sources (outside the 
visible spectrum), electrocution, small diameter fibres 
leading to puncturing of the skin, toxicity and flammability 
of materials and of chemicals requiredlreleased during 
115 
maintenance procedures. 
Use of WDM technology offers a significant weight and 
size advantage over copper cabling and even spatially 
multiplexed optical systems because of the resulting 
decrease in the number of optical fibres and, consequently, 
fibre connectors required. The electronic bottleneck 
associated with TDM systems is also alleviated. However, 
in common with medium to long-distance, optical fibre- 
based communications systems, the use of coherent laser 
sources poses a potential eye hazard. This can be avoided by 
using low-power optical sources with amplification stages 
provided in the network. 
On the toxicity and flammability question, optical fibre 
cables manufactured for aerospace applications use non- 
flammable, non-corrosive materials such as glass yarn 
strength members and fluoropolymer buffer sheaths. The 
fluoropolymer materials are very stable at high temperatures 
and generate very little smoke when burning. These 
materials also have excellent chemical and solvent 
resistance. Note that at present, it appears that it is not 
possible to design a plastic optical fibre that can meet both 
the most stringent toxicity and flammability regulations. 
The adoption of an optical fibre-based system of course 
excludes the possibility of power surges and the radiation or 
pick up of electromagnetic interference. 
Functional Requirements 
The functional requirements relate to capability of the 
network in transporting data from source to destination and 
involve parameters such as throughput, latency, fault 
tolerance, survivability, bit-error rates, deterministic 
behaviour, protocol support and contiguration flexibility. 
An avionics system can be expected to handle a number of 
types of data traffic, for example, aircraft control data (e.g. 
engine control, wing surface controls), sensor data (e.g. 
radar, lidar, navigation), civil aircraft entertainment (e.g. 
audio, video, internet, in-flight information). The data 
flowing through the network ranges from high bandwidth 
signals like radar and video, to low bandwidth signals such 
as temperature sensors. The network system is therefore 
expected to be able to handle data rates ranging from a few 
kbit/s up to a few Gbit/s, with the possibility of numerous 
simultaneous connections. 
The SAE SensorNideo Interconnect Requirements 
Taskgroup has produced a document that sets out guidelines 
for future avionics network capabilities [2]. For avionics 
backplane operation, data rates of 1 Gb/s are currently 
required, with a maximum latency of lps including data 
path set up/pull down times. In the sensodvideo distribution 
network, a stream data rate of 2 Gb/s is required at less than 
loops latency and no more than 50ms allowed for path set 
up/pull down. Control and status information is 
characterised by short duration data messages requiring 1 
Mb/s and a latency of less than lops. With respect to total 
throughput, aggregate avionics bit-rates in excess of 
SOGbit/s are already foreseen with the introduction of ever 
more sophisticated sensing and monitoring equipment in the 
military sector. 
Balancing high connectivity with low-latency represents a 
significant challenge, especially in the design of a unified 
network capable of supporting backplane, sensor and 
control data and which fulfils the need to exchange large 
quantities of data between multiple processors in a time 
critical manner. Reference [2] specifies support for up to 
4096 addressable nodes in the backplane and up to 128 in 
the distribution network. Sufficient flexibility and 
scalability to enable the available network bandwidth to be 
delivered when necessary, where required, then becomes a 
critical issue. 
The network must also be deterministic - i.e. it must be 
possible to predict the state of the network at any time. 
However, it is interesting to note that there have been moves 
to relax this requirement to that of a predictable network, 
whose state is known at specified points in time. 
Detected, uncorrected bit-error rates are quoted in [2] at less 
than 1.25~10-’ for stream data and less than 1 ~ 1 0 ‘ ’ ~  for
controlhtatus data on the distribution network. The 
undetected error rate must be less than 1 ~ l O - l ~ .  
Requirements for the backplane are not specified but will be 
taken to be less than lxlO-” (detected, uncorrected) and 
lx10-14 (undetected). 
Survivability is a key consideration in the design of an 
aircraft communications architecture. Failed nodes or fibre 
sections or even whole subnetworks should not impede 
operation of unaffected parts of the network. The network 
should therefore be multiple failure tolerant. It is usual to 
supplement this with multiple redundant data paths for 
enhanced network fault tolerance. 
The openness of network interfaces will assume a much 
greater importance as the COTS initiative takes hold. In the 
underlying operation of the network, conscious effort should 
be made not to preclude the use of certain protocols and 
ideally there should exist support for all commonly used 
protocols such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), 
Fibre Channel, Scalable Coherent Interface (SCI), 
SONET/SDH, ARINC and, importantly, provide backwards 
compatibility to the legacy MIL-STD-1553/1773 systems. 
Devices should also be location transparent, so that they can 
operate properly when located at any point in the network. 
Environmental Requirements 
The hostile aerospace operating environment imposes many 
constraints on the engineering and design of avionics 
systems. The most critical in respect of this work is the 
stringent operational temperature range of -55°C to + 125°C. 
Optical devices are especially susceptible to temperature, 
which causes path length and refractive index variations in 
the waveguide material, leading to spectral drift. Such 
effects can produce catastrophic crosstalk in a dense WDM 
system, and represent an engineering challenge in this 
project. Other environmental conditions, such as pressure, 
vibration and humidity, do not pose fundamental operational 
problems and can be withstood through appropriate 
component packaging. 
Cost and Life Cycle Requirements 
Cost and life cycle requirements relate to the 
maintainability, manageability, interchangeability, 
reliability and direct costs associated with the network. A 
significant proportion of the costs associated with owning 
and operating an avionics system lie in its maintenance over 
the operational life span and, therefore, there is a concerted 
drive towards the lowering of such costs. The network can 
help in this respect by incorporating built-in test and fault 
diagnosis procedures to enable the location of a fault to be 
identified and repabedheplaced quickly. Ideally, there 
should be a minimal number of different spare parts 
116 
required to service the network and replacements should be 
at module rather than component level. The network should 
also offer a reduced functionality operational mode to allow 
the aircraft to rehun to base for more major servicing. 
The Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) initiative represents 
a US government drive towards more affordable avionics by 
using, where applicable, ruggedised versions of 
commercially available components and technologies. The 
desire for COTS technology is commensurate with an 
inherent objective of the PHONAV project, which is to 
investigate mainstream telecommunications optical network 
concepts applicable to avionics. Although the cost of optical 
network technology is at present relatively high, extensive 
research and the competitive buoyancy of the 
telecommunications industry continue to drive down prices. 
In particular, WDM is fast becoming a standard 
telecommunications network multiplexing technology. 
PHONAV also complies with the notion of an Integrated 
Modular Avionics (IMA) architecture [3,18]; an approach to 
fulfilling COTS and open systems compliance whilst 
offering enhanced system performance and reduced 
operational costs. 
3. ROBUS - THE ROBUST Bus ARCHITECTURE 
Overview of ROBUS 
The physical topology of the proposed PHONAV 
architecture, known as the ROBUS (Robust BUS) structure, 
can be described as a number of interconnected twin fibre 
loops configured to support a logical topology consisting of 
numerous independent, uni-directional looped buses, each 
on a particular wavelength [4,20]. Robustness is achieved 
through the use of one of the twin fibres as a protection 
fibre, providing redundant datapaths. A diagramtic 
representation of the wavelength channels is shown in 
Figure 1. It is envisaged that eight or more such independent 
buses may exist simultaneously on a single optical fibre, 
transmitting data in either direction as appropriate. Note that 
WDM is predominantly a single mode optical technology. 
Wavelength 
Figure 1: WDM Wavelength Channel Assignments 
Each databus is configured through the network to deliver 
bandwidth where required. Routing from one ring section to 
another is via optical path routers (see Figure 2), whose 
configuration can be changed as necessitated by equipment 
upgrades or severe in-flight failure conditions. 
For successful source to destination node routing, packets 
must be assigned the appropriate destination node address 
and must be transmitted on a bus which ‘passes’ the 
destination node. As each bus is independent, packet 
switching is not required and congestion is not possible. The 
architecture supports broadcasting/ multicasting of packets 
through appropriate lightpath configuration and use of 
special packet addresses. Note that in contrast to many other 
WDM systems, ROBUS does not employ wavelength 
conversion for routing purposes. 
Ring IS a “Tim 
Device‘ 
Figure 2: Example of a ROBUS Section 
In ROBUS, each node is nominally able to modulate and 
receive all eight wavelengths, although this functionality 
can be limited, if necessary, for security reasons. 
The governor is able to control communications on each 
wavelength channel [4]. It node acts as the source and sink 
of light power on each wavelength channel and may require 
environmental conditioning to ensure wavelength stability. 
Should a governor fail, a direct backup can substitute or 
lightpaths can be re-routed so that a more distant governor 
provides the necessary functionality. The governor also has 
channel monitoring functionality and is able to detect bit 
errors in packet headers through the use of the CRC check, 
detect lost or out-of-sequence packets and multiple 
receive/transmit errors. 
Survivability is achieved through the use of an additional 
‘protection’ fibre, allowing 1+1 channel protection to be 
implemented on ring sections, similar to that employed in 
SONET/SDH networks, making it possible to route data 
around a failed node/link or network section [21]. Multiple 
nodes and entire subnetworks can be isolated very quickly 
(milliseconds) in this way, without significant effect of the 
remainder of the network. Furthermore, should any one 
channel fail, it is possible to use another as substitute with 
no network reconfiguration being required. 
Communications on a ROBUS-based network is either 
controlled centrally by a ‘governor node’ or may be 
distributed amongst nodes on each bus [4]. In either case, 
appropriate higher-layer protocols deal with access control, 
routing, framing, error handling - Fibre Channel Arbitrated 
Loop and Slotted Loop are primary candidates at this time. 
Generic Network Access Node (G-NAN) Designs 
In order to reduce spares requirements and simplify network 
maintenance, it is desirable to use a generic design for the 
network access node in the ROBUS architecture. From the 
previous sections, it is possible to summarise the 
requirements of a generic network access node as: 
0 The ability to multipledde-multiplex eight (or more) 
wavelength channels. 
0 Capable of being reconfigured in the event of a node 
failure or fibre break 
0 Insensitivity to temperature changes in the 
environment (temperature) 
0 Bi-directional communications capability 
0 Simple, cheap and robust construction 
Low insertion loss 
117 
A schematic of the envisaged network access node is shown 
in Figure 3. 
The node is capable of processing a total of n clockwise and 
m counter clockwise propagating signals (where n+m I 8) 
on the working fibre. 
Switches-The implementation of the 1+1 channel 
protection mechanism requires a means of looping the 
working fibre signal back onto the protection fibre. This can 
be achieved using an arrangement of two 2x2 optical 
switches, as shown in Figure 4. 
h, - hm+ 
t h, - h, Network 
Access 
Node 
Working Fibre 
Protection Fibre 
Avionics 1 Device 1 
I I 
Figure 3: Network Access Node 
Workina 
t hermq-oRtic 
2x2 switc es 
I 
Figure 4: Network Access Node showing 2x2 switches for 
1+1 Protection Mechanism Operation 
Under normal operation, the 2 x 2 switches are in the cross 
state and the protection fibre is not used. By setting either of 
the switches to the bar state, an incoming signal is looped 
back. Furthermore, in the event of a power failure at the 
node, both switches will move to the bar state and isolate 
the node from the system. This is an important feature as 
the signal processing elements within the node are not 
optically transparent without electrical power being applied. 
The 2 x 2 switches require two custom features: 
A passive 7c phase shift to enable bar state operation in 
the 'off state. 
0 wavelength insensitive operation over a 40 nm 
passband 
MultiplexerDemultiplexer-Within the generic network 
access node, it is necessary to be able to multiplex and 
demultiplex the individual wavelength channels transmitted 
on the optical fibre. One of the simplest, most flexible and 
most elegant optical devices for this purpose is the arrayed 
waveguide grating (AWG) [5,6,7,8] - see Figure 5. AWGs 
are an application of planar waveguide technology and can 
be fabricated on silica-on-silicon substrate using a 
combination of flame hydrolysis deposition (FWD) and 
photolithography and reactive ion etching (RIE). 
InputlOutput Waveguide 
/ \  
W aveplate 
A I .  Al. A ) .  
AL. A S  
(a) De-multiplexet 
A l .  A l . 1 3  
h4. A S  1 
A4 
5 
(b) Multiplexer 
A I .  A l .  A 3 .  A I .  AS 
A l  3.2 
(c) Add-Drop Multiplexer 
A I .  A? .  A3. A I ,  A S  
A l .  A l .  A). Ad. A S  
A I , ~ ~ . A ~ . A J . A S  
A I . A l .  A 3 . A I . A S  
A I .  A ? .  A3,Ad. A S  
A l .  A I ,  Al. A 4  A S  
A l .  A l .  A 3 . 1 4 .  AS 
hi. AI. A 3 .  AA.  i s  
A l .  A:. A). AJ. AS 
A l .  12.  U, AA.  AS 
(d) N x N  Interconnect 
Figure 5: Schematic diagram of Arrayed-Waveguide 
Grating Device (top) and various uses (bottom) 
Importantly, the AWG - also known as a Phasar - is the 
least temperature sensitive of current muddemux devices. 
The pass wavelength in a silica-based AWG varies linearly 
with temperature at approximately 0.01 nmPC, representing 
a total drift of more than 2 nm over the full military 
temperature specification of -55°C to +125"C. A heater or 
Peltier cooler can be used to control the temperature of the 
device but this requires the constant power consumption of a 
few Watts for each AWG in the network. (Temperature 
insensitive devices, using a silicone wedge with a negative 
thermal coefficient, have been fabricated for operation in the 
range 0-85°C [9] but the silicone is liable to melt at higher 
temperatures.) 
The elegance of the AWG is revealed through its ability to 
simultaneously multiplex and demultiplex a WDM signal 
using a loop-back configuration - see Figure 5c. Such 
reciprocity provides scope for add-drop signal applications 
and allows the AWG to handle light signals propagating in 
either direction at the same time. In this construction, an N x 
N port multiplexer is used, where the two centre ports are 
reserved for use as an input and an output port. This leaves 
a total of N-1 ports that can be used for signal wavelengths. 
On entering the node, the signals pass though the centre port 
of the AWG, and split across the N-1 output ports. These 
ports are then looped back, either by fibre or on the same 
planar substrate to the remaining N-1 input ports. These 
signals then multiplex down to the central output port. 
Within the looped-back paths, modulation, demodulation 
and amplification of the signals can occur. 
Modulator/Demodulator/Amplijier-The add-drop 
multiplexing configuration outlined in the previous section 
suggests that it is necessary to convert the signal to the 
electrical domain for processing and then regenerate the 
signal. However, Tachikawa has developed a method of 
using a semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) to modulate, 
demodulate and amplify a passing optical signal [lo]. 
118 
Signal monitoring is performed by an SOA, where passing 
optical signals cause changes in the terminal voltage across 
the pn junction forming the SOA [ 113 - see Figure 6. This 
change in voltage can be monitored through an rf interface 
to the device. This function occurs without any noticeable 
change in the passing optical signal. 
1 
h 1 - h n  
gure 6: AWG with Semiconductor ,ptical Amplifiers 
in looped-back paths. 
Passive optical monitoring, or listening, allows optical 
signals to be detected and pass. through the node virtually 
unhindered. Through a change in the bias conditions, it is 
also possible to have the SOA drop a signal from the 
system. Modulation of the passing wavelength channels 
occurs in a similar fashion, where the gain of the SOA is 
modulated throughout its dynamic range. Amplification of 
the passing signal is also achieved by applying the 
appropriate bias conditions. 
Summary-The preferred solution to the generic network 
access node is the AWG single filter component that can 
perform both multiplexing and de-multiplexing tasks and 
which provides both cost and packaging advantages. The 
Semiconductor Optical Amplifier (SOA) has been selected 
as the signal-processing element owing to its ability to 
provide amplification, lossless monitoring and modulation 
of passing data streams. Therefore, the ROBUS G-NAN 
contains no transmitter or receiver elements. All of the G- 
NAN components discussed are integrated optical devices. 
Their simple, planar construction provides reliability, and in 
the case of failure, such devices tend to exhibit graceful 
degradation. However, because of the wide operational 
temperature range, efforts to source an appropriate arrayed- 
waveguide grating from the commercial sector have proved 
unsuccessful and the packaging of the devices may yet 
prove to be another significant challenge in successful 
system integration. The following section therefore 
discusses the rationale behind the design of a custom 
arrayed-waveguide grating component for use in the hostile 
aerospace environment. 
4. DESIGN OF AN ARRAYED-WAVEGUIDE 
GRATING FOR THE AEROSPACE ENVIRONMENT 
Overview 
The primary objective is the design an AWG able to cope 
with large changes in temperature, without the need for 
electrical temperature control. The importance of this is 
illustrated in the following example. The anticipated number 
of nodes for an on-board ROBUS-based communications 
system would be in the order of about 100. Typical 
specifications for environmental control of AWGs state the 
power requirement for full environmental conditioning at 
around about 4 Watts per AWG [12,13]. The resulting total 
power requirement of 400W for conditioning alone 
represents more than 1% of the total electrical power 
available on-board an aircraft (-3OkW). 
The typical temperature dependence of wavelength in a 
silica based Arrayed Waveguide Grating is approximately 
0.01 nm/"C. The anticipated maximum temperature range 
for which operation is required is -55 to +125"C. Assuming 
that the source wavelength is fixed at the centre of an AWG 
channel at a given temperature, e.g. 35"C, then an AWG 
with a channel bandwidth of 2 nm could drift +lnm without 
any significant increase in crosstalk between adjacent 
channels, implying that a single AWG component can be 
used anywhere in the aerospace environment (within the 
given temperature range) with the same stabilised 8 
wavelength carriers. (It is assumed that the optical source 
supplying the carrier wavelengths is wavelength stabilised.) 
Therefore, a relaxed tolerance AWG custom design is 
required, packaged to meet the requirements for aerospace 
operation. 
Specifications of AWG 
Broad Channel Spacing-Each signal-bearing wavelength 
channel requires a width of at least 2 nm in order to 
accommodate the wavelength channel drift of the AWG due 
to temperature effects. The nearest standard channel spacing 
is 3.2nm, which is approximately 400 GHz. 
Flat Channel Passband-The typical wavelength response 
of an AWG is that of a Gaussian distribution - observable in 
Figure 7. However a drift of el nm within a channel of a 
conventional 400 GHz device would produce a signal roll- 
off loss as high as 10 dB, which is clearly unacceptable. It is 
therefore necessary to limit the roll-off across the full width 
of the channel to less than 1 dB. 
Crosstalk-The maximum acceptable crosstalk at the centre 
wavelength is defined to be -30 dB, the anticipated 
sensitivity of the SOA receiver. At the drift points, the 
expected maximum acceptable crosstalk is defined to be -20 
dB, which is considered reasonable value in view of the 
Gaussian roll-off of the channel distributions. 
Eight Channels-The minimum number of channels for 
ROBUS bandwidth requirements is eight [4]. 
Minimal Optical Loss-The AWG should incur minimal 
optical loss in order to reduce the SOA gain requirements. 
Prototype 4-channel AWG 
In order to design and simulate the performance of a 
suitable AWG, use was made of the 'WDM Phasar' package 
from the Optiwave Corporation, which uses the Fast Fourier 
Transform Beam Propagation Method to simulate lightwave 
propagation in optical waveguides. The computation effort 
required to design an 8x8 AWG resulted in simulations 
requiring days to complete. It was therefore decided in the 
first instance to concentrate on perfecting the design of a 
4x4 AWG, requiring a few hours simulation time. Prototype 
design refinement was carried out in three stages: 
Stage I T h e  first stage was the design of an optimised, 
broadband, 4x4, 400 GHz arrayed-waveguide grating. 
119 
Relevant desigdsimulation data is shown in Table 1 and 
was used to simulate the AWG in the ‘WDM Phasar’ 
package. The crosstalk levels were deliberately assigned 
extremely low values, as it is known that adding tapers and 
multi-mode interference (MMI) sections in later stages is 
liable to significantly affect crosstalk levels. 
Centre Wavelength 
Number of Inpuffoutput Waveguides 
Wavelenath Channel SDacina 
Table 1: Stage 1 Design Parameters 
1.55 p n  
4 
402.58265 GHz 
Dispersion 
Focal Length of Focal Plane Regions 
Arrav Waveauide SDacina (Crosstalk: -35dB) 
10.06 pmlnm 
2622.6485 pm 
15.6 um 
Input Waveguide Spacing (Crosstalk: -1 OOdB) 34.2 pm 
The output spectra from the simulated device are shown in 
Figure 7. Note the Gaussian shape of the spectral peaks, 
which result in a rapid power roll-off either side of the 
midpoint. 
Diffraction Order 91 
Table 2: Simulation results for Stage 1 AWG 
Number of Arrayed Waveguides 
Free Spectral Range 
Arrav Waveauide Lenath Increment 
I Centre Wavelenath 
28 
2124.4165 GHz 
97.712193 um 
Number of InpuVOutput Waveguides I 4 
0 -  
-LO - 
Q -20 
W 
-30 
U) 
U! 2 -40 
-50 
I Wavelenath Channel SDacina I 3.36 nm I 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
I . . . ,  , , . , , . . I  . . .  I / . .  
Crosstalk 
Free Spectral Range 
Insertion Loss 
These results were considered satisfactory for a first stage 
design exercise and the simulated AWG design was 
prepared e-beam mask writing and fabrication. 
-40.2 dB 
17.5 nm 
-3.59 dB 
Stage 2-The addition of array tapers makes it possible to 
reduce the AWG insertion loss. The array tapers minimise 
the optical loss and phase errors arising from field 
truncation and the power loss where the array is joined to 
the free propagation regions [14, 151. In effect, tapering the 
arrayed waveguides increases the numerical aperture (NA) 
of the array, better matching it to the NA of the Focal Plane 
Regions (FPR), thus increasing optical throughput. 
Array tapers of length 2500 pm were used, from a width of 
6 pm at the array end to 14.4 pm at the focal plane region of 
the AWG. The tapers were designed within adiabatic limits, 
with a 1 mm gap between tapers at the FPR to enable 
successful fabrication. With the tapers in place, the insertion 
loss data was calculated to be in the region of -2.2 dB. 
Stage 3-Through the addition of inputloutput waveguide 
MMI coupler regions at the input plane of the input focal 
plane region, it is possible to create a flatter, broader 
channel at the output of the AWG (see Soole et al. [16] and 
Amersfoot et al. [ 171). 
Figure 8 illustrates the operation of a linearly stretched 1xN 
AWG with a single wavelength Gaussian-shaped source at 
the input waveguide. After dspersion through the array, the 
input is imaged at the output side of the AWG. As the 
wavelength is swept across the AWG operating range, the 
Gaussian image moves across the output plane. 
arrayed waveguides 
waveguide 
Figure 8: Operation of Arrayed-Waveguide Grating 
Under these operating conditions the output spectra of the 
channel can be directly related back to the original Gaussian 
field distribution and its overlap integral with the mode of 
the output waveguide, i.e. the output spectra has a Gaussian 
distribution. 
If the input image is modified so that it is a two fold 
Gaussian image, Amersfoot et a1 [17] have shown that the 
spectra at the output waveguide will now take on the same 
broadened, flattened shape - see Figure 9. 
arrayed waveguides 
MMI couDler I a input 
waveguide I E I waveguide 
Figure 9: Operation of Arrayed-Waveguide Grating 
with MMI coupler section 
120 
On entering the MMI coupler, single mode signal is no 
longer restrained and expands to become multimodal. The 
wave propagation in the MMI coupler is characterized by 
the self-imaging properties of the multimode waveguide 
which are due to the constructive interference of the 
waveguide modes. 
The broadband AWG from stage 2 was optimised by 
varying the following parameters using the Central 
Composite Method Response Surface Design on the 
following parameters: MMI width, MMI length, array taper 
length and output waveguide width. Through this method, 
an optimised experimental design methodology is used to 
statistically analyse the influence of the 4 input parameters 
on the following output parameters: 
Crosstalk Level (Centre Wavelength) 
0 Crosstalk Level (Centre Wavelength + 1nm) 
Insertion Loss 
0 -3 dB Bandwidth 
-6 dB Bandwidth 
A total of 31 device simulations were performed, each 
lasting for approximately 4 hours. The final output was a 
number of equations which described the output parameters 
as a function of the input parameters. Analysis of these 
equations resulted in the following optimum settings: 
0 MMI Width (22 pm) 
MMI Length (265 pm) 
0 
Array Taper Length (2500 pm, final width 14.4 pn) 
Output Waveguide Width (6 pm) 
Illustrations of the MMI coupler sections and tapered arrays 
are given in Figures 10 and 11. Figure 12 shows output 
spectra over 4 channels for the optimum settings above. 
Figure 10: MMI couplers on AWG input waveguides. 
O r  
1.544 1.548 1.552 1.556 1.56 1.564 1.568 
Wavelength (microns) 
Figure 12: Optimised AWG output spectra 
Comparing this plot with the ‘normal AWG’ plot in Figure 
7, the broadening of the wavelength channels is clearly 
visible. For comparison purposes, the ‘normal’ 400 GHz 
channel is overlaid on the ‘broadband’ 400 GHz channel in 
Figure 13. 
1.544 1.546 1.548 1.55 1.552 
Wavelength 
Figure 13: Comparison of ‘normal’ and optimised 
‘broadband’ wavelength channels. 
Discussion of Results 
The tabulated results for the simulated device are given in 
Table 3. The -3dB width of the wavelength channels is on 
target at over 2.1nm and hence the device should be able to 
work over the full specified temperature range of -55°C to 
+125”C. This represents a channel broadening of 
approximately 1.3nm compared to the ‘normal’ AWG - 
hence satisfying the condition discussed earlier of a 
minimum channel width of 2nm. The corresponding channel 
separation is 3.26nm, as specified in the design parameters. 
It can also be seen that the crosstalk figure for the centre of 
the wavelength channel is -4OdB, 1OdB better than 
specified. For f 1 nm either side of the centre wavelength, 
the value of -2OdB is as specified and within acceptable 
limits. Although the G-NAN does provide amplification via 
the SOAs, the insertion loss is quite high (over 4dB) and 
further optimisation may be required. 
_ %  
Figure 11: Tapered arrays at the first focal plane region. 
121 
Figure 14: Screenshot of 400GHz AWG in WDM-Phasar CAD tool 
Wavelength Channel Spacing 
Crosstalk (Centre of wavelength) 
Crosstalk (Centre k 1 nm) 
Table 3: Device Parameters for Optimised AWG 
3.26 nm 
-40 dB 
-20 dB 
Centre Wavelength 
Number of Inout/Outout Waveauides I 4 
-1 dB width 
-3 dB width 
1.877 nm 
2.1 33 nm 
Free Spectral Range I 17.5 nm 
Insertion Loss I -4.05 dB 
5.  PRELIMINARY FABRICATION DETAILS 
Several 4-channel AWG prototype devices have now been 
manufactured and are currently undergoing tests - see 
Figure 14. Preliminary results show the arrayed waveguide 
gratings to be functioning correctly with respect to the 
mapping of input wavelengths to the correct output 
waveguide. It has also been established that the spacing 
between the propagated wavelengths is correct at 3.26nm. 
No further information is available at the time of writing 
this paper. 
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has outlined, for the first time, a high-speed, 
high-performance broadband WDM architecture for next- 
generation avionics communications, demonstrating how 
optical (de)multiplexing devices can be designed that are 
robust over the full military temperature specification of - 
55°C to +125”C. Future work in the PHONAV* project will 
involve extensive testing of the manufactured 4x4 PHASAR 
devices to environmental extremes in an environmental 
chamber and the characterisation and design of 8x8 (and 
perhaps 16x16) PHASAR devices to operate normally under 
the same stringent temperature conditions. Further 
development of temperature insensitive WDM components 
including semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs), the 
finalisation of node designs, protocol development, the 
mapping of standard protocols over the ROBUS and 
performance simulation of the network with realistic 
avionics data is also necessary. It is intended that the 
resulting devices be incorporated into a ROBUS proof-of- 
principle tested that will allow the operation of the devices 
to be analysed and the operation of other components and 
the protocols to be verified. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
*PHONAV is an U.K. EPSRC-funded project. The authors 
gratefully acknowledge help and support from the industrial 
partners - British Aerospace (Military Aircraft and 
Aerostructures), British Aerospace (Sowerby Research 
Centre), Smiths Industries Aerospace, GKN Westland 
Helicopters Limited, BICC Brand Rex Ltd, the Royal Air 
Force and the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency. 
REFERENCES 
[l] N Aldridge et al., “Applications of Photonics in Avionics - 
Statement of Anticipated Requirements”, The SBAC Technology 
Committee, February 1996. 
[2 ]  “Requirements document for sensodvideo interconnect 
subsystems with rationale“, Soc. of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, ARDS0012, 1993 
[3] G R Parr, R A Edwards, “Key issues in integrated modular 
avionics - IAWG viewpoint“, 1996 ERA Avionics Con$ 1996. 
[4] R Gardner et al., “PHONAV - A Photonic WDM Network 
Architecture for Next Generation Avionics Systems”, IEEE 
Aerospace ConJ1999, Snowmass, Colorado, March 6-13, 1999. 
[5] M K Smit and C. van Dam, “PHASAR-based WDM- 
Devices: Principles, Design and Applications”, IEEE J. Select. 
Top. Quantum Elec., 2,235-250, 1996. 
[6] H Takahashi, K. Oda, H. Toba and Y. Inoue, “Transmission 
characteristics of arrayed waveguide N x N wavelength 
multiplexer”, J. Lightwave Technol., 13,447-455, 1995. 
[7] C A Brackett, “Dense wavelength division multiplexing 
networks: Principles and applications”, IEEE J. Select. Areas 
Commun., 8, 948-964,1990. 
[8] M K Smit, “New focusing and dispersive planar component 
based on an optical phased array”, Electron. Lett., 24, 385-386, 
1988. 
[9] K Okamoto et al., “Silica-Based Planar Lightwave Circuits 
for WDM Applications“, IEICE Trans. Electron., Vol. ESl-C, No. 
8, August 1998. 
[ 101 Y Tachikawa, “Optical signal processing in a loop-back type 
array waveguide grating multiplexer: amplification, modulation 
and demodulation”, Electron. Lett., 32, 1803-1804, 1995. 
122 
[ 111 Y Mitsuhashi, J Shimada and S Mitsutsuka, “Voltage change 
across the self coupled laser”, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., QE-17, 
[I21 M Ishii, Y Hibino, F Hanawa, H Nakagome, K Kato, 
“Packaging and Environmental Stability of Thermally Controlled 
Arrayed-Waveguide Grating Multiplexer Module with 
Thermoeleccric Device”, J. Lightwave Technol., 16, 258-263, 
1998. 
[ 131 Photonic Integration Research, Inc. (PIRI), “16 Channel 
Arrayed Waveguide Grating Demultiplexer”, Technical Data 
Sheet, 12/01/97. 
[ 141 C Dragone, “An N x N optical multiplexer using a planar 
arrangement of two star couplers”, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 3, 
[I51 C Dragone, C A Edwards, R C Kistler, “Integrated optics N 
x N optical multiplexer on silicon”, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 3, 
896-899, 1991. 
[16] J B D Soole, M R Amersfoot, et al. “Use of multimode 
interference couplers to broaden the passbad of wavelength 
dispersive integrated WDM filters”, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 
8, 1340-1342, 1996. 
[17] M R Amersfoot, J B D Soole, H P LeBlanc, N C 
Andreadakis, A Rajhel and C Caneau, “Passband broadening of 
integrated arrayed waveguide filters using multimode interferenece 
couplers”, Electron. Lett., 32,449-45 1, 1996. 
[ 181 P J Prisaznuk, “Integrated Modular Avionics“, Proceedings 
of NAECON92, 1992. 
[19] D R Morgan, “Military Avionics Twenty Years in the 
Future“, AIAA /IEEE Digital Avionics Sys. Con$, 1995. 
[20] B S Johansson, C R Batchellor, L Egnell, “Flexible bus: A 
self-restoring optical ADM ring architecture”, Electronics Letters, 
Vol. 32, No. 255 th  December 1996. 
[21] A S Glista, Jr., “Fault Tolerant Topologies for Fiber Optic 
Networks and Computer Interconnects Operating in the Severe 
Avionics Environment”, IEEE LCS, Feb. 1991. 
[22] H Takahashi, Y Hibino and I Nishi, “Polarisation insensitive 
arrayed-waveguide grating wavelength multiplexer on silicon”, 
Opt. Lett., 17,499-501, 1992. 
[23] Y Inoue, A Kaneko, F Hanawa, H Takahashi, K Hattori and 
S Sumida, “Athermal silica-based arrayed-waveguide grating 
multiplexer”, Electron. Lett., 33, 1945-1947, 1997. 
[24] C A Brackett, “Dense wavelength division multiplexing 
networks: Principles and applications”, IEEE J. Select. Areas 
Commun., 8,948-964, 1990. 
1216-1225, 1981. 
812-815, 1991. 
Photonic Networks in A 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Robert D. Gardner was bom in Stirling, 
Scotland, U.K., and obtained his B.Eng. 
in Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
with first class honours from the 
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, 
Scotland, U.K., in 1994. He is currently 
submitting his Ph.D. thesis on “Event 
Correlation in Telecommunications 
Networks” to the same University. Since 
January 1998 he has been a Research 
Fellow in the University working on the 
lvionics (PHONAV) project. His research 
interests include eveidalarm correlation, network management, 
optical local area networks, high-speed network modelling and 
simulation, neural networks and communications protocols. He is 
a member of the IEEE Communications Society and Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems Society. 
has visited both BT I 
David K. Hunter obtained his Ph.D. from 
the University of Strathclyde in 1991. 
His thesis was concerned with the design 
and analysis of architectures for optical 
TDM and ATM switching. After that, he 
worked on several BT contracts before 
obtaining an EPSRC Advanced 
Fellowship in 1995. He is now a Senior 
Research Fellow at the University, and 
has authored or co-authored nearly 60 
journal and conference publications. He 
abs and the Universitv o f  Pittsburgh for ~“ ” “  
extended research assignments, and is an active reviewer for many 
international professional journals and conferences. His research 
interests include optical networking, optical packet switching, 
optical network management and network survivability. 
Ivan Andonovic, Professor of Broadband Networks, joined the 
Electronic and Electrical Engineering Department at Strathclyde 
University in 1985, following a three-year period as research 
scientist (at Barr & Stroud) responsible for the design, 
manufacture and test of guided wave devices for a variety of 
applications. His main interests centre on the development of 
guided wave architectures for implementing optical signal 
processing, optical switching and routing as applied in next 
generation optical networks. He held a two-year Royal Society 
Industrial Fellowship in collaboration with BT Labs during which 
time he was tasked with investigating novel approaches to optical 
networking, He has edited two books and authored/co-authored 
five chapters in books and over 150 joumal and conference 
papers. He has been chairman of the IEE professional group E13 
and has held a BT Short Term Fellowship. Pro$ Andonovic is a 
Fellow of the IEE, Senior Member of the IEEE and a Member of 
the OSA. 
Andrew J. McLaughlin obtained his B.Eng (1st Class Honours) in 
Electronic Engineering with Optoelectronics from the University 
of Glasgow, Scotland, in 1994. In 1998 he obtained his Ph.D. 
from the same university, with a thesis entitled “Hybrid Silicon 
Optoelectronic Technologies”. His thesis examined the 
application of optical waveguide technology to the development of 
optically addressed automotive sensors. He worked on the 
Photonic Networks in Avionics (PHONAV) project from March to 
November 1998, during which time he addressed some of the 
issues involving technology transfer between telecommunication 
systems and aerospace communication systems. His interests 
include planar silica waveguide technology, WDM component 
design and optical sensing. Dr McLaughlin is currently a member 
of the IEEE Communications Society and the IEEE Lasers & 
Electro-optics Society (LEOS). 
J. Stewart Aitchison received the BSc. and Ph.D. degrees from 
the Physics Department of Heriot- Watt University, Edinburgh. 
Scotland, U.K., in 1984 and 1987, respectively. His dissertation 
work was on optical bi-stability in semiconductor waveguides. 
From 1988 to 1990, he was a post-doctoral Member of Technical 
Staff with Bellcore, NJ. His research interests were in the areas of 
highly non-linear glasses and spatial soliton propagation. He 
joined the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering at 
the University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, U.K., in 1990 as a 
Lecturer and was promoted to Senior Lecturer in 1995. Since his 
appointment, he has developed interests in non-linear optical 
waveguides. More recently, his attention has focused on second- 
order effects for all-optical switching and frequency conversion 
applications. He has also developed research interests in planar 
silica technology for photosensitivity, waveguide lasers and 
passive components. In 1996, he was the holder of a Royal Society 
of Edinburgh Personal Fellowship to carry out research on spatial 
solitons. He is the author or co-author of over 200 refereed joumal 
123 
and conference papers. Dr. Aitchison is a member of the Institute 
of Physics, the Optical Society of America and the IEEE Lasers 
and Electro-Optics Society. 
University. His resear 
linear and non-linear 
developed new integri 
John H. Marsh graduated with a B.A. in 
Engineering and Electrical Sciences from 
the University of Cambridge in 1977, an 
M.Eng. in Solid State Electronics from 
the University of Liverpool in 1978, and 
obtained the degree of Ph.D. in the LPE 
growth and electrical transport 
properties of InGaAsP alloys from 
Shefield University in 1982. He i s  
currently Professor of Optoelectronics 
Systems in the Department of Electronics 
and Electrical Engineering at Glasgow 
ch interests are particularly concenzed with 
integrated optoelectronic systems. He has 
ation technologies for photonic integrated 
circuits based on quantum well devices and quantum well 
intermixing, and leads the extensive programme of work at 
Glasgow on Ill-V based photonic integrated circuits for high-speed 
digital optical communications. He has close links with several 
industrial companies. He is author or co-author of more than 260 
jounial and conference papers. Professor Marsh is a Fellow of the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers (FIEE), Fellow of the Royal 
Society of Arts (FRSA), Senior Member of the IEEE, Member of 
the IEEE Electron Devices Society (EDS), and Member of the 
IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics Society (LEOS), for which he was 
voted Chapter-of the year 1997 and 1998. 
124 
