Use of Electrostatic Technology for Aero Engine Oil 
System Monitoring 
Honor Powrie 
Stewart Hughes Limited 
School Lane 
Chandlers Ford, Eastleigh 
Hampshire, SO53 4YG 
United Kingdom 
+44 (0)23 8024 2000 
hep@ shl.co.uk 
Abstract- A significant reduction in aircraft operational 
costs will be achieved through prognostics and health 
management (PHM): Early or predictive fault diagnosis will 
be used to maximise aircraft availability by planning and 
undertaking maintenance only when it is needed. This 
requires reliable aircraft sub-system fault monitoring, from 
which comprehensive, early detection and tracking data can 
be obtained. A review of on-line oil system monitoring 
identified a number of gaps, which need to be filled before 
such capability can be achieved. Current technology is 
limited in terms of early detection and the impact of using 
materials such as ceramics should be considered. Two 
sensor systems are being developed to address present and 
future shortcomings in aero engine oil-system monitoring. 
The sensor systems have undergone a number of trials 
including gear and bearing rig tests and full scale engine 
work. This paper describes the technology performance 
during a recent Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) funded 
program.- 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
TASK 1- TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
TASK 2- RIG EVALUATION 
TASK 3- ENGINE TESTS 
TASK 4- TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION 
CONCLUSIONS 
REFERENCES 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Electrostatic monitoring was originally developed for 
detection of debris in the gas path of jet engines and gas 
turbines. The basic principle is to detect the electrostatic 
charge associated with the debris. A sensor placed in the jet 
pipe of a jet engine is used to monitor changes in the 
amount of debris present in the exhaust gas. These changes 
may be related to the onset of gas path component 
deterioration, examples of which include blade rubbing, 
combustion chamber erosion and wear of abradable seals or 
coatings. This is the basis of the Engine Distress Monitoring 
System (EDMS), which is detailed in [ l ]  - [3]. In addition, 
electrostatic sensors installed in the intake of the engine can 
be used to detect and discriminate foreign objects entering 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
the engine. This is known as the Ingested Debris Monitoring 
System (IDMS) [ l l  and [41. 
A major advantage of the electrostatic technology is that it 
uses a direct measurement of the debris produced by the 
fault condition, rather than secondary effects such as 
vibration or temperature exceedance. This means that 
electrostatic monitoring is sensitive to the earliest symptoms 
of component degradation and can provide this information 
in real-time. Electrostatic technology has now been applied 
to monitoring component degradation in oil systems. In this 
environment the technology offers two potential tools: 
The oil-line sensor (OLS) is being developed to incorporate 
shortcomings in existing oil-line monitoring systems, in 
particular detection of ‘fines’ and non-metallic particulate. 
The advantage of sensitivity to finer particulate is that 
significant quantities of fines are produced even during the 
initial stages of component wear [SI - [7]. The ability to 
monitor fine wear debris and hence component deterioration 
from an early stage provides greater flexibility in terms of 
maintenance planning and equipment availability, which 
complies with the JSF PHM objectives. More recent 
developments, particularly for high-speed aircraft engine 
bearings, have led to the introduction of ceramic coatings 
and hybrid bearings. Ceramic is not detectable with 
conventional real-time oil-line devices (for example, 
magnetic chip or inductive detectors). However if such 
materials are to be used in modem engine components, there 
is a requirement for monitoring non-metallic wear debris. 
For an oil-line debris system to provide comprehensive 
monitoring, then the capability to monitor fines and non- 
metallic particulate is essential. In [SI, OLS and 
corroborative particle size data are presented which show 
that the OLS is sensitive down to 20pm debris 
(corroborative measurements were not provided for sub 
20pm particles). It has also been demonstrated, from gas 
turbine gas path monitoring (EDMS and IDMS), that the 
electrostatic technique is extremely effective for detection of 
non-metallic debris (including ceramics). This should also 
apply to oil-debris monitoring. 
Other work, involving simple point contacts, has shown that 
an increase in electrostatic charge is generated in advance of 
significant wear debris [9] and [lo]. This effect has also 
been demonstrated on a gear test rig [8]. The exact physical 
reason for these charge generation events is still under 
57 
investigation, but evidence shows that they are linked to the 
onset of surface wear, for example; surface phase 
transformation or initial charged debris formation. 
Monitoring this increase in charge level has the potential for 
giving advance warning of oil system component 
deterioration. Based on this effect, a wear-site sensor (WSS) 
is being developed. The WSS is mounted close to contacting 
surfaces for early detection of degradation. It is particularly 
relevant for monitoring a flight critical component, which is 
prone to rapid deterioration and / or hazardous failure. In 
this case, an undetected failure may result in substantial 
secondary damage, loss of machinery or even life. Typical 
applications that are affected by these criteria are 
helicopters, fast jets and maritime patrol aircraft. The WSS 
also has potential for monitoring dry (non-lubricated) 
components, such as plastic bearings. 
The current program addressed the application of 
electrostatic monitoring technology to bearing and oil 
system PHM. Both oil-line and wear-site sensors were 
included in the program, which was performed in four tasks: 
Task 1 Technology Development 
Task 2 Rig Evaluation 
Task 3 Engine Testing 
Task 4 Technology Transition 
This paper details the progress and performance of the 
electrostatic OLS and WSS during the Joint Strike Fighter 
Program Office (JSFPO) sponsored program. Particular 
detail is provided on the engine test results as these are of 
most relevance to the future application of the technology. 
2. TASK 1 2 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
In Task 1, a review of current in-service experience with oil 
monitoring and bearing failure was carried out. Combined 
with state-of-the-art technology, projected bearing and 
lubrication developments and JSF PHM objectives, the 
requirements for future oil monitoring systems were 
identified. 
To meet the requirements of PHM, future engine monitoring 
techniques must be able to provide information about the 
condition of engine components at any time. To achieve 
this real-time monitoring is required, which is sensitive to 
the earliest stages of component degradation. It is also 
important that potential PHM technology will be able to 
respond to future aircraft system developments. 
Based on the review of bearing service experience and 
needs, current and future real-time monitoring systems need 
to address the following points: 
Early detection of bearing deterioration in high 
speedhigh load environments, including sensitivity to 
fine (1-100 pm) particulate. 
Detection of non-metallic material to monitor ceramic or 
plastic bearings. 
Increased operational temperature capability. 
These requirements were fed into the remainder of the JSF 
funded program. 
For the second part of Task 1, testing was carried out on a 
small bearing rig at the University of Southampton (UoS). 
The tests built upon previous work but specifically enabled 
the electrostatic sensor and algorithm performance to be 
evaluated with respect to monitoring bearings. At the end of 
these tests the following conclusions were drawn: 
. Electrostatic (OLS and WSS) sensor RMS levels may be 
bearing load dependent as well being influenced by the 
working condition of the oil. 
Power spectra of the WSS signal may be used to indicate 
the current status of the bearing. 
There is a relationship between the OLS correlation 
value and the presence of debris. 
During the tests, tribological evidence that the bearing 
cage produced wear debris corroborated observations 
from the electrostatic sensors. . Further development of the indicators is required to 
produce a more robust diagnosis. 
. 
. 
. 
These results were used to define the pre-prototype sensor 
hardware and analysis algorithms for Tasks 2 and 3. At this 
stage the algorithms were incorporated into a real-time, PC 
based, Sensor Monitoring System (SMS). 
3. TASK 2 - RIG EVALUATION 
In Task 2, the pre-prototype OLS and WSS were installed 
on a bearing rig at the Georgia Institute of Technology (Ga 
Tech). The rig tests were designed to incorporate bearing 
geometries and operating conditions similar to those found 
in a jet engine. Tests with ball and plain roller bearings and 
mineral and mil-spec oils were included to allow a transition 
between the UoS rig tests (Task 1) and the engine tests 
(Task 3). In almost all the tests the cause of bearing failure 
was surface spalling due to fatigue, which was the dominant 
mode identified in the Task 1 review. Additional data 
produced during these tests included magnetic plug analysis, 
post-test bearing inspection and vibration and acoustic 
sensor data. These results were used for corroboration and 
comparison with the electrostatic sensor data. By the end of 
Task 2, the rig tests had demonstrated that the electrostatic 
sensors could detect the onset and progression of bearing 
failure under a range of conditions, as follows: 
The WSS is capable of monitoring the onset and 
progress of bearing defects from the earliest stage. 
Both roller bearing and ball bearing faults were 
monitored. . During the tests the WSS monitored bearing inner race 
(IR) and outer race (OR) failures. 
From the results analysed, the WSS generally gives a 
better indication of the onset and progression of bearing 
defects than the vibration or acoustic data. 
The OLS is capable of providing similar information to 
the magnetic plug. 
In addition the OLS can provide an advance warning of 
failure, which was not evident from the magnetic plug 
data. 
The OLS responds later than the WSS, showing that the 
OLS is detecting the production of bearing debris some 
time after the initial defect indication by the WSS. 
In addition, the following experience was gained from the 
Ga Tech Bearing rig tests: 
Rig testing and data from an operational environment 
similar to aero-engine conditions (speed, bearing 
geometry and oil type). 
Comparison of electrostatic data with other oil system 
component monitoring data (vibration and acoustic 
monitoring, inspection and magnetic plug samples). 
The WSS requires a ‘reasonable’ view of the relevant 
component. This can be, at least, partly achieved 
through sensor design and is a consideration for 
technology transition. 
WSS and OLS require robust instrumentation to 
minimise electrical pick up and to increase signal to 
noise ratios. This will improve the consistency and 
quality of data from the electrostatic sensors and is a 
requirement for technology transition. 
The data analysis algorithms applied during Task 2 were 
also used for the seeded fault engine test (Task 3) data. 
4. TASK 3 - ENGINE TESTING 
The objective of Task 3 was to demonstrate the electrostatic 
sensor technology in a realistic environment. Under the JSF 
PHM program, two ex-service FlOO engines were made 
available to Pratt and Whitney (P & W) for testing selected 
PHM technologies. To achieve this task, two Seeded Fault 
Engine Tests (SFETs) were undertaken. In both SFETs, 
engine #1 and #5 bearings were selected for monitoring. A 
WSS was fitted in each bearing chamber and an OLS was 
fitted in each bearing scavenge line. The electrostatic sensor 
data was processed and monitored in real-time using the PC 
based Sensor Monitoring System (SMS). The SFETs 
covered a number of likely oil system faults including oil 
thermal degradation, oil vapor phase coking, oil 
contamination, an attempted bearing chamber fire 
(unsuccessful) and mechanical damage to #1 and #5 
bearings. The WSS and/or OLS were not expected to detect 
all of these faults, but the SFETs did provide a ‘look-see’ 
opportunity for a number of novel conditions. The 
electrostatic results were corroborated with additional data 
where available. 
Sensor Installation and Data Acquisition 
A schematic of the installation of the electrostatic sensors is 
shown in Figure 1. The WSS installed in each bearing 
chamber had a Vi inch diameter sensing element. The WSS 
sensor installation into #1 bearing chamber is shown in 
Figure 2. To locate the sensing element close to the bearing, 
the WSS for #1 bearing chamber was installed at the end of 
a short tube riveted to the bearing cover. The sensor for #5 
bearing was fitted into a mounting block, which provided an 
oblique view of the bearing. Figure 3 shows an OLS 
installed in #5 bearing scavenge line. One OLS was 
installed in each of the #1 and #5 bearing oil scavenge pipes 
as close as possible to where the pipes exited the bottom of 
the engine. 
Signal Processing and Data Acquisition 
SFET#l was the first engine installation for the Stewart 
Hughes Limited (SHL) electrostatic oil monitoring system. 
As the WSS and OLS systems were under development at 
the time of the S E T ,  experimental, pre-prototype sensors 
and laboratory conditioning electronics were used for the 
installation. Whilst experimental equipment is not the 
ultimate solution for the engine environment, it does 
provide a relatively inexpensive and flexible approach to 
hardware development. 
Site Sensor 
No. 
Site 
U 1 Wear -- ToOil --- 
1 Sensor 
Figure 1 Sensor Installation for the Seeded Fault Engine Tests 
59 
60 
Inside No.1 Bearing Chamber Cover View in No.1 Bearing Chamber 
Figure 2 #1 Bearing Wear Site Sensor for SFET Tests 
Figure 3 Oil Line Sensor Installed in #5 Bearing Scavenge Line 
The signal conditioning units (SCUs) used were commercial 
off-the-shelf laboratory units. Based on the status of the 
WSS/OLS technology prior to the SFETs, it was anticipated 
that both hardware and processing modifications would be 
required as a result of the engine tests. Therefore, the use of 
laboratory SCUs provided a flexible approach to hardware 
development. The SCUs were fitted on anti-vibration 
mountings in closed boxes and cooled with gaseous nitrogen 
from the facility supply. 
A schematic of the engine installation, including data 
acquisition is given in Figure 4. The signals from the SCUs, 
together with the engine spool speed signals, were recorded 
onto DAT tape. All of these signals were also monitored by 
the SMS. In this case the electrostatic sensor signals were 
routed via anti-alias filters. The use of a DAT recorder 
allowed any changes to the SMS to be tested by playing 
back the engine test data at a later time. 
First Seeded Fault Engine Test (SFET#l) 
The #1 bearing failure was chosen for ease of 
implementation as well as its applicability to the JSF engine 
program. The #1 bearing is a roller bearing which is lightly 
loaded under engine operation in a sea level test cell, and 
therefore difficult to propagate to a spa11 condition. The #1 
bearing for the first engine test was modified to the 
following pre-faulted condition: 
The inner race was heat treated to reduce the hardness. The 
inner race was also damaged by using a Rockwell Hardness 
test machine to put six indents across the inner race at two 
locations 180 degrees apart. 
The #5 bearing is also a roller bearing and was modified by 
heat treating the inner race to reduce the hardness. 
SFET #1 ran in October 1998 for a total of 55.5 hours. The 
first 11.6 hours consisted of vibration surveys and 
performance calibrations on the engine plus some 90 minute 
simulated mission cycles. The following 21.8 hours were 
hot oil tests in which the simulated mission cycle was 
continuously repeated while the oil was heated. The oil was 
not changed or topped up during this test in order to 
thermally degrade the oil. Oil samples and magnetic plug 
samples were taken regularly throughout the tests. 
Figure 4 Schematic of the Electrostatic Oil Sensor System Installation for the S E T S  
At the end of the hot oil tests there had been no noticeable 
propagation of the bearing failures detected by any of the 
PHM technologies. It was therefore decided to remove half 
(10) of the rollers from the #I bearing in an attempt to 
increase the contact load. A further 12.9 hours of simulated 
mission cycles were run with the modified bearing. At this 
point, there being no noticeable degradation in the #1 
bearing, it was decided to turn off the oil supply to the 
bearing. Over the next 6.2 hours the oil was turned off, 
initially for short periods. These quickly increased to where 
the engine was run for three hours with no oil to the #1 
bearing. 
At this point, with no bearing failure propagation, a more 
severe approach was taken. The #1 bearing chamber cover 
was removed and the chamber flushed clean with solvent 
and dried. A slurry of 100 micron silicon carbide grit and 
Arizona Road Dust mixed with waterlalcoholkola was 
brushed onto the bearing rollers and races. The engine was 
restarted with no oil to the #I bearing and the engine run for 
2 hours 34 minutes before the oil was turned back on for a 
final 20 minutes. That was the completion of SFET#I, and 
no bearing damage propagation was accomplished. 
Second Seeded Fault Engine Test (SFET#2) 
Initial testing on SFET#2 was carried out with the #1 
bearing from SFET#l. After this, a second seeded fault 
bearing was fitted. This had been modified by machining 
two EDM slots 30 degrees apart across the outer race in two 
locations at bottom dead center and top dead center (when 
the race is installed in bearing housing). 
The #5 bearing for the second engine test was the service 
bearing that came with the engine. 
The first 10.6 hours of SFET#2 testing were to propagate 
fan cracks with the SFET#I #I bearing installed, during 
which time a bearing failure was to be avoided. These tests 
consisted of acceVdece1 cycles for vibration surveys with 20 
minute steady state running at speeds determined, by the 
vibration survey, to be the worst for second torsional 
vibration mode on the fan blade. After 10.6 hours of 
testing, the seeded fault #1 bearing was installed and the 
engine was run for a further 31 hours using a bearing 
degradation cycle. The steady state speeds were selected by 
vibration and stress wave monitoring as being the “worst” 
operating condition for the #1 bearing. 
Data Analysis Methods 
The data analysis methods for the S E T S  were derived from 
the technology development phase of the program and 
previous SHL oil monitoring experience. The analysis 
methods were implemented in the experimental PC based 
SMS. After SFET#l, a few minor changes were made to 
the analysis to improve visualisation of the electrostatic oil 
monitoring data. The final version of the analysis was re- 
applied to some of the SFET#I data and used to analyse all 
the SFET#2 data, as well as the Ga Tech bearing rig test 
data. 
Oil-line sensor (OLStFor  the OLS, the signal processing 
is primarily used to identify changes in the oil system, 
which relate to the early stages of degradation of the 
component being monitored. Typically this is evidenced by 
generation of fine debris, sufficient quantities of which will 
influence the flow quality monitored by the OLS. To detect 
fine particulate, a correlation based parameter is derived 
from the output signals of the OLS dual sensing elements. 
This parameter is normalised to minimise dependence on 
factors such as engine speed and absolute charge levels. 
A secondary part of the signal processing is detection of oil 
degradation by the OLS. Oil degradation influences the 
absolute charge levels detected by the electrostatic sensors. 
61 
For the SFXT#1 data, a preliminary analysis was employed 
to assess whether changes in absolute charge level may be 
used to indicate the general condition of the oil. 
Bearing #1 
Roller (Qty = 20) 
The SMS produces the OLS Indicator which relates to the 
presence of debris (including fines) in the oil-line. The 
SMS also produces an FWS Indicator which may be related 
to oil condition. 
Wear-site sensor (WSS)-The signal processing identifies 
the onset of bearing distress as monitored by the WSS. This 
is done by using Z-mods (showing frequency and intensity 
as a function of time), to identify increases in charge levels 
at frequencies related to bearing component distress. The 
frequencies for defects in the races, cage and rolling 
elements of #1 and #5 bearings are shown in Table 1, where 
N1 is the LP spool speed. 
Frequency 
4.23 x N1 
Roller (Qty = 22) 
Cage Rotating 
Roller Passing on Inner Race 
I Cage Rotating I 0.44 x N1 I 
4.62 x N1 
0.55 x N1 
9.83 x N1 
I Roller Passing on Inner Race I 11.17xNl I 
I Roller Passing on Outer Race I 8.83 xN1 I 
I Bearing#5 I I 
I Roller Passing on Outer Race 1 12.1 x N1 I 
Bearing #I Oil-Line Sensor (OLS#l) Response 
Bearing #I  Degradation Test (SFET#l)-DiEkulties 
encountered with the functionality of the original OLS, 
meant that portions of the OLS#1 data from SFET#l were 
unusable. In addition, the periods of no oil supply to the #I  
bearing during SFET#I resulted in sections of intermittent 
OLS data. 
A threshold for the OLS indicator, which could be used to 
establish when debris is being produced, was eventually 
determined from SFET#2 data. The threshold was 
subsequently applied to parts of the SFET#l data, which is 
presented here. The section of data comes from the latter 
part of SFET#l, around the time when the #1 bearing 
compartment was dried out and packed with a slurry 
mixture of Arizona Road Dust and Silicon Carbide material. 
The section of SFET#1 data, including the detection 
threshold, is shown in Figure 5. The data from the periods 
when no oil was flowing through the bearing are not 
included in this figure. 
In the first part of the data of Figure 5, corresponding to 
47.6 to 48 engine hours, there are no excursions below the 
threshold. This period is the last 25 minutes of engine 
running before the bearing was degreased and packed with 
the contamination slurry. For the next period of running, 48 
to 50.6 engine hours, the oil supply is stopped for more than 
2.5 hours. In Figure 5, two vertical dashed lines separate 
the two parts of the engine run when the oil supply was on. 
The oil was turned back on at 21:39 (50.6 engine hours). 
Immediately there are two excursions (at 21:39 and 21:40) 
which correspond to debris being flushed out of the #1 
bearing chamber. There is a third, larger, excursion at 
2156, which is also evidence of debris in the oil-line. The 
OLS#1 detected debris produced and flushed out from the 
bearing when the oil supply was turned back on. 
Detection Threshold 
I I Lkbrisflushed I frombearing 
Gap in data when 
no oil supply 
! v :  
47.6 Hrs 50.6Hr-s Test End 
Figure 5 OLS#1 Indicator During SFET#l Showing Debris from Original #1 Bearing 
62 
SFET #1 15 October 1998 
48 Hrs x a c t l v i t y  Engine Hours 50.6 Hrs 
Figure 6 OLS#1 RMS Response to S ic  Slurry Mix (SFET#l) 
There is good evidence from the OLS#l data that the slurry 
packed into the bearing chamber (and perhaps some eroded 
debris) was scavenged from the chamber during the period 
when the oil supply was off. While the engine is running 
the scavenge pump will be operative, thereby providing a 
means by which the slurry can leave the chamber. Due to 
the unrealistic nature of the oil flow during this part of the 
test, the OLS Indicator from this period may not be directly 
comparable with the rest of the test data, but effects on the 
OLS#1 RMS level are apparent, as demonstrated in Figure 
6. The figure also includes parts of the engine run before 
the oil was switched off and after the oil was turned back 
on. It can be seen that silicon carbide and Arizona road dust 
have a very marked effect on the OLS#l RMS charge level, 
which is to be expected, given the nature of the seeded 
debris (insulator, therefore a high charge carrying ability). 
A few initial peaks are seen on the RMS level about 3.5 
minutes into the no-oil phase, but the main effect of the 
slurry starts to be apparent about 13 minutes after the oil 
supply was switched off. This lasts for about 20 minutes, 
although some activity is evident for almost the entire no-oil 
phase. Some of this may be due to evaporated cola and/or 
water particles being sucked through the oil-line. The cola 
and water was used to mix the S ic  and road dust debris into 
a slurry. 
#I Bearing Degradation Test (SFET#2)-The OLS# 1 
signals from SFET#2 are noticeably more dynamic than 
those during SFET#l. This is attributed to the sensor 
modifications undertaken between the two SFETs, which 
influenced the overall sensitivity of the OLS system. Due to 
the non-dimensional approach used for the analysis, the 
detection threshold and system response are not considered 
to be significantly affected. 
The OLS#1 data were processed for SFET#2 from 18 March 
1999 onwards, which is when the original #1 bearing was 
replaced by the new, ‘slotted’ bearing. To enable an 
assessment of fine debris production using the OLS 
indicator, it is necessary to establish one or more thresholds, 
which relate to such events. The intention was to use the 
results from the SFETs to determine how to set threshold(s). 
However, for both SFETs, the seeded fault on the #1 
bearing did not progress to a point where a sufficient 
quantity of debris was produced from the bearing to enable 
thresholds to be set. 
A quantity of wear debris was picked up from the #5 
bearing during SFETM. Based on these #5 bearing results, 
the detection threshold for the #1 bearing was set at (-) 5 
standard deviations and is calculated from the no fault data. 
The OLS Indicator uses a correlation derived flow quality 
measurement, so instances of debris will correspond to 
when the indicator drops below the threshold value. As the 
debris is transported through the sensor by the oil flow, then 
excursions will be transient. 
The OLS#1 bearing data, including the threshold, are shown 
in Figure 7. There are no excursions during the entire 
SFET#2, indicating that no significant quantity of wear 
debris was produced from the #1 bearing. This is in 
agreement with the available corroborative data from 
SFET#2. It is interesting to note the time at which the 
minimum indicator value occurs in these data - 24 March 
1999 -13:oO: Although it is not an excursion, it may be 
evidence of an initial burst of fine debris or other charge 
related event being released from the #1 bearing. The result 
is of more significance when considered in conjunction with 
the associated #1 bearing WSS data. 
It should be noted that debris was captured on #1 bearing 
chip collector during SFET#2 (on 18 March 1999). One 
debris chip was of bearing cage material, however it was not 
generated as a result of wear and so is not indicative of a 
fault condition. This was thought to be build debris as a 
result of fitting the new #1 bearing. The debris was not 
detected by the OLS, possibly because of its benign nature: 
There is a charging mechanism associated with the 
generation of wear debris, which occurs when the debris is 
separated from the bulk of the material. Benign debris is not 
freshly generated and therefore may not be significantly 
charged, thus it may not be detected by the electrostatic 
sensor. 
63 
S F E T # Z  BesrlnO 111 
"1  
2 Detection Threshold i 
Minimum OLS 
Indicator Value - 
same time as #I 
bearing OR defect 
:I 
Englnc  * D Y , l  
10.7 Hrs Test End 
Figure 7 OLS#l Indicator During SFET#2 (New #1 Bearing) 
#I Bearing Wear-site Sensor (WSS#I) Response 
#I Bearing Degradation and Baseline Tests (SFET#I and 
SFET#2kAll of SFET#l and the early part of SFET#2 
included engine running with the original #1 bearing. 
Figure 8(a) and (b) shows Z-mods of WSS#l data from the 
early stages of each SFET. In each case the engine is 
running at intermediate power which means that bearing 
related tones are consistent between the two plots. 
Comparison of the Z-mods shows that both plots contain a 
series of tones, which are multiples of the LP spool speed. 
The twelfth order tends to have more energy associated with 
it. During SFET#l, this was postulated as being caused by 
the #1 bearing inner race defect. Allowing for bearing slip 
of approximately lo%, which is likely on a lightly loaded 
bearing such as #1 bearing, the inner race defect frequency 
is very close to the twelfth order of the LP shaft speed. 
SFET 1 
The WSS#l RMS data from the end of SFET#l, during the 
period of no-oil supply, is shown in Figure 9. The figure 
also includes parts of the engine run before the oil was 
switched off and after the oil was turned back on. It can be 
seen that silicon carbide and Arizona road dust have a very 
marked effect on the WSS#1 RMS charge level, which is to 
be expected given the nature of the seeded debris (insulator, 
therefore a high charge carrying ability). The WSS 
immediately responds to the slurry, and monitors it for the 
first ten minutes of the test phase. After this, the RMS level 
reduces, with only a few (relatively) small peaks as the no- 
oil phase continues. Presumably most of the slurry has 
exited the chamber by this time. The slurry does not have a 
very significant effect on the OLS#l data until about 13 
minutes into the no-oil phase (Figure 6). This can be 
explained by the fact that, when there is no oil flowing, the 
slurry will take time to travel along the oil-line to reach the 
OLS once it has exited the bearing chamber. 
SFET 2 
'7 '1 rooor 
35001 
3000 ' 
2500 
3000 
'I 
I - - . - -. ._ 
500 
0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25 
(a) (b) Time 
Figure 8 Comparison of Original #1 Bearing from SFET#l and SFET#2 
64 
SFET #1 15 Oct 1998 
4- No Oil Flow 
Immediate 
response on 
wss 
50.6 48 Engine Hours 
Figure 9 WSS#1 RMS Response to S ic  Slurry Mix (SFET#l) 
Bearing #I Degradation Test (SFET#2)-Figure 10 shows 
Z-mods of the WSS #1 data from the early stages of (a) the 
original and (b) the new (slotted) bearing running during 
SFET#2. The engine is at intermediate power in each case. 
It can be seen that the new (slotted) bearing also contains 
evidence of the LP spool related tones and so it is concluded 
that this family of tones is related to the bearing mounting 
geometry, rather than the inner race defect as suspected on 
the original bearing. It was observed from pictures 
available during SFETM that there are 12 lobes around the 
#1 bearing mounting. It is likely that these lobes are 
responsible for LP spool tones seen in the baseline signature 
for the #I bearing. It is worth noting that the baseline 
signature is similar for two bearings of the same type, rather 
than being dependent on the individual bearing. This 
indicates that one baseline may be applicable per bearing 
type, in a given engine installation. 
Figure 11 shows a series of Z-mod plots generated from the 
WSS#1 signal during SFET#2. The data shown in Figure 
11 are from 19 March 1999 onwards, which is after the 
original #1 bearing was replaced with the slotted bearing. 
Each Z-mod section represents 30 minutes of engine 
running. The Z-mods are taken from various stages of the 
engine test and are at either intermediate or max power 
levels. Thus the shaft speed dependent frequencies will 
appear roughly the same in plots (a) to (g). The 
approximate start time and date are identified on each Z- 
mod. Due to the ongoing engine up-trim during SFET#2, 
intermediate and max conditions vary during the test. As 
observed in the earlier data (Figures 8 and lo), the Z-mods 
from WSS#1 all exhibit the LP spool family of tones, which 
is now identified as part of the #1 bearing baseline 
signature. A global view of the results in Figure 11 shows 
that an intermittent tone, at approximately 1400Hz, develops 
during the test. From these plots the tone first becomes 
apparent on 24 March 1999 at 17:OO. By 20:OO the tone is 
continuous and considerably stronger. The tone is evident 
in all subsequent sections shown and corresponds to the 
outer race defect frequency of the #1 bearing. 
Old Bearing New Bearing 
3500 3504 - 
3040 woo 
__ -__ I- 
-~ 
__ ....... ... 
l5W -.....-.I .......... 1500 
~ -~ _- 
500 
0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 1C 15 20 25 
(a) (b) 
Time 
Figure 10 Comparison of Original and New #I Bearing from SFET#2 
65 
Defect 12m 1200 1200 
i aw 1000 1000 
800 800 800 
600 600 GOO 
400 400 400 
200 2w 2cm 
0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 
U 4  
Time 
uL---, 
Time 
Figure 11 Development of #1 Bearing OR Defect During SFET#2 
A detailed view of the progression of the outer race defect 
frequency during SFET#2 is given in Figure 12. From 
these plots it can be seen that the OR defect first appears, 
albeit intermittently, during the period of data starting at 
13:OO (24 March 1999). Interesting points are that the 
frequency of the tone varies, even though the LP spool 
speed (as evidenced through the LP orders) is quite 
constant. At different sections of engine running, the 
defect frequency is not always in exactly the same 
position relative to the shaft speed. These points are 
taken as evidence that the bearing is slipping by different 
amounts during the engine running. This could be due to 
changes in load on the bearing, hence the outer race 
defect frequency varies accordingly. Returning to the 
OLS#1 data, there was one noticeable event during the 
SFET#2 which occurred on 24 March at about 13:OO (see 
Figure 7). This is also the time when the OR defect is 
first picked up by WSS#l. One interpretation is that, at 
this point during the engine running, one of the slots in 
the #1 bearing outer race, both of which are initially 
dormant, becomes an active wear-site. The wear-site 
hosts the onset of component deterioration from the initial 
stages, the bearing surface becomes distressed and there 
will be an increase in the electrostatic charge activity 
relating to this. It may be that a small quantity of fine 
debris or some related burst of charge is initially released, 
which would explain the effect seen on OLS#l. There is 
no further evidence of this from the O B ,  although 
WSS#l continues to monitor the progress of the bearing 
outer race activity for the remainder of SFET#2. As there 
is no experience in monitoring this condition on a bearing 
and because the fault did not progress to failure during the 
SFET, it is not possible to determine the remaining life of 
the bearing from these results. Nonetheless, it is evident 
that the WSS is capable of detecting and monitoring the 
bearing defect from a very early stage, which is an 
important asset for oil system component PHM. 
66 
1400 
1350 1 
-. 
OR 
Defect 
---b 
13 00 24/3/99 17 00 24/3/95 
1550 
1500 - 
OR Defect 
ityiication) 
1400 1400 
1350 1350 
0 10 20 
1300 
0 10 20 
1300 
20 00 241389 22 00 24809 22 00 2513ffi 
1450 
0 10 20 
1300 
20 W 24/3/99 
15 00 26/3/95 
1450 
t 
OR 
Defect 
(d) (e) (f) (9) Time 
Figure 12 Development of #1 Bearing OR Defect Frequency (detail) 
#5 Bearing Oil-line Sensor (OLS#5) Response degradation phase. The engine is at cruise power in all three 
Oil Degradation Tests (SFET#l)-During S€ET#1, oil 
degradation tests were undertaken. Part of the OLS analysis 
was to investigate how sensitive the system is to changes in 
the electrical properties of the oil, in particular conductivity. 
Deterioration in oil condition produces an increase in 
conductivity due to the increased presence of ions in the 
lubricant. Results from previous rig testing by SHL has 
indicated that this effect reduces the electrostatic charge 
level monitored by the OLS. 
cases. The first and second sets of data are from 7 October 
1998 between 18:20 and 20:lO and then 2052 and 22:41 
respectively. The third set was taken on 8 October 1998 
between 2057 and 22:30. The COBRA, TAN and RULER 
measurements of the oil samples taken at the end of each of 
these periods of running are shown in Table 2. The off-line 
oil analysis shows deterioration in the oil condition over this 
time. Further work is required to investigate the full 
potential of the OLS to provide a real-time oil condition 
indicator. The changes in signal levels will not affect the 
OLS oil debris monitoring capability because the algorithm 
Figwe l3 shows RMs 'Om three different for debris monitoring is purposely independent of absolute 
periods of engine running during the SFET#l oil chargelevelS. 
67 
Date 
7 Oct 
7 Oct 
8 Oct 
Oil condition at 
end of period: 
COBRA: 4 
TAN: 0.30 1 1 
RULER: 43 I 
I 
Time COBRA TAN RULER 
20: 10 4 0.30 43 
22:46 5 0.45 29 
22:35 6 0.66 21 
Oil condition at 
end of period: 
TAN: 
I 
COBRA: 2i.a I I 
RULER: 
I - 
0 0 ,  . 
Oil condition at 
end of period: 
COBRA: 6 
TAN: 0.66 
RULER: 21 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
Figure 13 SFET#I Oil Degradation Test - OLS RMS Signal at Cruise Power 
Bill of Material #5 Bearing (SFET#2)- The #5 bearing for 
SFET#2 was as supplied with the engine. The OLS#5 data 
were processed for all engine running during SFET#2. 
Figure 14 shows the non-dimensional OLS indicator as 
function of engine hours. To enable fine debris production 
to be determined from the OLS indicator, it is necessary to 
establish one or more thresholds which relate to such events. 
It was intended to use the results from the S E T S  to look at 
where to set these thresholds. Some debris was picked up 
from the #5 bearing during SFET#2 and a detection 
threshold was set using these #5 bearing data. The threshold 
is calculated from the non-fault data and is set at (-) 5 
correspond to when the indicator drops below the threshold 
value. As the debris is transported by the oil flow then 
threshold excursions will be transient. Figure 14 shows that 
there are several threshold excursions during SFET#2. 
There are three excursions of longer duration, together with 
two narrower peaks. 
The first excursion occurs on 22 March 1999 at 
approximately 13:08. This is the engine run prior to the 3rd 
oil filter change (on 22 March). After this filter change, it 
was reported that the #5 bearing chip collector had a 
quantity of fine debris, which corroborates the OLS#5 
standard deviations from the averaged value. The OLS indication. 
indicator is based on quality of flow; instances of debris 
SFET #2 Bearing #5 
' -  1 
25 March 
-20~40 
8 ::I Detection Threshold 1 
Q 
22 March 
-13:08 -14~20 
26 March 
-14:45, 
-15:05 
t 
0 Hrs Engine Hours Test End 
Figure 14 OLS#5 Indicator During SFET#2 
~ 
68 
There is no evidence of the debris collected on the #5 chip 
collector after 4" oil filter change. However, the debris 
does not appear to be bearing material and so it may not 
have been freshly generated. For this reason the debris may 
not be significantly charged and hence would not have been 
detected by the electrostatic sensor. 
Date Time OLS indicator 
22March 13:08 Yes 
23 March No 
24March 14:20 Yes 
The second OLS#5 excursion occurs on 24 March at 
approximately 14:20. This does not correspond with debris 
being collected on the chip collector. It could, however, be 
due debris present in the oil system, which either is too fine 
or too little in quantity to be picked up on the chip collector 
analysis. Alternatively the debris may have been non- 
metallic, for example a pre-debris charge event, and hence 
not collected by the chip collector. 
#5 chip collector Comments 
Quantity of fine debris 
Several small debris 
Bearing debris seen by OLS 
Probably not bearing related (benign) 
Very fine or small quantity of debris or non-metallic 
The first of the narrow peak excursions occurs at 
approximately 20:40 on 25 March. This is approximately 
25March 
26March 
the time at which JP8 fuel was injected into the oil system. 
It is not conclusive whether the fuel contamination is the 
cause of the threshold excursion or whether debris was 
produced from the #5 bearing. 
debris? 
No results from  chi^ collector at end of SFET#2 
20:40 Yes Nothing collected JP8 fuel contamination test 
14:45 Yes 
The final two excursions are a narrow peak followed by a 
longer period. These occur on 26 March towards the end of 
SFET#2. The narrow peak is at 14:45 and the longer 
duration excursion starts at 15:05. The OLS#5 data indicate 
that fine debris is being produced from the #5 bearing at the 
end of SFET#2. It is not known whether the chip collector 
was analysed for debris at the end of SFET#2, and if so 
what was found, which makes it difficult to corroborate the 
final part of OLS#5 data. 
The OLS#5 results from SFET#2 are summarized in Table 
3: 
Table 3 OLS#5 Debris Indicator During SFET#2 
1 15:05 I Yes 
#5 Bearing Distress Monitoring (WSS#5) response Bearing Degradation Test (SFET#2)-The WSS#5 was 
broken when P & W personnel removed the SFET#l engine Bearing Degradation Test (SFET#lk--The wss#5 from the test stand. Although a repair was attempted, it was 
monitored the #5 bearing throughout PSDs from unsuccessful. Consequently no data was produced from 
the WSS#5 early on and at the end of SFET#l show very wss#5 during SFET#2. Results for the wss during little change in the bearing characteristics, Thus it was SFET#2 are limited to #1 bearing. concluded that the #5 bearing did not deteriorate during the 
SFET#l. P & W personnel indicated that this was the case. 
Although nothing happened, this is an important result in of and wss responses During the sFETs 
that there were no false alarms generated by-the WSS#5. Table 4 summarizes the OLS and WSS responses during the 
SFETs. 
Table 4 Summary of OLS and WSS Responses During SFETs 
om bearing chamber 
69 
SFET 
2 
2 
2 
5. TASK 4 - TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION 
Event WSS Response OLS Response Comments 
#I bearing Onset and progression of Initial indication possible Slots cut in bearing OR - other 
degradation OR defect monitored but 110 progression seen techniques did not monitor onset 
#5 bearing NIA We& debris detected Debris on chip collector - 
debris corroboration of fine debris 
JP8 fuel Possible response Further investigation required 
contamination 
of bearing defect 
required 
The test and development phases of the program have 
enabled electrostatic monitoring to be developed and 
demonstrated for bearing and oil systems monitoring. The 
technology exhibits features desirable for PHM, such as 
providing early warning and subsequent tracking of faults, 
monitoring in real-time, sensor dual functionality and the 
benefit of sensor data fusion. The technology has also been 
tested and proven in a genuine engine environment. 
Task 4 constituted technology development and transition 
planning. For this phase, Tasks 1 to 3 were reviewed to 
establish the status and performance of the electrostatic oil 
monitoring system throughout the development work. From 
this review, a prototype system design has been proposed 
and includes several variants to accommodate different 
installation situations. For the OLS, enhancements include 
higher temperature capability, reduced weight and improved 
sensing performance. Due to the nature of its location, the 
primary considerations for the WSS are altemative sensing 
geometries and cabling options. These points and also the 
requirements for developing analysis thresholds and other 
potential applications for electrostatic monitoring are 
important features to be considered in future applications. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The current program has resulted in signifcant enhancement 
of the Stewart Hughes Limited electrostatic oil monitoring 
technology. The program has built upon original hardware 
and algorithms, designed and developed by SHL, and has 
helped progress this technology towards in-service 
application. The program concentrated on both types of 
electrostatic sensor, the Oil-line Sensor for monitoring oil- 
borne debris and associated effects and the Wear-site Sensor 
for monitoring specific high risk components, together with 
the PC based Sensor Monitoring System for real-time 
monitoring and algorithm testing. The sensor system 
development has focussed on the objectives of the JSF 
Prognostics and Health Management program, which is to 
provide a reliable and robust technology giving accurate 
information about the health of the oil system and associated 
components. 
Achievements during the program include: 
Assessment of in-service experience and projected 
developments to define future oil monitoring 
requirements 
Completion of bench rig tests at the University of 
Southampton to assess and demonstrate the application 
of the technology to monitoring bearings 
Design and build of a pre-prototype sensor system for 
scale bearing rig and engine tests, including the PC 
based Sensor Monitoring System 
A series of scale bearing rig tests at Georgia Tech, 
incorporating aero type bearings and oil lubrication 
system 
Detection of the onset and progression to failure of 
different bearing components during the scale rig tests 
Two seeded fault engine tests (SETS), incorporating 
different oil system faults 
Detection of seeded faults during the SFEiTs: bearing 
degradation (both onset and debris generation), oil 
thermal degradation, oil debris contamination and 
possibly fuel-oil contamination 
Corroboration and comparison of electrostatic test data 
with other health monitoring methods 
Technology development and transition planning for 
prototype sensor system design, threshold development 
and future test requirements 
7. REFERENCES 
[ l ]  C.E. Fisher, “Gas Path Debris Monitoring - a 21” 
Century PHM Tool,” ZEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, 2000. 
[2] H.E.G. Powrie and K. McNicholas, “Gas Path 
Condition Monitoring During Accelerated Mission Testing 
of a Demonstrator Engine,” AIAA Paper 97-2904, July 
1997. 
[3] J. Nurse, C. Petch and C.E. Fisher, “Engine Gas Path 
Integrity Monitoring,” Aerotech 94 Paper C470/6/052, 
January 1994. 
[4] H.E.G. Powrie and C.E. Fisher, “Monitoring of 
Foreign Objects Ingested into the Intake of a Gas Turbine 
Aero-Engine,” Zntemational Coiference on Condition 
Monitoring, University of Wales Swansea, UK, 175 - 190, 
April 12 - 16,1999. 
[SI J.L. Xuan and H.S. Cheng, “Microscopic Wear 
Debris and Surface Topography,” Wear Particles, D. 
Dowson et a1 (editors), Elsevier, 1992. 
70 
[6] B.J. Roylance and G. Pocock, “Wear Studies 
Through Particle Size Distribution I: Application of the 
Weibull Distribution to Ferrography,” Wear 90, 113 - 136, 
1983. 
[7] B.J. Roylance and S. Raadnui, “The Morphological 
Attributes of Wear Particles - Their Role in Identifying 
Wear Mechanisms,” Wear175,115-  121, 1994. 
[SI H.E.G. Powrie, O.D. Tasbaz, R.J.K. Wood and C.E. 
Fisher, “Performance of an Electrostatic Monitoring System 
During FZG Scuffing Test,” International Conjkrence on 
Condition Monitoring, University of Wales Swansea, UK, 
155-174, April 12 - 16, 1999. 
[9] O.D. Tasbaz, R.J.K. Wood, M. Browne, H.E.G. 
Powrie and G. Denuault, “Electrostatic Monitoring of Oil 
Lubricated Sliding Point Contacts for Early Detection of 
Scuffing,” Wear 230,86-97, 1999. 
[lo] O.D. Tasbaz, R.J.K. Wood, H.E.G. Powrie, T.J. 
Harvey and G. Denuault, “Electrostatic Monitoring of Oil 
Lubricated Contacts for Early Detection of Wear,” 
International Conference on Condition Monitoring, 
University of Wales Swansea, UK, April 12 - 16, 1999. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was carried out with the support of the DoD JSF 
Program Office. Thanks also to Mr Bob Tape of ExperTech 
Inc. for his input throughout the program, Pratt and Whitney 
(Florida) for assistance during the engine test phase and to 
staff at Stewart Hughes Limited who worked on the 
program. 
71 
