Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying Modulator 
Ken Tsai, Tina Oyang, John Phan, Cheng Chih Yang, Neal Schneier 
TRW 
1 Space Park 
Redondo Beach, CA 90278 
neal.schneier@trw.com 
310-814-2884 
Abstract-Modem satellite systems must transmit ever 
increasingly large amounts of digital data. A number of 
techniques are available to do this: 1) higher transmit and 
receive frequencies, 2) better management of existing 
frequencies, 3) the use of efficient source encoding 
techniques and 4) the use of spectrally efficient modulation 
techniques. A relatively new satellite communication 
scheme, Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying (GMSK), 
addresses many of these techniques. GMSK’s main 
attributes are constant envelope, spectral efficiency, error 
rate performance and self-synchronizing capability. GMSK 
is an especially desirable modulation technique where 
satellite adjacent channel interference could be a significant 
problem. However, GMSK requires greater on-board digital 
processing which, due to advances in IC processing, has 
become available only recently. This paper describes the 
prototype implementation and test of a GMSK modulator. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. GMSK COMMUNICATION 
3. GMSK MODULATOR DESIGN 
4. TESTRESULTS 
5. SUMMARY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Satellite to earth communication design is a compromise of 
competing constraints. The user endeavors to transmit 
(sometimes securely) as much information as possible 
(maximize the data rate) with the fewest possible errors 
(minimize the bit error rate [BER]). National and 
international governments allocate radio frequency bands 
and limited communication bandwidths. Rain, solar activity 
and other natural interference imposes a widely varying 
amounts and types of noise on the communication signal. 
Further, poor satellite design can create additional signal 
distortion. Satellite designers strive to minimize the onboard 
processing and RF transmitter power dissipation. Finally, 
older generation ground hardware may need to operate with 
newer satellite communications signals. 
Various techniques are available to modulate a digital signal 
onto an RF carrier. Each modulation scheme requires a 
minimum bandwidth and bit time intervals to transmit data. 
The metric used to quantify both the time and frequency 
constraints of broadcast symbols is the bandwidth efficiency, 
defined in bits/s/Hz. Spectral efficiency is a measure of the 
amount of data that can be sent per unit of bandwidth. 
Original modulation schemes, such as BPSK and FSK, 
transmit one bit of data per bit period and have a bandwidth 
efficiency of 1 bit/s/Hz. Newer schemes, such as QPSK and 
MSK, transmit two bits of data, a “symbol”, during one 
period by modulating the bits on orthogonal signals (e.g. 
sine and cosine of the IF carriers). These schemes are 
considered spectrally efficient modulation and have a 
bandwidth efficiency of 2 bits/s/Hz. Figure 1 depicts the 
relative bandwidth of two modulation schemes. 
Spectral density of QPSK and MSK 
10 
0 
-1 0 
-20 
n 
v 
g -30 
3 -40 *- 
-50 
-60 
-70 
ff 
Figure 1. Frequency bandwidths of two modulation schemes. 
The normalized 3dB bandwidth of MSK = 2.76. The 
normalized 3dB bandwidth of GMSK is about 1. 
In all of these schemes, each symbol was independent of 
others, i.e. there was no history. Intersymbol interference 
(ISI) occurs when symbols spread from their time period to 
adjacent periods. Further, symbols are broadcast in specific 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 EEE 
235 
0 n boa  rd 
processor 
Figure 2. Satellite downlink from baseband processor to antenna. 
IF 
signa 
frequency bands, called “channels”. Adjacent channel 
interference (ACI) occurs when symbols spread from their 
bandwidth to adjacent bandwidths. 
Satellite to Earth signals (“downlinks”) consist of baseband 
digital signals modulated onto intermediate frequency (IF) 
carriers, upconverted to radio frequency (RF), amplified by 
a travelling wave tube amplifier (TWTA) and transmitted to 
Earth through an antenna (Figure 2). 
Working backwards from the downlink signal, international 
regulations require satellites to transmit at specific 
frequencies. For example, one set of Ka band satellites will 
broadcast over a 500 MHz bandwidth centered at 43 GHz. 
Within the 500 MHz are 11 signal channels, each one 40 
MHz wide and separated by 10 MHz. To minimize BER, 
energy from one channel can not spill over to an adjacent 
one. 
The downlink signal power is amplified by a TWTA to 
overcome over 200 dB attenuation between a 
geosynchronous satellite and the earth. When operated at 
peak amplification (just below saturation), the TWTA is a 
highly nonlinear power amplifier. Amplitude modulation 
would distort the downlink signal, creating signal harmonics 
and cross products, resulting in a very wide downlink signal 
bandwidth, cross channel interference and potentially energy 
outside the allocated bandwidths. The constant RF envelope 
signals are less sensitive to TWTA and other nonlinearities 
due to the lack of fluctuations in the signal amplitude, 
resulting in a more compact power spectrum. Side lobe 
spreading, or “regrowth”, as compared with that of non- 
constant envelope signals, is reduced hence improving the 
bandwidth efficiency. For BPSK and QAM (digital 
modulation schemes that vary the signal amplitude) the 
TWTA must operate at least 6dB below saturation, lowering 
the downlink power. FSK and MSK are digital modulation 
techniques that feature constant RF amplitude. These 
schemes transmit data by varying the frequency andor phase 
Phase Shaping Filter, q(t) 
of the RF carrier. 
Continuous phase modulation (CPM) is a subset of the 
constant envelope modulation schemes. In CPM, the phase 
is constrained to be continuous. CPM signals are more 
resistant to ACI due to their compact power spectrum so that 
more of the energy is contained in the channel bandwidth. 
However, a continuous phase requires each transmitted 
symbol to depend on the previous ones, making memory 
being present in the input to the phase or frequency 
modulator. CPM signals may have ISI. GMSK is a CPM 
modulation technique spreads the bits out over longer time 
by deliberately causing IS1 in exchange for higher spectral 
efficiency by compressing data over fewer Hz. 
The transmitted CPM signal s(t) is given by: 
s(t) = + cos(27Lfct + @(t, a)) (1) 
where E is the transmitted energy per symbol, T is the 
symbol period, f, is the carrier frequency and the transmitted 
information (a) is contained in the phase term (+). 
A digital frequency modulation signal can be produced by 
applying a NRZ data sequence (q) to a filter having an 
impulse response g(t) that spreads each data bit over a 
number of bit intervals. The resulting signal is multiplied by 
2nhF, where hF is the DFM modulation index and q(t) is the 
time response of the premodulation filter. The arrangement 
is shown in Figure 3, where the phase signal is: 
t 
~ t ,  a) = 2XhF J[. f w(T-~T)]~T (2) 
1=-00 
-00 
Frequency s(t 1-44 modulator NRZ data a, 
Figure 3. Block diagram of GMSK CPM 
236 
2T 
T time T time 
Figure 4. Impulse response (g(t)) and accumulated phase (q(t)) of a MSK system for one symbol. 
The phase response described in equation 2 is a function of 
the integral of the pulse q(t). The shape of q(t) determines 
the smoothness of the transmitted information carrying 
phase. The rate of change of the phase is linearly 
proportional to the modulation index h. The pulse q(t) is 
normalized over all time to 0.5: 
00 
Jq(t)dt = 0.5 (3) 
The impulse response q(t) is given by: 
t 
s(t> = Jim dz 
-00 
(4) 
MSK features a piecewise linear change in the carrier phase 
trajectory. The effect of each chip is to add or subtract a 
quantity d 2  to the phase of the signal. For MSK each chip 
duration is T seconds and g(t) = 0 for t>T (Figure 4). MSK 
is a “full response” CPM with a frequency deviation defined 
in terms of the error function. 
2T 
2. GMSK MODULATION 
LT 
GMSK was invented as a means of improving the MSK 
power spectrum. GMSK uses a low pass pre-modulation 
Gaussian filter which makes the output power spectrum 
more compact. The filter has narrow bandwidth and sharp 
cutoff properties which are required to suppress the high- 
frequency components. Moreover, it has a lower overshoot 
impulse response which protects against excessive 
instantaneous deviation. 
The resultant signal is very bandwidth-efficient at the 
expense of ISI. The chip duration becomes LT (where L is a 
positive integer). Since g(t) # 0 for t>T, GMSK is called a 
“partial response” CPM. The output is a series of 
overlapping frequency deviation functions scaled so the area 
under each one is d 2  (Figure 5). 
CO 
$(t, a) = 2nh Gq(t-iT) (5 )  
1=-00 
h(t) is the bandwidth of the Gaussian filter: 
/- LLT 
Figure 5. The time domain impulse response of a Gaussian filter to a rectangular pulse of width T and accumulated phase 
of the GMSK system for one symbol. 
237 
The parameter 0 determines the BT product of the filter and 
is given by 
3. GMSK MODULATOR DESIGN 
(7) 
The transition from a continuous integration to discrete 
summation of q(t) offers ways to simplify the GMSK design. 
An approach that is easy to implement is to integrate the 
data sequence (q) prior to filtering and apply the resultant 
signal to a phase modulator. Standard GMSK takes the 
convolution of the input step function with the GMSK filter 
to get a response. Instead of calculating the convolution, 
another simplification is to sum the known incremental 
phase responses (also called A$). Since the Gaussian curve 
is represented by a finite resolution, one system tradeoff is 
the number of bits used to represent the Gaussian curve vs 
the signal distortion. A higher number of bits results in less 
distortion at the cost of a bigger adder/summer/integrator. 
The adder must be sized so it wont overflow the summer 
when all of the inputs bits are high. 
Although the GMSK modulator was architected as a system 
of functional blocks, the verification of the digital design 
was performed block by block. We used SPW’s behavioral 
simulation (running on a unix system) to verify digital logic 
functions. We then used SPW’s Hardware Description 
Language (HDL) to simulate the effects of limited bit 
resolution. 
The GMSK modulator was implemented using two 
DynaChip DL5000 - Fast Field Programmable Gate Arrays. 
FPGAs use programmable logic blocks to implement 
desired logic functions, including: multi-input AND/ORs, 
XORs, adder, multipliers, multiplexers, demultiplexers, flip 
flops and PROMS. The logic functions are grouped in 
blocks of electrically programmable logic called 
Configurable Logic Blocks (CLBs). This specific FPGA 
family features up to 528 CLBs and ECL or PECL interface 
levels and differential outputs running at a clock speed 
exceeding 100MHz. 
The GMSK design was coded in VHDL. The CLBs were 
manually programmed and routed to maximize the 
operational speed. We achieved full functional operations 
block-by-block and checked strategic test vectors of the 
logic analyzer outputs against the logic behavior in the SPW 
simulation. 
The maximum clock speed of the full functional P G A  set 
was 106 MHz with zero error. Rounding down to provide 
small timing margin, we collected most data at 100 MHz 
clock and 50 million chips per second (Mcps) data rate. 
TEST SETUP 
Figure 6 depicts one of the test setups. SPW generated test 
vectors and determined the expected results. I and Q outputs 
were mixed with a baseband carrier signal, upconverted, 
downconverted and redigitized. Instead of building a 
similar high speed demodulator, the depicted setup shows 
we used software to characterize BER performance and 
theoretical spectrum of the high speed GMSK modulator. 
TEST RESULTS 
The observation of the GMSK spectrum is quite 
straightforward with a reasonably long pseudo-random 
sequence. Using the spectrum analyzer such as HP 8563E, 
we can see the compactness of such a spectrum (Figure 7). 
Note the general Gaussian taper of the main lobe and 
absence of any side lobes. For a 50 Mcps transmission, the 
spectrum density rolls off -35dB from the peak at -30MHz 
offset from the center. This hints at the potential channel 
spacing of less than Rc, the channel data rate, especially 
when channel user power can be equalized in the system. 
Equalized channel power will minimize the adjacent channel 
interference. 
Figure 6. Block diagram of GMSK BER measurement test setup. 
238 
Figure 7. GMSK modulator output spectrum. In this run, the data was spread over seven bit periods (G-7). 
A newer wide band vector signal analyzer, such as the 
HPIAgilent E3830A, can process and characterize this 
digital modulation in useful ways such as constellation 
diagram in the trajectory (Figure 8). The blue dots mark the 
waveform at the sample instant and the orange traces show 
the trajectory. As claimed by the constant envelope nature 
of GMSK, the trajectory closely resembles a unit circle. 
I -B 
300 
/ d i v :  
1'1 
E r r  4.8163 k.HZ 
f F s e t  = -34.336 dE 
S t r i + - :  I :*z'tt S t o p :  '39 5.1'1 
Figure 8. HP E3830A screen. Upper left: Constellation with trajectory. Lower left: Error vector linear magnitude. Upper 
right: Data eye. Lower right: Summary sheet. 
239 
L=7 Test BER w. Radian BPF 
(64 taps tesfset) 
1 . o m 0  
I , 
1 .oE-01 
U ; 1.oE-02 
1 .OE-03 
1 .OE-04 
I I I I I I I I 
X Rc=50,mM 
Rc=50, IL 
Rc=50 expected 
I I 
I I I I I I ' I  
0 1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
I EdNo (dB) 
Figure 9. Graph of bit error rate (BER) as a function of the chip signal to noise ratio. Tests were run at three data rates: low 
(lL), medium (mM) and high (hH). The data results are also compared to theory. 
Verification of Performance 
Another practical and realistic measurement of the GMSK 
modulator is the BER performance under noise loaded 
operation. Without a hardware demodulator, our approach 
was to record 10,000 symbols worth of the digitized, down- 
converted RF spectrum, and perform demodulation in SPW 
simulation. In the case of our 50 Mcps modulator, we 
down-convert the modulated spectrum back to 5OMHz 
center and digitized with an 8 bit AID at 200 MHz. The 
ratio of sample rate and the data rate and the IF frequency is 
significant; because the sampled data sequence easily 
provides baseband I and Q outputs. The software nature of 
the demodulator provides easy signal to noise ratio 
adjustment and software BER characterization (Figure 9). 
The sample size of 10,000 is also significant in providing 
adequate samples and errors at the expected SNR operating 
point, for the measurement to be statistically sound. 
7. SUMMARY 
TRW has designed a Gaussian Minimum Shift Key 
modulator. The design was implemented in FPGAs and 
tested at 50 Mcps rate. The resultant signal was 
upconverted and downconverted, emulating a full satellite 
communication path. The resultant BER matched 
theoretical expectations. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 R. Gagliardi, Satellite Communications, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Company, New York, 1984. 
[2] K. Hetling, GMSK for the Advanced EHF Wavefomz, 
MilSatCom Conference, 1999. 
USC. 
Kenneth Tsai is a Technical 
Specialist in the Digital 
Communication and Synthesizer 
Products Department of TRW. 
His recent work includes 
development of digital 
modulator and high 
performance frequency 
synthesizers. He has a BSEE 
from UCLA and MSEE from 
Tina Oyang is a staff engineer 
in the Telecommunication 
Systems Department of TRW. 
Her recent work includes 
responsibility for the downlink 
of a new generation of satellite 
systems. She has a BS from 
UCLA and MSEEfrom USC. 
240 
Jolzn Phan is a member of the 
technical staff at the Digital 
Communications & Synthesizer 
Products Department at TR W. 
His recent work designed and 
tested demodulator subsystems, 
particular1.y command, 
telemetry and DSP hardware. 
He has a BS iiz Engineering 
from Harvey Mudd College and 
is pursuing a MSEE at USC. 
Cheng Chih Yang is a senior 
staff engineer in the Microwave 
& Millimeter-wave Systems 
department of TRW, where he 
joined in 1984. His recent work 
is focused on microwave 
subsystem hardware 
development to support various 
payload communications 
systems. He received a PhD 
degree in Electrical Engineering from UCLA. 
Neal Schneier is a staff engineer 
in the High Speed Digital and 
Analog Products Department of 
TRW. His recent work developed 
f i l l  custom gallium arsenide 
(GaAs) ICs and a satellite slice. 
He has patents f o r  new digital 
logic architectures in High 
Temperature Superconductivity 
(HTS) and GaAs. He has 
published on topics of HTS, GaAs design, computer aided 
design and su$ace acoustic waves.' He has a Masters in 
Physics from the University of Califomia, Irvine. 
241 
