Ground Target Tracking - a Historical Perspective1 
Chee-Yee Chong David Garren Timothy P. Grayson 
Science Applications International 
4001 North Fairfax Dr, Suite 300 
Booz Allen & Hamilton, Inc. 
101 California St., Suite 3300 Corp. Agency 
San Francisco, CA 941 11 
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
3701 North Fairfax Dr. 
41 5-28 1-4948 
chongchee @ bah.com 
Arlington, VA 22203 
david.a.garren@cpmx.saic.com 
703-558-2768 
Arlington, VA 22203 
tgrayson@darpa.mil 
703-248-1519 
Abstract - Airborne sensor platforms such as Joint STARS 
provide a capability for ground surveillance and monitoring 
target movements. Because of the high target density and 
maneuverability, high clutter, low visibility due to terrain 
masking, etc., ground target tracking presents unique chal- 
lenges not present in tracking other types of targets. This 
paper reviews major developments in multi-target tracking 
over the past four decades and discusses how algorithms 
developed primarily for tracking air targets can be used for 
tracking ground targets. The similarities and differences 
between ground and air target tracking are first compared. 
We then discuss how simple target state estimation algo- 
rithms such as Kalman filtering have evolved into more 
complicated algorithms for tracking maneuvering targets. 
Similarly, we discuss how association algorithms have pro- 
gressed from nearest neighbor to joint probabilistic data 
association (JPDA), multiple hypothesis tracking (MHT), 
and multi-dimensional assignment. The adequacy of these 
techniques for tracking ground targets is discussed. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. TARGET STATE ESTJMATION 
4. DATA ASSOCIATION 
5.  CONCLUSIONS 
2. TRACKING ROUND VERSUS AB TARGETS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Over the past four decades, multiple target tracking has 
developed into a fairly mature technology. Applications now 
include diverse areas such as air traf!k control, air and mis- 
sile defense, avionics, ocean surveillance, port monitoring, 
etc. Sensors that provide data include radar, infrared, acous- 
tic, etc. However, until recently, there has not been much 
emphasis on tracking ground targets due to the lack of sen- 
sors. 
The introduction of the Ground Moving Target Indicator 
(GMTI) radar has drastically changed the situation. A GMTI 
radar can provide detections on moving ground vehicles 
over a large area. During Operation Desert Storm in 1991, 
Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint 
STARS) aircraft proved to be extremely valuable in pro- 
viding the commander with a ground picture of the battle- 
field. An example of its capability is the now famous picture 
that shows “The Mother of All Retreats”. In addition to Joint 
STARS, GMTI have been considered for other platforms 
such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). References [31] 
and [34] trace the development of GMTI for ground sur- 
veillance from some early programs to Joint STARS and 
other potential future platforms. 
Besides providing a global picture of vehicle movements, 
GMTI measurements can be used to track individual targets. 
Thus, there has been increasing interest in ground target 
tracking and government programs have been started to 
develop tracking algorithms for ground targets [47]. How- 
ever, ground target tracking has characteristics that are quite 
different from tracking other types of targets, in particular 
air targets. Specific differences include high target density, 
high clutter, possible terrain obscuration, etc. Thus, many 
tracking approaches that have been developed for air targets 
may perform poorly when used to track ground targets. The 
objective of this paper is to review the progress of multi- 
target tracking over the past 40 years and discuss its appli- 
cability to tracking ground targets. 
We focus primarily on tracking non-cooperative targets over 
a large area. Thus we have excluded the tracking of vehicles 
with onboard locators (e.g., a global position system re- 
ceiver) such as those used in vehicle location and navigation 
systems [ S I .  Also excluded from our review are algorithms 
that track vehicles over a small area using video sensors 
[19], [35], [44]. This paper is not intended to be a compre- 
hensive survey of multi-target tracking. Good surveys and 
overviews can be found in the survey paper [3], and the 
books [4], [5], [9]-[11], [17], [20]. Instead, it is an overview 
of the major developments in tracking technology and their 
relevance to tracking ground targets. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, 
we discuss differences between tracking ground and air 
targets such as target dynamics and density, and provide a 
numerical comparison of the difficulty. Section 3 reviews 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
433 
the development of target state estimation which is needed 
to support association, from Kalman filtering to multiple 
models for maneuvering targets. Section 4 contains a review 
of data association approaches including nearest neighbor, 
joint probabilistic data association, multiple hypothesis 
tracking and multi-dimensional assignment. This is followed 
by conclusions in Section 5. 
Environment 
Dynamics 
2. TRACKING GROUND VERSUS A I R  TARGETS 
Even though tracking problems can be found in many appli- 
cations, e.g., ocean surveillance and submarine tracking, 
most tracking algorithms have been developed for air tar- 
gets. Air tracking algorithms are potentially applicable to 
ground targets because both have relatively high revisit 
rates. Thus, a comparison of the characteristics of ground 
and air tracking will be useful in assessing whether current 
tracking algorithms are adequate for ground targets. 
3 D 2 D o r l D  
Less mobile, can- Highly mobile, 
2. I Qualitative Comparison 
A tracking problem is defined by the targets of interest, the 
sensors that collect the measurements, and the environment 
in which the targets move and sensors observe the targets. 
4 
Environment - Aircraft move in a three dimensional space 
while ground vehicles move over the surface of the earth. 
Thus the motion of ground targets is generally two dimen- 
sional. For a vehicle that moves on roads, the space becomes 
one dimensional on a road segment until it reaches an inter- 
section, when it moves to other road segments. The region 
where the vehicles can move may be further constrained, 
e.g., rough terrain may limit accessibility. The same con- 
straint may apply to air targets since mountains and ground 
have to be avoided. 
Target Dynamics - Ground targets can accelerate, slow 
down and stop completely, and remain stationary for an 
indefinite period of time. Except for helicopters, aircraft 
dynamics is far more restricted with a minimum speed below 
which the aircraft will stall. Furthermore, some vehicles can 
move from off-road to on-road and back. The actual dy- 
namics depend on the local condition, e.g., slope, terrain 
type, type of road, etc. Thus ground target motion is far 
more variable than air target motion. 
Target Density - Except in very rare cases, air targets 
maintain reasonable separation from each other for safety 
reasons. Ground targets, however, can move very close to 
each other. When stationery, the vehicles can be parked side 
by side. Thus the density of ground targets is much higher 
than air targets. 
Sensor Detection - Because of the observation geometry, 
ground targets can be obscured by terrain. Furthermore, 
MTI radars can only detect targets with radial velocities 
above the minimum detection velocity (MDV). There is no 
detection when vehicles stop or move perpendicular to the 
line of sight of the radar. Thus the detection of ground tar- 
gets depends on dynamics and may not be continuous. On 
the other hand, the detection of air targets depends mostly 
on the radar cross section and less on the target dynamics. 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) has been proposed for 
imaging stopped targets, thus providing continuous tracking 
capability. 
Clutter - Air target operates in a low clutter environment 
while ground targets move in heavy clutter. The need to 
remove such clutter also results in lower detection of ground 
targets. 
Table 1 summarizes the differences between air and ground 
target tracking. 
Table 1: Ground versus Air Tracking 
I I AirTargets I Ground Targets 
not sto 
probability observation and 
I Clutter I Low I High 
2.2 Quantitative Comparison 
Basic Tracking Functions - One approach of characterizing 
a tracking problem is in terms of the difficulty of performing 
the tracking functions. The basic functions in multi-target 
tracking are shown in Figure 1 and consist of prediction, 
association, and estimation. When measurements are re- 
ceived, the current tracks are predicted to the time of the 
measurements and associated with the measurements. Then 
the associated measurements are used to update the state 
estimates of the tracks. Although these functions are not 
always performed sequentially, they are present in most 
tracking algorithms. 
Association 
Figure 1 : Basic Tracking Functions 
Estimation Performance - Prediction and estimation are 
single target state estimation functions in the absence of 
measurement uncertainty. Prediction difficulty depends on 
target dynamics and sensor revisit time. Highly maneuver- 
able targets will result in large prediction uncertainty while 
fairly static targets with high revisit rates will result in small 
prediction uncertainty. 
120 - 
Figure 2 compares the prediction and estimation perform- 
ance between air and ground tracking assuming a four di- 
mensional ( 2  D position and velocity) linear target motion 
model. The acceleration noise for air targets and ground 
targets are assumed to be lg  and 0.1 g respectively. The 
RMS measurement errors are assumed to be 60 m x 60 m for 
air targets and 100 m x 10 m (case 1) and 10 m x 10 m (case 
2 )  for ground targets. The investigation of two separate 
cases for ground targets is intended to model the potential of 
using a single sensor versus two sensors with orthogonal 
vantage points. The prediction and estimation errors are 
computed using steady state Kalman filter equations and 
thus do not consider maneuvers. However, they represent 
the typical values in air and ground tracking. Thus, with 
perfect association, air target tracking is more difficult than 
ground tracking. However, as we shall see shortly, the main 
difficulty with ground tracking is association. 
+Air Prediction 
+Air Estimation i - +Ground Prediction - 
100 
E 
6 80 
& 
- 
L 
60 
LT 
40 
*Ground Estimation (1) 1-1 H 
I *Ground Estimation (2) I 
20 
0 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
Revisit Period (s) 
Figure 2: Estimation Performance 
Association Per$ormance - Association performance de- 
pends on target density, prediction performance and meas- 
urement accuracy. However, high target density does not 
necessarily result in poor association performance if the 
target state can be predicted accurately or the measurements 
are accurate. One way of representing association difficulty 
is in terms of the normalized target density which is the 
number of targets in the measurement validation gate. These 
are basically the measurements that can be confused with the 
true measurement from the target. The normalized target 
density can be computed as (see [65] for details) 
where D, and D, are the target and false alarm densities 
respectively, is the error covariance matrix for the pre- 
dicted target position, and R is the measurement error co- 
variance matrix. The normalized target density as a function 
of the revisit period is shown in Figure 3, where the average 
target separation is assumed to be 2 Km for air targets and 
50 m. for ground targets. Note that the normalized target 
density for ground targets increases rapidly with the revisit 
period. 
The normalized target density represents the intrinsic diffi- 
culty in association. The actual performance depends on the 
specific association algorithm used and is hard to predict 
analytically. For single scan optimal assignment algorithms, 
an approximate formula for predicting the probability of 
correct association is given by [65]: 
I 
PcA =exp(-D) ( 2 )  
where E is the normalized target density. Figure 4 shows 
the probability of correct association as a function of nor- 
malized target density. It can be seen from Figures 3 and 4 
that the association performance for ground target tracking 
is expected to be much lower than air target tracking. In 
order to achieve reasonable performance, we need accurate 
target estimation algorithms and association algorithms that 
can handle high target density. 
12 I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
Revist Period (sec) 
Figure 3: Normalized Target Density 
0.01 0.1 1 10 
Normalized Target Density 
Figure 4: Probability of Correct Association 
3. TARGET STATE STIMATION 
Target state estimation is an important component of any 
multi-target tracking algorithm. The association of meas- 
urements to tracks requires the prediction of the target state 
of each track to the time of the measurements so that the 
435 
measurement to track likelihood can be computed. Accurate 
state prediction is a key to good association Performance. 
Once an association decision has been made, the output of 
the tracker consists of updated state estimates of the tracks 
using the associated measurements. In this section, we re- 
view the development of target state estimation algorithms 
and discuss their applicability to ground target tracking. 
Although the target state can include features, we will focus 
on the kinematics target state, i.e., the position and velocity. 
Target state algorithms can be grouped into linear algo- 
rithms that compute the means and covariances of the target 
state estimate, nonlinear algorithms that compute the condi- 
tional probability distributions, and adaptive algorithms that 
address target maneuvers. 
3.1 Linear Estimation Algorithms 
These algorithms assume linear target motion and observa- 
tion models and provide estimates of the target state by 
means of linear transformations. 
Alpha-Beta-Gamma Filters - These constant coefficient 
filters [14], [76] estimate the target position and velocity 
from position measurements only. The alpha-beta filter 
assumes a second order model driven by white noise for the 
target dynamics while the alpha-beta-gamma filter assumes a 
third order model. In either case, the fixed coefficients can 
be shown to be related to the steady state Kalman filter 
gains. 
These filters are simple to implement and were popular in 
the early days of tracking when computation resources were 
limited. However, they do not provide accurate estimates 
and have problems in high clutter or low detection probabil- 
ity situations. Thus, they have been mostly replaced by Kal- 
man filters in recent years. 
Kalman Filter - The Kalman filter has been the standard 
approach to filtering for linear systems since its develop- 
ment in the early sixties [40], [41]. It is based upon the fol- 
lowing linear model for the state and measurements: 
State equation: 
X k + ,  = FkXk + GkWk ( 3 )  
Measurement equation: 
Z, = H,x, + v ,  (4) 
where xk is the target state (position, velocity, etc.) at sam- 
pling instant k, z ,  is the measurement, w, is a zero-mean 
white process noise with covariance Q , and v ,  is a zero- 
mean white measurement noise with covariance R . Kalman 
filtering consists of two steps: prediction of the current esti- 
mate and error covariance to the next time (time update) and 
combining the prediction with the measurement to update 
the target state estimate and error covariance (measurement 
update). In the following i k l j  and Pklj  are the estimate and 
error covariance at time k given all the observations up to 
time j .  
Measurement update: 
iklk = i,,-, + W,Vk (7) 
where v, = z ,  - i,,,-, = 6, -HA&,,-, is the measurement 
residual or innovations, W, = ~ k I & ~ H k ' s ~ '  is the Kalman 
filter gain and SA = H,P,,,-,H,'+R is the covariance of the 
residual. 
Kalman filtering reduces the design of the filter to choosing 
the appropriate target dynamics and measurement models. 
For kinematic states, the standard models are 
Almost constant velocity. The target states are position 
and velocity, and the state equation is a 2"d order system 
driven by acceleration noise. 
Almost constant acceleration. The target states are po- 
sition, velocity, and acceleration, and the state equation 
is a 31d order system driven by white noise. 
Singer acceleration model [771. Since the acceleration 
typically lasts over a certain time interval, a first order 
Markov model has been used to model this correlation: 
a ( k  +I) = e - T / ' a ( k ) + J - m ( k )  (9) 
where T i s  the measurement update interval, z is the accel- 
eration time constant, Q is the standard deviation of the 
acceleration, and Q is now one. 
These linear models are the basic models used for tracking 
air targets which are not maneuvering. These same models 
can be used for non-maneuvering ground targets moving on 
a single road segment (2-D) or in open terrain (2-D). As an 
example, a second order 1-D model has been used to track 
vehicles on a road with imaging sensors so as to monitor the 
traffic density and separation [44]. However, when the tar- 
gets maneuver or reach an intersection, these simple linear 
models are no longer adequate. 
3.2 Adaptive Filters 
The Kalman filter performs well when the target dynamics 
match the model used in the filter. When a target maneuvers, 
the model no longer matches the dynamics and performance 
will degrade. One approach of dealing with target maneu- 
436 
vers is to increase the process noise in the target model. This 
will usually decrease the tracking accuracy since the state 
estimate will depend more on the current measurement and 
not utilize the information accumulated from previous meas- 
urements. Increasing the prediction uncertainty will also 
make association more difficult. Thus several approaches 
have been developed to detect maneuvers and adapt the 
filter to the target dynamics in real time. 
Parameter adjustment [18], [61] - The structure of the filter 
(and the underlying model) is fixed. However, the filter will 
monitor its own performance (such as the size of the residu- 
als) and adapt parameters (such as the process noise covari- 
ance or the Kalman filter gain) when a maneuver is detected. 
State Augmentation [6] - This approach recognizes that 
there is a penalty in using a model which tries to work in all 
situations. Instead, the dimension of the state is changed 
when a maneuver has been detected. For example, before 
maneuver, a constant velocity model is used. When a ma- 
neuver has been detected, the filter switches to an accelera- 
tion model with higher state dimension and switches back to 
the original model when the maneuver is determined to have 
ended. 
3.3 Multiple Models 
The state augmentation approach discussed above makes a 
hard decision on the target dynamic model that is valid at 
any particular time. This is similar to making hard associa- 
tion decisions to be discussed later. When the measurement 
does not contain sufficient information, an incorrect decision 
may be made, resulting in poor performance. Thus algo- 
rithms that maintain multiple target dynamic models have 
been developed. These algorithms compute the probability 
of each model being true given the measurements and gen- 
erate a target state estimate as a weighted sum of the esti- 
mates given the individual models. 
A description of multiple model estimation can be found in 
the books [lo], [11], [20] , the survey paper [60] and the 
review [54]. Mathematically, multiple model estimation is 
the estimation of a hybrid state system [82]. The discrete 
state mk is the model in effect at time k and has value in 
the model set M ={mi] ;= ,  . The discrete or model state 
evolves according to the Markov model 
A semi-Markov chain can also be used to include the de- 
pendence on the sojourn time. Given the model m', the 
continuous state xk of the target evolves according to the 
dynamic system 
with the measurement equation 
The basic idea of multiple model estimation is to run a bank 
of filters corresponding to the number of models, compute 
the probability of each model being valid, and then obtain 
the overall estimate using a combination of the estimates 
from these filters. Let 5' be the measurement sequence up 
to time k . Then the optimal estimate is given by 
r k  
i,,, = E[x, I z k ]  = C E [ x ,  I m'A9'),~A]P{m'k.' ' I zA} (13) 
( , , / ) = I  
where m'k7" is one of the r A  model sequences up to time k . 
Static Multiple Models - The early work [53], [56] on mul- 
tiple models assumes that the true target motion model is 
static and contained in a fixed set of models, i.e., pii = 0 for 
i # j . Since the model dose not switch, the model sequence 
consists of only one model, the number of filters is fixed at 
r , and equation (1 3) becomes: 
2.kk = E[x, 15'3 = x E [ x ,  I m',~!']P{m' I z ' }  (14) 
,=I 
Because the target model does not change with time, this 
approach is not appropriate for maneuvering targets, al- 
though it can be used to determine what discrete state the 
system is in. 
Model Sequence Pruning - The optimal multiple model 
estimator given by (13) requires a filter for each possible 
model sequence hypothesis. Since the number of model 
sequences and thus the number of filters increases exponen- 
tially with time, the optimal estimator is not practical. An 
obvious sub-optimal approach is to prune the least likely 
model sequences according to their probabilities. However, 
this has been shown to have inferior performance relative to 
other approaches [84]. 
Generalized Pseudo Bayesian Estimator - The Generalized 
Pseudo Bayesian (GPB) method [l], [27], [83] is a sub- 
optimal approach that reduces the number of filters by 
merging model sequences that end up with the same fixed 
length sub-sequences. A GPB algorithm of order k , called 
GPBk requires a bank of r A  filters. Thus the first order GPB 
estimator, GPB1, will re-initialize the filters with the esti- 
mates: 
(15) -i _k-1 xk-llk-1 = E b k - ,  14 I =&-l,k-l 
Interacting Multiple Models - This alternative merging 
approach was first developed by Blom [21], [22] and has 
become very popular. It is conceptually similar to the GPB2 
algorithm but has only GPBl complexity. Let pL-uk-l be the 
conditional probability of mk-, = m' given the cumulative 
measurements zn-l, and x,-,,-, and be the state Ai 
437 
estimate and error covariance of xk-l for filter with model 
m' . Each cycle of the IMM algorithm consists of the fol- 
lowing steps: 
1. Interaction or model-conditioned re-initialization 
Predicted model probability: 
p;,,-, = P(nz: I ?-I } = c Pjip;-un-l (16) 
j=l 
Mixing weight: 
pL!!,k-l = P(mL-, I mi, & I }  = p j i p ~ - u , - l / p ~ k - l  (17) 
Mixing estimate: 
Fl-l,,-l = E[x,-, I mi., ;'-'I = ~ ~ ~ - l k - l p / ! ! l ~ - l  (18) 
j=l 
Mixing covariance: 
A j  - j  jli EL, = ~[P;:l,k-l +(%&I - X , - , k - l ) ( ~ ~ - l I k - l  - % 4 - 1  YlPk-l,k-I 
j=l 
(19) 
Model-conditioned filtering. For each i = 1,2,. . . , r , the 
estimate Fl-llk-l and covariance are used to ini- 
tialize a standard Kalman filter to process the measure- 
ment zk to obtain the updated state 2LIk and covariance 
according to equations (7) and (8). 
Model probability update. The model likelihood 
tk = p ( z ,  I mb,zk-')  = N(v, ;O,S:) ,  where N(v;O,S)  
denotes a normal distribution in v with zero mean and 
covariance S. The model probability is then updated by 
Estimate fusion. The overall estimate and covariance 
are given by 
r 
i,,, = E[x, I Z k ]  = z i ; , , p ; , k  (21) 
i=l 
I 
pklk = Z[G,, +<i,,, - qIk )(2klk - 2 l l k  )'I&. (22)  
i=I 
The IMM algorithm is one of the most popular algorithms 
for tracking maneuvering targets because of its relatively 
simple implementation and its ability to handle complicated 
dynamics. 
Variable Structure Interacting Multiple Models - While 
IMM has been successfully used in several applications, 
having a fixed model set has its disadvantages. The applica- 
ble target motion models will depend on the situation. 
Keeping all the needed models throughout the tracking pe- 
riod can incur extra computational load and degrade accu- 
racy. In tracking multiple targets, the same estimator with 
the same set of models is used for all targets even though 
each target may need different models. 
The variable structure multiple model (VSMM) estimator 
has been proposed [54], [55] for situations where the model 
space is large and the set of likely models varies with time or 
state. Since the optimal VSMM estimator is infeasible, a 
variable structure interacting multiple model (VS-IMM) 
estimator has been developed. It has a two level structure: 
Model set adaptation. This determines which model set 
to use at each time using both information contained in 
the measurements as well as prior knowledge. Different 
ways of terminating existing models and initializing 
new models have been proposed. 
Model set conditioned estimation. This consists of the 
same steps as fixed model set IMM and an additional 
step to assign initial probabilities to the new models and 
initialize the filters. 
In [48], [49], the VSIMM approach is used to track ground 
targets moving over roads and open field. The target motion 
models reflect the mobility of a target for different condi- 
tions. In open field, the process noise has equal covariances 
in both X and Y directions. For a target moving on a road, 
the noise is higher along the road and lower orthogonal to 
the road due to the road constraint. 
Models are added or removed by examining the location of 
the target track. At each time, the track is tested for proxim- 
ity to road segments, intersections, etc. For example, when 
the track moves from one road segment A into a road seg- 
ment B, the model corresponding to segment B is added. 
Similarly, when a target moves near an intersection, the 
models for the roads at the intersection are added to the 
model set. 
3.4 Nonlinear Estimation 
The Kalman filter is the basis of the single target state esti- 
mation algorithm described above. For the Kalman filter to 
be applicable, both the target motion model and the sensor 
measurement model have to be linear. Strictly speaking, for 
the Kalman filter to be a conditional mean estimate, the 
noises also have to be Gaussian. Since many dynamic mod- 
els or observation models do not satisfy the linear assump- 
tions, approaches for estimating the state of nonlinear sys- 
tems have been developed. The following sub-subsections 
review some of these approaches. 
Extended Kalman Filter - When the non-linearity of the 
dynamic and observation models is not too severe, these 
models can be linearized about a nominal trajectory, and 
then a Kalman filter can be developed with the linearized 
model. Specifically, let the target motion model and meas- 
urement model be 
438 
xk+l = f k  (xk) -I- gk (’k )wk 
z ,  = h, (x, ) + v, 
(23) 
and 
(24) 
In the extended Kalman filter, the nominal target trajectory 
is usually chosen to be the best estimate of xk given the 
cumulative measurements z’ . Thus time update is given by 
(25) %+Ilk = f, ( - 4 K  ) 
where F, (x) and G, (x) are the derivatives of f ,  (.) and 
g, (.) evaluated at x . The measurement equation is ap- 
proximated by 
Z, = h, (3kik-i ) + H ,  ( 2 k l k - l  )(xk - fi,I,-,) + V ,  (27) 
where H ,  (x) is the partial derivative of h, (.) evaluated at 
x . The standard Kalman filter measurement update equation 
can then be used to updated estimate. 
The extended Kalman filter is the most popular nonlinear 
filter commonly used. Its operation is similar to the usual 
Kalman filter except that the Kalman filter gain depends on 
the most recent estimate and thus cannot be computed ahead 
of time. For target tracking, if the appropriate coordinate 
system is used, the target motion equation is linear. For 
radar measurements, the measurement equation is nonlinear 
because the range and azimuth are nonlinear functions of the 
target coordinates in x and y. 
Gaussian Sum Approximation [2], [80] - The extended 
Kalman filter assumes that the conditional probability distri- 
bution can be approximated reasonably accurately by a 
Gaussian distribution. When this approximation is not valid, 
e.g., when the conditional distribution is multi-modal, the 
conditional probability distribution of x given the cumulative 
measurements z k  can be approximated by a sum of Gaus- 
sian distributions, i.e., 
where the weights a:,’s of the individual Gaussian 
distributions with means ELl, and covariance Bilk sum to 
one. The Gaussian sum filter operates as a collection of 
extended Kalman filters. In time update, the weights stay the 
same and the mean and covariance of each Gaussian 
distribution is propagated by the time update equation. In 
measurement update, the means and covariances are updated 
by the usual Kalman filter, but the weights are updated using 
the innovations of the measurements for the different filters. 
Note that the Gaussian sum filter has almost the same 
structure as the static multiple model filter, except that there 
is only one model evaluated at different nominal trajectories. 
Nonlinear Filtering - In a Bayesian framework, nonlinear 
estimation is conceptually very simple [38]. The target dy- 
namics is represented by the Markov transition probability 
p ( ~ , + ~  I x,) and the measurement model is given by the 
conditional probability p ( z ,  I x, ) . Then the optimal Baye- 
sian estimate is given by the following equations: 
Time update: 
Measurement update: 
p(x ,  I 2 )  = C-’p(e ,  I x,)p(x, I 2 - 1 )  (30) 
where C is a normalization constant. 
This optimal nonlinear filtering algorithm has nice features 
such as the ability to update the probability distribution of 
the states due to non-detections (so called negative evi- 
dence). However, implementation is computationally inten- 
sive since it requires discretization of the state space and 
performing the integration by a summation. Thus even 
though the algorithm has been known for many years, it has 
seldom been used. Reference [74] describes how this algo- 
rithm can be used to track targets moving over terrain. The 
time update equations propagate the probability distribution 
by considering the effects of terrain on target speed and 
direction of movement. The measurement update equations 
update the distributions when measurements are received. 
This general algorithm was also discussed in [64] and used 
to formulate the multiple hypothesis tracking problem. Ref- 
erence [81] presents more details on this approach and its 
use in multiple target tracking motivated by work in tracking 
submarines. 
4. DATA ASSOCIATION 
When the origins of the measurements are uncertain, e.g., 
when clutter or multiple targets are present, the measure- 
ments have to be associated with other measurements or 
tracks before the target state estimates can be generated. 
Association is what distinguishes target tracking from tradi- 
tional state estimation and establishes tracking as a separate 
discipline. 
Association can be between two sets of measurements to 
establish target tracks (track initiation or formation), be- 
tween measurements and existing tracks (track continuation 
or maintenance), or between tracks from different sensors 
(track fusion in a distributed architecture). Historically, track 
formation (initiation) and maintenance (continuation) were 
at first treated as separate problems. However, the more 
recent algorithms usually integrate these functions into a 
single framework. 
439 
Algorithms can also be classified according to whether they 
focus on single targets (uncoordinated association) or con- 
sider explicitly the presence of multiple targets (coordinated 
association) and whether association decisions are made 
using single or multiple scans of data. The early algorithms 
tend to focus on single scan and uncoordinated associations, 
while the recent algorithms deal with multiple scans of data 
and coordinated association. In general, algorithms that 
consider multiple targets and use multiple scans of data 
perform better but require more computations. 
4.1 Single Target (Uncoordinated) Track Formation 
These track formation algorithms initiate tracks from se- 
quences of measurements without considering competition 
from other tracks. Thus the resulting tracks may share the 
same measurements. 
M out of N Test - The earliest track formation algorithms 
[25] are based on the following simple logic. A track is 
tentatively initiated from a single measurement. A validation 
gate is then established around this measurement and a 
measurement falling inside this gate becomes part of the 
track. When there are m detections out of I? scans of meas- 
urements, then the track is formed or confirmed. This 
method is very simple but does not provide a score on the 
confidence of the track. 
Likelihood (Ratio) Test - Let Ok3' be a track 1 consisting of 
the measurement sequence z'.' = { z ~ , ~ ' ,  z ~ , ~ ,  , . . ., qj ,  1 . A 
tentative track can be scored by the likelihood of the track, 
[78] defined as 
where p ( q j ,  I zk-l.',Ok*') = N(vi.jf ;0,Si, , )  is the probability 
distribution of the innovations process. The log likelihood 
can be computed recursively from the previous log likeli- 
hood and the measurement residual. Alternatively, one can 
compute the likelihood ratio given by 
where p ( z k J  IFA) is the likelihood that all the measure- 
ments in the sequence are false alarms. Again, the likelihood 
ratio is converted to a log likelihood ratio. In the likelihood 
tests, tracks are declared as confirmed (or deleted) when the 
likelihood or ratio exceeds (or falls below) a certain thresh- 
old. 
4.2 Single Target (Uncoordinated} Track Maintenance 
As in Sections 4.1, these algorithms associate measurements 
with the existing tracks without considering the presence of 
other tracks. Thus a measurement may be associated with 
multiple tracks. 
Nearest Neighbor - When there are multiple measurements 
within the validation gate of a track, the measurement that is 
closest (according to some distance measure) to the track is 
associated with the track. This approach makes a hard deci- 
sion based on a single scan and is very easy to implement. 
However, it does not perform well in high density situations. 
Track Splitting [79] - This is basically applying the likeli- 
hood function (or ratio) approach to track maintenance. For 
every measurement that falls in the validation gate, the track 
is split. Each track is scored using a likelihood as discussed 
before. The track is pruned when the likelihood falls below a 
threshold. This approach makes soft decisions based upon 
multiple scans of data. Because of its computational re- 
quirements and limited performance, this approach is no 
longer popular. 
Probabilistic Data Association (PDA) [ 121, [13] - Instead 
of associating a single measurement with a track, this ap- 
proach probabilistically associates all measurements in the 
validation gate. If the number of validated measurements is 
mk , the updated state estimate for the track is 
(33) 
i=O 
where pl P{Oi I Z k  1 is the conditional probability of the 
event 0: that measurement z,,~ is the correct measurement 
(originating from the target) and Rl,, = E[x,  I 0: ,Zk ] is the 
updated state estimate given the association. The state esti- 
mate update has the same form as the usual Kalman filter, 
i.e., 
R,, = Rk,k- ,  + WkV,  (34) 
except that the measurement residual is the weighted sum of 
the measurement residuals 
'"k 
v, = c p : v :  
i=O 
(35) 
The covariance update equation is also similar to the Kal- 
man filter update equation except for another term which 
depends on the measurement residuals. Thus the Kalman 
filter gain cannot be computed a priori. The need to associ- 
ate measurements has turned the problem into a nonlinear 
estimation problem. 
The PDAF is an all-neighbors association algorithm. Its 
logic is similar to GPBl where a single "lumped" state esti- 
mate is used as sufficient statistics. It is fairly easy to im- 
plement and has been shown to perform better than the near- 
est neighbor approach in high clutter. Augmented PDAF's 
that use features in addition to kinematics measurements 
have also been developed. 
440 
The PDA approach was originally developed for track 
maintenance for a fixed number of targets. By combining 
with interacting multiple models in the so called interacting 
multiple models PDAF (IMMPDAF) [7], it has been modi- 
fied to handle track formation as well. 
Optimal Bayesian Approach [77] - The PDAF is a subopti- 
mal approach since the association event only considers the 
current measurements. The optimal approach will consider 
all possible association hypotheses up to the current time. 
Let the total number of measurement sequences of possible 
tracks up to time k be 
k 
LL = n ( l + n z j )  (36) 
j=l 
The additional 1 in the product corresponds to the absence 
of measurement from that scan in the track. Then the state 
estimate is 
(37) 
where p"' E P(Ok,' I Z k  ] is the conditional probability that 
the measurement sequence is the correct sequence (origi- 
nating from the target), and 
;ilk = E [ ~ ,  iek,/,zk] = E [ ~ ,  I zk.'] (38) 
is the updated state estimate given the association sequence. 
The optimal algorithm is not feasible since the number of 
filters grows exponentially, as in the optimal multiple model 
algorithm. One approximate solution approach is the n-scan 
algorithm that combines all tracks with identical measure- 
ment sequences during the previous n scans, similar to 
GPBn in multiple models estimation. The PDAF corre- 
sponds to the situation when n=O. 
4.3 Multiple Target Track Maintenance 
Association performance can be improved when the algo- 
rithms consider explicitly the presence of multiple targets 
and recognize that a single measurement cannot belong to 
multiple tracks. 
Optimal Assignment - The optimal assignment approach, 
also sometimes called global nearest neighbor, is the coordi- 
nated version of nearest neighbor. Instead of selecting the 
measurement that is closest to a track, this approach selects 
the set of measurements that is closest to the set of tracks 
according to some global distance measure subject to the 
constraint that two tracks do not share a single measurement, 
and two measurements do not appear in the same track. The 
likelihood of a measurement zkTj  originating from the track 
i with previous measurement sequence z ~ . ~  is 
where v ~ , ~ ~ ~ , ~  and Sk,jlk,i are the residual or innovations and 
covariance of measurement z ~ , ~  in track i . The joint likeli- 
hood of each set of associations is given by 
By taking the logarithm and substituting in the Gaussian 
distribution, the log likelihood function of the joint associa- 
tion is 
i,i 
With the constraint that each track can be associated with at 
most one measurement, and each measurement with at most 
one track, the optimization problem is the so called assign- 
ment problem which has been solved by methods such as the 
Munkres [66], [23] or Hungarian [50] algorithms. Recent 
algorithms such as the JVC algorithm first proposed in [39] 
and enhanced in [24] and the auction algorithm [15] have 
been shown to be highly effective in solving the assignment 
algorithm arising from data association problems. 
Optimal assignment is a single (coordinated) hypothesis, 
single scan approach to track maintenance. It is generally 
used in conjunction with a track formation approach dis- 
cussed before. Measurements that are not assigned to any 
existing tracks are used to initiate new tracks. This approach 
is still very popular because of its simplicity and the avail- 
ability of good assignment algorithms. 
Joint Probabilistic Data Association (JPDA) [32], [33] - 
This is the extension of PDA to multiple targets. The tracks 
for a known number of targets are assumed to have been 
initiated and the problem is to associate the measurements to 
the tracks. As in PDA, the estimate for each target is given 
by a single mean and covariance. 
The state estimation equation looks exactly the same as 
PDA, except that the measurement and target association 
probabilities are now computed jointly across all targets. 
Specifically, for target t, the estimate is 
where mk,r is the number of measurements in the validation 
gate for target t ,  pi" is the (marginal) probability for the 
event that measurement j originates from target t ,  and 2;; is 
the estimate obtained by updating the target state with meas- 
urement j .  The key to JPDA is computing the probability for 
the joint association event 
j=l 
(43) 
441 
such that all the associations are feasible, i.e., each meas- 
urement can originate from at most one target and each 
target can generate at most one measurement. 
JPDA can be viewed as a special case of the multiple hy- 
pothesis approach when hypotheses are combined as soon as 
they are formed. As in PDA, it is an all neighbors approach, 
as compared to optimal assignment, which is global nearest 
neighbor. The JPDAF is a very popular association algo- 
rithm with many applications. One of its disadvantages is 
that since models interference is assumed to be random, it 
does not work well when there is persistent interference, 
e.g., from another nearby target. 
4.4 Multiple Scan Coordinated Association 
The track maintenance algorithms in Section 4.3 base the 
association decisions on only one scan of measurements. 
Since both the measurement and the target motion models 
have uncertainty, the single scan decisions may not be the 
correct associations. Thus association performance can be 
improved by using multiple scans of data. 
The core of all multiple scan algorithms is the evaluation of 
track likelihoods, which can be used for both track forma- 
tion and maintenance. Thus multiple scan algorithms gener- 
ally can be used for both track formation and association. 
Znteger Programming - The earliest multiple scan algorithm 
was found in [62]. Let N be the total number of measure- 
ments and L be the total number of tracks formed (the tracks 
are assumed to satisfy the constraint that each track cannot 
contain more than one measurement from the same scan). 
For each track i , let cpi be an N-dimensional indicator vec- 
tor whose k-th element is 1 if the k-th measurement is in the 
track, and 0 otherwise. Let p be a Ldimensional vector 
with elements 1 or 0 that indicate whether a particular track 
is in the scene hypothesis. Then the feasibility condition that 
a single measurement cannot belong to two tracks becomes 
A p  [cp, ....cp,]p I 1 (44) 
Let the score of a track i be Ai.  This score can be com- 
puted as before (31), e.g., as a likelihood. The total score 
for a particular assignment is given by A’ p and the problem 
of finding the best scene hypothesis is the integer program- 
ming problem 
min A’p (45) 
P 
subject to Ap I 1  (46) 
This integer programming problem can be solved by branch 
and bound or other methods. Although this approach was the 
fist multiple scan algorithm, interest soon shifted to other 
multiple scan algorithms such as multiple hypothesis track- 
ing described below. 
Multiple Hypothesis Tracking (MHT) - Multiple hypothesis 
tracking delays making hard decisions when there is not 
sufficient information to make a good decision. Alternative 
hypotheses are formed to represent the ambiguities and each 
hypothesis is evaluated. MHT originated with the work in 
[75] and a general formulation was given in [63], [64]. In 
MHT, there are two levels of hypotheses: track hypotheses 
containing measurements originating from the same targets 
and scene hypotheses of consistent tracks (with no meas- 
urements) that explain the origins of all cumulative meas- 
urements. 
There are two alternative implementations of MHT: the 
original hypothesis-oriented approach of [75] and expanded 
in [64] and the track-oriented approach in [Sl]. Both ap- 
proaches require the formation and evaluation of hypotheses 
at the track and scene level. Received measurements are first 
associated with the current tracks to form new track hy- 
potheses. A measurement may be associated with a current 
track (i.e., from a previously detected target), used to form a 
new track (i.e., from a target that has not been detected be- 
fore), or not used in a track at all (i.e., false alarm). At the 
same time, a track may not be associated with any measure- 
ments (i.e.. not detected). The result is a set of updated track 
hypotheses along with the likelihoods of these associations. 
These track hypotheses are then used to form scene hypothe- 
ses by incorporating the feasibility constraints and the prob- 
abilities of the hypotheses evaluated. One formula for recur- 
sively computing the probability of the scene hypothesis is 
given by [64]: 
where C is a normalization constant, A is a scene level 
hypothesis given the cumulative measurements Z , X is the 
parent hypothesis given the previous measurements Z , 
L y  ( Z ,  I x) is the likelihood of the false alarms in the cur- 
rent measurements Z,  as hypothesized by A ,  and 
Lk (zk.[ Iekk-’.’,Z) is the likelihood of associating the meas- 
urement z,,/ with the track . The hypothesis evaluation 
equation can also be expressed in batch form in terms of the 
track likelihoods. 
The MHT is conceptually simple but computationally inten- 
sive since the number of hypotheses grows exponentially. 
Thus sophisticated hypothesis management techniques are 
needed to reduce the combinatorics. Common techniques 
include pruning to remove low probability hypotheses, 
clustering to decompose the problem, and combining or 
merging to replace similar hypotheses by a single hypothe- 
sis. 
In the hypothesis oriented approach [75], [64], the most 
current scene hypotheses and the measurements are used to 
generate new scene level hypotheses. Most of the hypothesis 
442 
management operations are performed on scene hypotheses. 
The track oriented approach [51], [20] does not maintain 
scene hypotheses from scan to scan. Only high likelihood 
track hypotheses are maintained and used to form scene 
hypotheses. The probabilities of the scene hypotheses are 
then used to further prune the track hypotheses. 
The track-oriented approach is computationally more effi- 
cient since scene hypotheses are only formed for high likeli- 
hood tracks. In the hypothesis-oriented approach, the expan- 
sion of the hypothesis may result in the generation of many 
low probability hypotheses which will eventually be pruned 
any way. However, the use of Murty’s method [67] for 
finding the n-best solutions of an assignment problem can be 
used to find high ranking scene hypotheses directly without 
having to expand all hypotheses [28], [29]. 
In recent years, MHT has become quite popular because of 
advances in computing hardware and algorithms. Simulation 
studies have shown that it can produce much better perform- 
ance than more traditional algorithms in difficult situations 
[26]. MHT has also been combined with more sophisticated 
models to handle maneuvering targets, e.g., IMM/MHT as 
discussed in Chapter 16 of [20]. 
Multi-Dimensional Assignment - Traditional MHT requires 
the explicit expansion and evaluation of many hypotheses. 
Successful implementation requires the use of sophisticated 
hypothesis management techniques to handle the combinato- 
rics. During the last decade, alternative optimization based 
methods that do not require the explicit expansion and 
evaluation of hypotheses have been developed [30], [68]- 
[72]. Such algorithms are easier to implement and computa- 
tionally more efficient. 
Suppose that there are N scans of data with m, measure- 
ments in each scan. To account for missing detections, we 
define an additional dummy measurement indexed by 0 in 
each set k. A track hypothesis can be represented by an 
indicator function ziliz,,.iN where: 
if measurements i, , i2 ,..., i, belong to track 
otherwise 
z . .  , = 
ill? ... IN 
Let cili2,,,iN be the cost of forming the track ziIiz ,,,; , e.g., the 
negative of the logarithm of the track likelihood define in 
(31). Then the problem of selecting the scene hypothesis to 
maximize the probability or likelihood of the hypothesis can 
be formulated as the following optimization problem: 
for all i, = 1,2, ....., m, , and k = 1,2 ,....., N . The constraints in 
(49) specify that each measurement can belong to only one 
track. There are no constraints on the dummy measurements 
since several tracks may be undetected in a single scan. The 
cost coo,.,, is defined to be zero. 
Equations (48) and (49) define an N dimensional assignment 
which is a natural extension of the two dimensional assign- 
ment problem described in Section 4.3. While the 2-D as- 
signment problem can be solved in polynomial time, the N- 
D assignment is N-P hard, i.e., the solution time cannot be 
bounded by a polynomial of fixed order. Thus sub-optimal 
approaches have been developed to solve the assignment 
problem. 
Although there are differences in the specific steps, the 
existing approaches to N-D assignment are all based upon 
Lagrangian relaxation. The main idea is to use Lagrangian 
multipliers to move constraints into the cost to be minimized 
until the problem becomes a 2-D assignment problem which 
can be solved efficiently by algorithms such as the auction 
algorithm. A main challenge in Lagrangian relaxation is 
updating the Lagrangian multipliers so that the constraints 
are satisfied. Different approaches of handling this problem 
are discussed in [68]-1721. 
Multi-dimensional assignment can be used for both track 
initiation and track continuation by using a sliding window 
over the different scans of data. The solution from one time 
can be used as a “warm start” for the solution of the next 
time [7 11. Multi-dimensional assignment has become quite 
popular during the last few years because it provides a com- 
putationally attractive alternative to MHT when there is a 
need to use multiple scans of data for association. Algo- 
r i t h m s  for finding the m-best assignments have also been 
developed for situations when knowing the best assignment 
is not enough [73]. 
4.5 Tracking Without Data Association 
Most multi-target tracking algorithms follow the structure of 
Figure 1 and perform association before target state estima- 
tion. In recent years, several approaches have been proposed 
to perform tracking without an explicit association function. 
Instead of dealing with individual target states and individ- 
ual measurements, these approaches treat all targets and 
measurements as components of one system, and estimate 
the system state directly without explicitly forming associa- 
tion hypotheses. 
Symmetric Measurement Equations (SME) [42]-[43]- In this 
approach the original measurements on the targets are con- 
verted into a new set of measurements that are symmetric 
functions of the original measurements. For example, for 
two targets with measurements y ,  and y 2 ,  the symmetric 
measurement vector Z = ( z ,  , z 2 )  is given by 
443 
Since the new measurements do not depend on specific 
origins of the measurements, data association is not neces- 
sary for estimating the target state. Because the new meas- 
urement model Z = f ( X ) + V  is always nonlinear in the 
joint state X of all the targets, the extended Kalman filter is 
used to estimate the joint target state. 
The SME approach assumes that the number of targets is 
known a priori. Thus it is really an algorithm for track con- 
tinuation or maintenance. The cost of avoiding data associa- 
tion is a nonlinear estimation problem with higher dimen- 
sion. Thus, even though the SME approach has potential, it 
may be applicable only to tracking problems with a small 
number of targets. 
Multi-target Nonlinear Filtering [45], [46], [57]-[59], [81] - 
Suppose the individual target states are replaced by a multi- 
target state X , ,  and the individual measurements are re- 
placed by a joint measurement Z, . Suppose the individual 
target motion and measurement models can be aggregated 
into a multi-target motion model given by the conditional 
probability p(X,+ ,  I X,) and a measurement model given 
by the likelihood p ( Z ,  I X,) . Then, the same nonlinear 
filtering equations (29), (30) developed for a single target 
can be used (conceptually at least) for tracking multiple 
targets, i.e., 
P(X,+,  I zk) = ~ P ( X , + ,  I X , ) P ( X ,  I Z ’ M X ,  (52) 
p ( X ,  I Zk) = c - ’ p ( z ,  I X , ) p ( X ,  I zk-l) (53)  
The simplicity of these equations is deceptive. Discretization 
of the target state space is needed to represent the probabil- 
ity densities. Since the joint target state space is the direct 
product of the individual target spaces, the number of cells 
needed can be very high. For example, if each target state is 
discretized into N cells, the joint state space for two targets 
will have N 2  cells. Also, if the number of targets is un- 
known, the joint target state needs to represent that informa- 
tion. 
The prior conditional probabilities also need to be defined. 
In particular, the likelihood function p ( Z ,  I X,) now con- 
tains all the information on association. The Unified Track- 
ing Algorithm approach [81] computes the likelihood di- 
rectly using fairly basic probability techniques and applies it 
to situations when ordinary association is not meaningful, 
e.g., measurement strength that depends on two targets. On 
the other hand, the Finite-Set Statistics (FISST) approach 
[57], [58] is based on random set theory. 
Although multi-target nonlinear filtering has potential, its 
mathematical foundation is quite complicated and not 
widely understood. Reference [59] presents some issues in 
problem formulation and compares some algorithms. The 
computational requirements are quite substantial. Reference 
[8 I] states that the algorithm “is computationally infeasible 
for problems involving even moderate numbers of targets”. 
It also suggests that the algorithm should be part of a system 
with a standard tracking method and used only when targets 
cross or merge. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
Ground target tracking has become an important problem 
recently because airbome platforms such as Joint STARS 
can provide measurements on vehicles moving over a large 
area. Since such measurements have become available only 
recently, very few tracking algorithms have been developed 
specifically for ground targets, and most tracking algorithms 
have their origins in air targets. 
Ground target tracking is considerably more difficult than 
air target tracking because of higher target motion variabil- 
ity, higher target density, and possible miss-detection due to 
terrain masking and minimum detection velocity for MTI 
measurements. Thus, many tracking algorithms developed 
for air targets will not be suitable for ground targets. 
Our review of tracking algorithms over the last four decades 
suggests that the state-of-the-art in tracking is such that high 
performance tracking of ground targets is possible. Target 
state estimation algorithms have progressed from Kalman 
filters for targets with fairly stationary dynamics to multiple 
models estimation for highly maneuverable targets. At the 
same time, multiple scan association algorithms are now 
available to handle the high target density typically found 
for ground targets. Thus we believe that ground tracking 
algorithms can be developed using the more advanced tech- 
niques currently available. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  G. A. Ackerson and K. S. Fu, “On State Estimation in 
Switching Environments,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Con- 
trol, vol. AC-15, pp. 10-17, Feb. 1970. 
[2] D. L. Alspach and H. W. Sorenson, “Nonlinear Baye- 
sian Estimation Using Gaussian Sum Approximations,” 
IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-17, no. 4, pp. 439- 
448, Aug. 1972. 
[3] Y. Bar-Shalom, “Tracking Methods in a Multi-Target 
Environment,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, vol. AC- 
24, pp. 618-626, Aug. 1978. 
[4] Y. Bar-Shalom, Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking: 
Advanced Applications, Nonvood, M A  Artech House, 
1990. 
444 
[5] Y. Bar-Shalom, Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking: 
Applications and Advances Vol. 11, Nonvood, MA: Artech 
House, 1992. 
[6] Y. Bar-Shalom and K. Birmiwal, “Variable Dimensional 
Filter for Maneuvering Target Tracking,” IEEE Trans. on 
Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. AES-18, pp. 621-629, 
Sept. 1982. 
[7] Y. Bar-Shalom, K. C. Chang, and H. A. P. Blom, 
“Automatic Track Formation in Clutter with a Recursive 
Algorithm,” Chapter 2 in Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking: 
Advanced Applications, Y. Bar-Shalom, ed., pp. 25-42, 
Norwood: Artech House, 1990. 
[8] Y. Bar-Shalom and A. Jaffer, “Adaptive Nonlinear 
Filtering for Tracking with Measurements of Uncertain 
Origin,” in Proc. 1972 IEEE C O I ~  Decision and Control, 
pp. 243-247, New Orleans, LA, Dec. 1972. 
[9] Y. Bar-Shalom and T. E. Fortman, Tracking and Data 
Association, Orlando, FL: Academic Press, 1988. 
[lo] Y. Bar-Shalom and X. R. Li, Estimation and Tracking: 
Principles, Techniques and Software, Artech House, 1993. 
[ l l]  Y. Bar-Shalom and X. R. Li, Multitarget-Multisensor 
Tracking: Principles and Techniques, Storrs, CT: YBS 
Publishing, 1995. 
[12] Y. Bar-Shalom and E. Tse, “Tracking in a Cluttered 
Environment with Probabilistic Data Association,” in Proc. 
4“’ Symp. Nonlinear Estimation, San Diego, CA, Sept. 1973. 
[13] Y. Bar-Shalom and E. Tse, “Tracking in a Cluttered 
Environment with Probabilistic Data Association,” Auto- 
matica, vol. 11, pp. 451-460, 1973. 
[14] T. Benedict and G. Bordner, “Synthesis of an Optimal 
Set of Radar Track-While-Scan Equations,” IRE Trans. on 
Automatic Control, vol. AC-7, pp. 27-32, July 1962. 
[15] D. P. Bertsekas, “The Auction Algorithm for Assign- 
ment and Other Network Flow Problems: a Tutorial,” In- 
t e ~ a c e s ,  vol. 20, pp. 133-149, 1990. 
[16] D. Beymer and J. Malik, “Tracking Vehicles in Con- 
gested Traffic,” in Proc. 1996 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium, pp. 130-135, 1996. 
[17] S. S. Blackman, Multiple Target Tracking with Radar 
Applications, Nonvood, MA: Artech House, 1986. 
[I81 S. S .  Blackman, T. J. Broida, and M. F. Cartier, “Ap- 
plications of a Phased Array Antenna in a Multiple Maneu- 
vering Target Environment,” in Proc. of 1981 IEEE Con$ 
on Decision and Control, pp. 1413-1418, San Diego, CA 
1981. 
[19] S. S. Blackman, M. T. Busch, S. W. Cantrell, and C. J. 
Musial, “Applications of Signal and Data Processing Tech- 
nology to Vehicular Traffic Monitoring,” Signal and Data 
Processing of Small Targets 1994, Proc. SPIE, vol. 1954, 
pp. 361-375, May 1993. 
[20] S. Blackman and R. Popoli, Design and Analysis of 
Modern Tracking Systems, Nonvood, MA: Arctech House, 
1999. 
[21] H. A. P. Blom, “An Efficient Filter for Abruptly 
Changing Systems,” in Proc. 23rd IEEE Cor$ on Decision 
and Control, pp. 656-658, Las Vegas, NV. Dec. 1984. 
[22] H. A. P. Blom and Y. Bar-Shalom, “The Interacting 
Multiple Model Algorithm for Systems with Markovian 
Switching Coefficients,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, 
vol. AC-33, pp. 780-783, Aug. 1988. 
[23] F. Bourgeois and J. C. Lassalle, “An Extension of the 
Munkres Algorithm for the Assignment Problem to Rectan- 
gular Matrices,” Comm. of the ACM, vol. 14, pp. 802-804, 
Dec. 1971. 
[24] D. A. Castanon, “New Assignment Algorithms for 
Data Association,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 1698, pp. 3133-323, 
1992. 
[25] F. R. Castella, “Sliding Window Detection Probabili- 
ties,’’ IEEE Trans. Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. AES- 
12, pp. 815-819, NOV. 1976. 
[26] D. S. K. Chan, “Tracking in a High-Clutter Environ- 
ment: Simulation Results Characterizing a Bi-Level MHT 
Algorithm,” in Proc. Signal and Data Processing of Small 
Targets, SPIE, vol. 1954, pp. 540-551, 1993. 
[27] C. B. Chang’and M. Athans, “State Estimation for 
Discrete System with Switching Parameters,” IEEE Trans. 
on Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. AES-14, pp. 418- 
425, May 1978. 
[28] I. J. Cox and S. L. Hingorani, “An Efficient Imple- 
mentation of Reid’s Multiple Hypotheses Tracking Algo- 
rithm and Its Evaluation for the Purposes of Visual Track- 
ing,” IEEE Trans. Pattem Analysis and Machine Intelli- 
gence, vol. PAMI-18, no. 2, pp. 138-150, Feb. 1996. 
[29] I. J. Cox and M. L. Miller, “On Finding Ranked As- 
signments with Application to Multitarget Tracking and 
Motion Correspondence,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace and 
Elect. Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 486489, Jan. 1995. 
[30] S. Deb, M. Yeddanapudi, K. R. Pattipatti, and Y. Bar- 
Shalom, “A Generalized S-D Assignment Algorithm for 
445 
Multisensor-Multitarget State Estimation,” IEEE Trans. 
Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 523-538, 
April 1997. 
[31] J. N. Entzminger, Jr., C. A. Fowler, and W. J. Ken- 
neally, “JointSTARS and GMTI,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace 
and Elect. Systems, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 748-761, April 1999. 
[32] T. E. Fortman, Y. Bar-Shalom, and M. Scheffe, 
“Multi-Target Tracking Using Joint Probabilistic Data As- 
sociation,” in Proc. 1980 IEEE Con$ Decision and Control, 
Albuquerque, NM, Dec. 1980. 
[33] T. E. Fortman, Y. Bar-Shalom, and M. Scheffe, “Sonar 
Tracking of Multiple Targets Using Joint Probabilistic Data 
Association,” IEEE Joumal Ocean Engineering, vol. OE-8, 
pp. 173-184, July. 1983. 
[34] C. A. Fowler, “The Standoff Observation of Enemy 
Ground Forces; from Project PEEK to JointSTARS,” IEEE 
AES Systems Magazine, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 3-17, June 1997. 
[35] J. F. Gilmore, and D. A. Garren, “Airbome Video 
Surveillance,” in Proc. SPIE Coifererice on Automatic 
Target Recognition VIII, vol. 3371, pp. 2-10, 1998. 
[36] I. R. Goodman, R. P. S. Mahler, and H. T. Nguyen, 
Mathenzatics of Data Fusion, Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1997. 
[37] Y. C. Ho, and R. C. K. Lee, “A Bayesian Approach to 
Problem in Stochastic Estimation and Control,” IEEE Trans. 
Automatic Control, vol. AC-9, pp. 333-339, 1964. 
[38] 
Theory, New York Academic Press, 1970. 
A. H. Jazwinki, Stochastic Processes and Filtering 
[39] R. Jonker and A. Volgenant, “A Shortest Augmenting 
Path Algorithm for Dense and Sparse Linear Assignment 
Problems,” Computing, vol. 38, pp. 325-340, 1987. 
[40] R. E. Kalman, “A New Approach to Linear Filtering 
and Prediction Problems,” Joumal of Basic Engineering 
(ASME), vol. 82D, pp. 35-45, March 1960. 
[41] R. E. Kalman and R. Bucy, “New Results in Linear 
Filtering and Prediction,” Joumal of Basic Engineering 
(ASME}, vol. 83D, pp. 95-108,1961. 
[42] E. W. Kamen, “Multiple Target Tracking Based on 
Symmetric Measurement Equations,” IEEE Trans. Auto- 
matic Control, vol. AC-37, pp. 371-374, 1992. 
[43] E. W. Kamen and C. R. Sastry, “Multiple Target 
Tracking Using Products of Position Measurements,” IEEE 
Trans. on Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. AES-29, No. 
2, pp. 476-493, April 1993. 
[44] W. Y. Kan, J. V. Krogmeier, and P. C. Doerchuk, 
“Model-Based Vehicle Tracking from Image Sequences 
with an Application to Road Surveillance,” Optical Engi- 
neering, vol. 35, pp. 1723-1729, June 1996. 
[45] K. Kastella, “Event-Averaged Maxmum Likelihood 
Estimation and Mean-field Theory in Multitarget Tracking,” 
IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-40, no. 6, pp. 
1070-1074, 1995. 
[46] K. Kastella, “Joint Multitarget Probabilities for Detec- 
tion and Tracking,” in Proc. SPIE Coilf: Acquisition Track- 
ing and Pointing XI, vol. 3086, pp. 122-128, Apr. 1997. 
[47] D. R. Kirk, T. Grayson, D. Garren, C. Y. Chong, and J. 
Brandstadt, “AMSTE Precision Fire Control Tracking 
Overview,” in Proc. 2000 IEEE Aerospace Cor$erence, 
March 2000. 
[48] T. Kirubarajan, Y. Bar-Shalom, K. R. Pattipati, I. 
Kadar, B. Abrams, and E. Eadan, “Tracking Ground Targets 
with Road Constraints Using an IMM Estimator,” Proc. 
1998 IEEE Aerospace Conference, vo1.5, pp. 5-12, March 
1998. 
[49] T. Kirubarajan, Y. Bar-Shalom, K. R. Pattipati, and I. 
Kadar, “Ground Target Tracking with Topography-Based 
Variable Structure IMM Estimator,” Proc. SPIE Conf on 
Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets, vol. 3373, pp. 
222-233, 1998. 
[50] H. W. Kuhn, “The Hungarian Method for the Assign- 
ment Problem,” Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, no. 2, 
pp. 83-97, 1955. 
[51] T. Kurien, “Issues in the Design of Practical Multitar- 
get Tracking Algorithms,” Chapter 3 in Multitarget- 
Multisensor Tracking: Advanced Applications, Y. Bar- 
Shalom, ed., pp. 43 - 84, Artech House, 1990. 
[52] T. Kurien and R. B. Washbum, “Multiobject Tracking 
Using Passive Sensors,” in Proc. 1985 American Control 
Con$, Boston, MA, June 1985. 
[53] D. G. Lainiotis, “Partitioning: A Unifying Framework 
for Adaptive Systems, I: Estimation,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 64, 
pp. 1126-1143, Aug. 1976. 
[54] X. R. Li, “Engineers’ Guide to Variable-Structure 
Multiple-Model Estimation for Tracking,” in MuZtitarget- 
Multisensor Tracking: Applications and Advances, ed. by Y. 
Bar-Shalom, Norwood: Artech House, 1999. 
[55] X. R. Li and Y. Bar-Shalom, “Multiple Model Estima- 
tion with Variable Structure,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Con- 
trol, vol. AC-41, pp. 478-493, April 1996. 
446 
[56] D. T. Magill, “Optimal Adaptive Estimation of Sam- 
pled Stochastic Processes,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic 
Control, vol. AC-IO, pp. 434-439, Oct. 1965. 
[57] R. Mahler, “Global Integrated Data Fusion,” in Proc. 
7’“ National Symp. on Sensor Fusion, vol. 1, pp. 187-199, 
Albuquerque, NM, Mar. 1994. 
[58] R. Mahler, “Global Optimal Sensor Allocation,” in 
Proc. 9’“ National Symp. on Sensor Fusion, vol. 1, pp. 347- 
366, Monterey, CA, Mar. 1996. 
[59] R. Mahler, “Why Multi-Source Multi-Target Data 
Fusion is Tricky,” in Proc. 1999 IRIS Symp. on Sensor and 
Data Fusion, Laurel, MD, May 1999.h 
[60] E. Mazor, A. Averbuch, Y. Bar-Shalom, and J. Dayan, 
“Interacting Multiple Model Methods in Target Tracking: A 
Survey,” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Elect. Systems, vol. 
AES-34, No. 1, pp. 103-123, Jan. 1998. 
E611 R. McAulay and E. Denlinger, “A Decision-Directed 
Adaptive Tracker,” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Elect. 
Systems, vol. AES-9, pp. 229-236, March 1973. 
[62] C. L. Morefield, “Application of 0-1 Integer Program- 
ming to Multitarget tracking Problems,” IEEE Trans. Auto- 
matic Control, vol. AC-22, pp. 302-312, June 1977. 
[63] S. Mori, C. Y. Chong, R. P. Wisher, and E. Tse, 
“Multi-Target Multi-Sensor Tracking Problems: a General 
Approach,” in Proc. I983 American Control Col$ San 
Francisco, CA, June 1983. 
[64] S. Mori, C. Y. Chong, E. Tse, and R. P. Wishner, 
“Tracking and Classifymg Targets without A Priori Identifi- 
cation,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-31, no. 5, 
pp. 401-409, 1986. 
[65] S. Mori, K. C. Chang, and C. Y. Chong, “Performance 
Analysis of Optimal Data Association with Applications to 
Multiple Target Tracking,” Chapter 7 in Multitarget- 
Multisensor Tracking: Applications and Advances, Vol 11, 
Y. Bar-Shalom, ed., pp. 183 - 235, Artech House, 1992. 
[66] J. Munkres, “Algorithm for the Assignment and Trans- 
portation Problem” J. SIAM, vol. 5, pp. 32-48, 1957. 
[67] K. G. Murty, “An Algorithm for Ranking All the As- 
signments in Order of Increasing Cost,” Operations Re- 
search, vol. 16, pp. 682 - 687, 1968. 
[68] K. R. Pattipati, S. Deb, Y. Bar-Shalom, and R. B. 
Washburn, “Passive Multisensor Data Association Using a 
New Relaxation Algorithm,” Chapter 7 in Multitarget- 
Multisensor Tracking: Advanced Applications, Y. Bar- 
Shalom, ed., pp. 219 - 246, Artech House, 1990. 
[69] K. R. Pattipati, S. Deb, Y. Bar-Shalom, and R. B. 
Washbum, “A New Relaxation Algorithm and Passive Sen- 
sor Data Association,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. 
AC-37, no. 2, pp. 197-213, Feb. 1992. 
[70] A. B. Poore, “Multidimensional Assignment Formula- 
tion of Data Association Problems Arising from Multitarget 
and Multisensor Tracking,” Computational Optimization 
and Applications, vol. 2, pp. 27-57, 1994. 
[71] A. B. Poore and 0. E. Drummond, “Track Initiation 
and Maintenance Using Multidimensional Assignment 
Problem,” in Network Optimization, P. M. Pardalos, D. 
Hearn, and W. Hager, ed., Spring-Verlag, 1996. 
[72] A. B. Poore and A. J. Robertson 111, “A New Lagran- 
gian Relaxation Based Algorithm for a Class of Multidimen- 
sional Assignment Problems,” Computational Optimization 
and Applications, vol. 8, pp. 129-150, 1997. 
[73] R. L. Popp, K. R. Pattipati, and Y. Bar-Shalom, “m- 
best SD Assignment Algorithm with Application to Multi- 
target Tracking,” in Proc. SPIE Con$ on Signal and Data 
Processing of Small Targets 1998, vol. 3373, pp. 475- 495, 
Orlando, FL, April 1998. 
[74] D. B. Reid, “A Non-Gaussian Filter for Tracking Tar- 
gets Moving Over Terrain,” Proc. 121h Asilomar Conference 
on Circuits, Systems & Computers, pp. 112-1 16, Nov. 1978. 
[75] D. B. Reid, “An Algorithm for Tracking Multiple 
Targets,” IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-24, no. 
6, pp. 843-854, 1979. 
[76] H. R. Simpson, “Performance Measures and Optimi- 
zation Conditions for a Third-Order Sampled Data Tracker,” 
IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, vol. AC-8, pp. 182-183, 
April 1983. 
[77] R. A. Singer, R. G. Sea, and K. Housewright, “Deriva- 
tion and Evaluation and Improved Tracking Filters for Use 
in Dense Multitarget Environment, IEEE Trans. Inform. 
Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 423-432, July 1974. 
[78] R. W. Sittler, “An Optimal Data Association Problem 
in Surveillance Theory,” IEEE Trans. Mil. Electron., vol. 
MIL-8, pp. 125-139, Apr. 1964. 
[79] P. Smith and G. Buechler, “A Branching Algorithm for 
Discriminating and Tracking Multiple Objects,” ZEEE 
Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-20, pp. 101-104, Feb. 
1975. 
[SO] H. W. Sorenson and D. L. Alspach, “Recursive Baye- 
sian Estimation Using Gaussian Sums,” Automatica, vol. 7, 
no. 4, pp. 465-479, July 1971. 
447 
[81] L. D. Stone, C. A. Barlow, and T. L. Corwin, Bayesian 
Multiple Target Tracking, Norwood, M A :  Artech House, 
1999. 
[82] D. D. Sworder and J. Boyd, Estimation Problems in 
Hybrid Systems, Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
[83] J. K. Tugnait, “Detection and Estimation for Abruptly 
Changing Systems,” Automatica, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 607- 
615,1982. 
[84] J. K. Tugnait and A. H. Haddad, “A Detection- 
Estimation Scheme for State Estimation in Switching Envi- 
ronments,” Automatica, vol. 15, pp. 477-481, 1979. 
[85] Y. Zhao, Vehicle Location and Navigation Systems, 
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1997. 
Chee-Yee Chong received his S.B., S.M., and Ph.D. de- 
grees in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Currently he leads fusion technol- 
ogy development at Boo: Allen & Hamilton. His research 
interests include centralized and distributed tracking and 
fusion, resource planning and scheduling, reasoning with 
uncertainty, distributed decision making, integration of 
system techniques with artijkial intelligence, and the appli- 
cation of the above to large scale systems. Previously he 
was with Advanced Decision Systems in Mountain View, 
CA, and before that on the faculty of the Georgia Institute of 
Technology. In addition to being an IEEE member for many 
years, he also helped to start the International Society of 
bzformation Fusion in 1998. 
David A. Garren earned the B.S. degree in mathematics 
and physics from Roanoke College in 1986 and the M.S. 
and Ph.D. degrees in physics from the College of William 
and Mary in 1988 and 1991. He has thirteen years experi- 
ence in analysis and algorithms of multi-sensor multi-target 
tracking, imagehipal processing, and physics. He is cur- 
rently the U S .  Government core team lead for the Precision 
Fire-Control Tracking segment of DARPA‘s Affordable 
Moving Su$ace Target Engagement (AMSTE) program. 
Timothy P. Grayson received his B.S. degree from the 
University of Dayton, and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the 
University of Rochester. Currently he is DARPA program 
manager, Special Projects Ofice supporting various pro- 
grams in the general area of moving target engagement, 
including the Affordable Moving Sullface Target Engage- 
ment (AMSTE) program. His technical interests include 
statistical GMTI and SAR radar processing, tracking, com- 
plex signal processing, combat ID systems, electro-optic 
sensors, lasers and fundamental statistical optics. Previ- 
ously he worked for SAIC as a senior system engineer and 
before that for  Wright Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB. 
448 
