Spacecraft Modular Architecture Design For On- 
Orbit Servicing 
Dr. Charles M. Reynerson 
Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation 
PO Box 1062 
Boulder, CO 80306-1062 
creyners @alum.mit.edu 
Abstract - The Spacecraft Modular Architecture Design 
(SMAD) Concept involves the use of an on-orbit servicing 
vehicle to replace andor replenish components on a 
spacecraft. This study was conducted to evaluate the 
potential cost and benefits for on-orbit satellite servicing. 
Actual satellite data was used to estimate a baseline cost and 
to establish an operational design. This paper gives an 
overview of the study including the selection of servicing 
methodology, benefits of servicing, spacecraft impacts, 
selection of spacecraft components/ subsystems to service, 
derived servicer requirements, servicer point design, and a 
costing evaluation. 
INTRODUCTION 
The SMAD study' investigated the history of on-orbit 
servicing missions and studies. These past missions and 
studies were used to categorize different levels of on-orbit 
servicing. Given the present space infrastructure, and that 
which is anticipated in the near term, the SMAD study 
identified the appropriate level of on-orbit servicing for a 
remote sensing space system architecture. This architecture 
is composed of a constellation of 10 or less satellites in Low 
Earth Orbit (LEO) with 2 satellites per orbit plane. Details 
of the payload and mission are considered classified. 
The SMAD study identified six potential benefits of on- 
orbit servicing: 
Reduced life cycle costs 
Increased payload sensor availability 
Extended spacecraft orbital lifetime 
Enhanced spacecraft capabilities 
Pre-launch spacecraft integration flexibility 
Enhanced mission flexibility and operational readiness 
Modifications to the satellite design to enable on-orbit 
servicing were kept to a minimum. The satellite electrical 
and mechanical systems were examined to determine the 
potential design impacts of making the satellite serviceable, 
and the costs associated with these modifications. 
~~ 
' This material is declared a work of the U.S. Govemment and is not 
subject to copyright protection in the United States. 
The components of the satellite architecture were examined 
to determine the potential for replacement of failed 
components by a servicing mission. Approximately one- 
third of all satellite components can be practically replaced, 
and many more could be replaced by adopting a more 
modular bus and payload design. Replacement of 
components is performed functionally, not physically. All of 
the replacement components are packaged in a single 
payload module which a servicer satellite attaches to a 
docking interface on the satellite. Failed components are 
turned off, and their functions are performed by replacement 
components in the payload module. This functional 
replacement strategy minimizes the cost and complexity of 
the servicing mission. Many other on-orbit servicing 
concepts are based on either human or robotic manipulation 
of failed and replacement modules. Both manned satellite 
missions and robotic hardware are extremely costly 
compared to the chosen approach of functional replacement. 
A conceptual design for an on-orbit servicer spacecraft, the 
Rendezvous/Docking (R/D)' Servicer was also developed as 
part of the SMAD study. The IUD Servicer design effort 
was extensive and included a detailed technical assessment 
of enabling technologies required for the mission (e.g., laser 
rangingldocking system, high reliability docking 
mechanism, enhanced autonomous capabilities, and thermal 
control system interconnect). The point design was 
developed in such detail that a credible bottoms-up costing 
analysis could be conducted. The non-recurring and 
recurring costs of the IUD servicer development are 
included in all subsequent system level life cycle cost 
evaluations. 
Portions of this paper were reproduced with the permission 
of the U.S. Government study sponsor. Dr. Reynerson was 
the project manager and technical advisor for this study 
performed by the Naval Research Lab~ratory.~ 
Servicing of Multiple Satellites Using an OMV-Derived Transfer Vehicle. 
Spacecraft Modular Architecture Design (SMAD), Study Final Report, 
Graves, C.D., Meissinger, H.F., and Rosen, A. 1989. 
Oct. 18, 1996, Naval Research Laboratory. 
227 
BACKGROUND OF ON-ORBlT SERVICING 
Previous Studies 
Numerous studies have been written on the subject of on- 
orbit servicing. During the 1970’s and early 1980’s, most 
studies assumed routine, economical space access via the 
Space Shuttle and the Space Station. Many late 1980’s 
studies continued to assume a much larger space 
infrastructure than exists: 
“ ... the need to service. .. has established two categories of 
servicing concepts: 1) ground-based servicing satellites such 
as the Space Shuttle with extravehicular activity capabilities 
or a Vertical Take-Off Trans Atmospheric Vehicle (VTO- 
TAV) and 2 )  space based servicing satellites such as the 
Space Station or a logistical satellite servicing platform.+’ 
The current focus of on-orbit servicing work is on low cost 
servicing missions that enhance and/or have the potential to 
reduce the life cycle costs of high dollar systems. 
Defining “Serviceable Spacecraft ’’ 
Any spacecraft can be serviced on-orbit given enough 
resources. Just as any spacecraft can and will be repaired at 
the last minute on the ground, Astronauts and robotic 
manipulators could dissemble and repair any spacecraft on- 
orbit. But at what cost? The practical limits of spacecraft 
servicing must be assessed through economic analysis on a 
mission by mission basis. A spacecraft should not be 
considered serviceable unless the cost of servicing it is 
justified by the benefits. A proposed definition for 
serviceable spacecraft follows from this reasoning. 
Serviceable spacecraf: Any spacecraft for which the 
benefits of on-orbit servicing outweigh the associated cost. 
The purpose of senicing can be to replace degraded or 
failed coinponents, to upgrade existing capabilities, or to 
add new fitnctioiiality or capabilities. 
THE SMAD CONCEPT 
The SMAD servicing strategies and servicer designs were 
conceived with the intent to provide for practical, cost- 
effective on-orbit servicing. Certain aspects of SMAD 
distinguish it from other studies on spacecraft servicing. 
Spacecraft Modular Architectures 
In the context of spacecraft servicing, modularity describes 
the degree to which electrical and mechanical architectures 
are standardized and systematically partitioned. In general, 
modularity decreases the complexity and cost of spacecraft 
servicing. “In private industry the fields of manufacturing 
and maintenance have proven the value of designing for 
functional and physical partitioning. The technique of 
‘ Servicing the Strategic Defense Initiative Svstem: A Svsterns Annlvsis. 
December 1986. Thesis. Capt. V.J. Sumner, USAF. Doc # 
AFITfGSO/AA/86D-6 
standardization is similar to functional and physical 
partitioning and is known and used by the military on other 
systems, i.e., aircraft, communication electronics 
equipment.”’ A modular serviceable spacecraft has 
flexibility and standardization built into it so the servicer 
spacecraft simply needs to be built to a similar level of 
standardization. Replacement of individual components, or 
blocks of components (modules), can be effectively 
accomplished without impacting other modules in the 
serviceable spacecraft. 
Modularity of the Senliceable Spacecraft 
Use of standard data buses increases the serviceability of a 
spacecraft. Components on a serviceable spacecraft which 
are connected only to standard data buses and power require 
a minimum of rewiring to enable on-orbit functional 
replacement. On a serviceable spacecraft, connections to the 
standard data bus lines are brought out to a docking 
interface. A servicer can attach replacement components 
through this interface. This approach enables replacement of 
the functions of a failed component by turning it off, and 
turning on the replacement component at the docking 
interface. Shown in Figure 1 are schematics that contrast the 
type of data architecture which is typical on the spacecraft 
and a completely modular data architecture. 
It is much more attractive to design a spacecraft in a 
modular architecture from the beginning than to retrofit an 
existing spacecraft design. Complete modularization of the 
satellite design would require an extensive redesign effort, 
and was out of the scope of the SMAD study. To some 
extent, the spacecraft’s electrical architecture has been 
designed with modularity. Many bus and payload 
components are connected directly to standard data buses 
(e.g., MIL-STD 1553 (digital data bus) and MIL-STD 1773 
(fiber optic data bus). But, many of these same components 
are wired directly to other components which are not on the 
data buses. Replacement of any of these components 
requires much more complicated harness, switching, and 
docking interface designs. 
Servicer Spacecraft Modularity 
In order for the benefits of modularization of a serviceable 
spacecraft to be realized, the spacecraft which services it 
must be designed to a similar level of modularity. The 
replacement components on board the servicer must be 
partitioned in a way that makes them recognizable in the 
data architecture of the serviceable spacecraft. As far as the 
rest of the components on the serviceable spacecraft are 
concerned, the replacement components will perform 
identically if they have the same bus address as the failed 
components which they are replacing. 
Adapted from Air Command and Staff Research Report 87-2780 entitled 
On-Orbit Space Maintenance by Maj. L. S. Watt. 
228 
Servicing a Satellite’s Functionality 
A servicing strategy coined “functional replacement” was 
employed in the SMAD concept. It describes a method for 
replacement of failed components on a serviceable 
spacecraft. All of the replacement components are packaged 
in a single module which the servicer attaches to a docking 
interface on the spacecraft. Failed components on the 
spacecraft are simply turned off, and data is rerouted to the 
replacement components, which remain at the docking 
interface. Many on-orbit servicing spacecraft concepts are 
based on either human or robotic manipulation of failed and 
replacement modules. A robotic servicing architecture, 
which employs modularity in such forms as Orbital 
Replacement Units (ORU’s), is extremely costly, adds 
considerable complexity, and can decrease the probability of 
a successful servicing mission. Studies by the Strategic 
Defense Initiative Organization and the U.S. Air Force have 
“shown that manned missions to perform on-orbit servicing 
or repair may be impractical because: 
altitudes and orbit inclination in which servicing would be 
accomplished 
Refueling and other services could pose hazards to 
humans 
The use of humans in service and repair of Space Based 
Assets will also increase manpower (both space and ground 
personnel) and training requirements 
Manned servicers require additional cost to implement 
life support systems.336 
Radiation poses a hazard for humans at the expected 
jettisons, taking one payload module with it and leaving one 
attached to the first satellite. The servicer then rendezvouses 
and docks with a second satellite and drops off a second 
payload module. The only weight permanently attached to 
the satellite is the payload module which provides life 
extension andlor mission enhancement. Each servicer can 
repair two satellites. This concept was furtlzer developed 
into a point design as the ReIide~vous/Dockirig Sewicer. 
Oution 3: The servicer docks temporarily with the 
satellite, and leaves no structure or components permanently 
attached to the satellite. This minimizes the impact to the 
current satellite subsystems (attitude control, electrical 
power, thermal, etc.), but the only service that can be 
provided without complex robotics is refueling. Multiple 
satellites can be serviced by a single servicer. This concept 
is similar to the Naval Research Laboratory’s Autonomous 
Refueling Demonstration concept 
Option 4: The servicer contains propellant and 
replacement components for two satellites. It docks 
temporarily and delivers propellant to each satellite. It 
then flies in relatively close proximity to both satellites 
while the replacement components on-board perform the 
functions of the failed components on the satellites. Data is 
transferred between the servicer and the satellite via a laser 
crosslink system. A limited number of failed components 
could be functionally replaced in this way. The servicer 
must be designed for years of operation instead of the short 
duration rendezvous and docking period. 
Potential Bene$ts of Servicing Satellites 
Sewicer Spaceera) 
There are many ways that a servicer could be designed to 
accomplish the functional replacement servicing strategy. 
Some of the options which were investigated follow. 
the satellite. In addition to the replacement components for 
the satellite, all navigation, attitude control, propulsion, 
communications, and data processing hardware are housed 
in this servicer. This extra bus hardware adds considerable 
weight to the satellite (with no added value), and care needs 
to be taken to avoid exceeding the satellite attitude control 
margin. Each servicer can only repair one satellite. 
Option 1: The entire servicer permanently docks with 
Option 2: The servicer is designed in a modular 
configuration, with two payload modules and one bus 
module. The bus module contains all navigation, attitude 
control, propulsion, communications, and data processing 
hardware. Each payload module contains replacement 
components for its respective satellite. The servicer docks to 
the satellite interface, attaching a payload module. The 
payload module connects to satellite’s electrical power 
system, data buses, and propellant lines. The bus module 
On-Orbit Servicing: “Technology and Logistics Integration.” R. 
Hendrick and B. Teoh, PhD. SPARTA, Inc. Doc # AIAA-91-4081 
The SMAD study identified six major benefits of servicing 
satellite systems on-orbit: 
Reduced life cycle costs. Servicing a system of 
satellites allows for a greater interval between spacecraft 
block replacements. With essentially the same initial cost, a 
serviceable system will last longer than a non-serviceable 
system. 
Increased payload sensor availability. Servicing 
replaces sensors which fail long before the spacecraft would 
be expended or replaced without servicing. 
Extended orbital lifetime. On-orbit servicing can 
replenish consumables such as propellant and pressurant; 
compensate for degradation of components such as batteries 
and solar arrays; and recover anomalies of bus and payload 
electronic and mechanical components. 
Enhanced spacecraft capabilities. Servicing provides 
for opportunities to adapt a spacecraft’s payload, or mission, 
through insertion of new technology. It enables the use of 
next generation technology on current generation spacecraft. 
Enhanced mission flexibility and operational readiness. 
The refueling capability of a servicing mission may enable 
extraordinary mission operation flexibility. It allows for 
orbital maneuvers which would normally shorten spacecraft 
lifetime due to fuel consumption. 
Pre-launch spacecraft integration flexibility. A 
229 
serviceable spacecraft which is assembled in a modular 
architecture allows for easier changeout of its components 
before launch. 
REPLACEA- 
BILITY 
CATEGORY 
COMPONENT NAME 
Making Spacecraft Serviceable 
Inertial Reference Unit 
Direct Down Link 
Three Axis Magnetometer 
At present most spacecraft are not designed for on-orbit 
servicing. The electrical architecture does not allow for 
functional replacement of many components. A more 
modular/standardized bus architecture would enable greater 
flexibility for servicing. Current spacecraft designs do not 
have the basic hardware which is needed to cooperatively 
interface with a servicer spacecraft. 
following requirements: 
“Serviceability will be attained by accomplishment of the 
A 
A 
B1 
Failure identification in orbit 
Capability of module exchange 
Refueling capability”’ 
Modular satellite system and payload design 
Existence of suitable docking adapters 
Payload Electronics 
Gimbal Control Electronics 
Digital Sun Sensor Electronics 
Three Axis Magnetometer 
Electronics 
Drive Control Units 
Power Distribution Unit 
Electrical Considerations - All of the electrical components 
are interconnected by a combination of data buses (digital 
and optical fiber), power lines, and discrete digital lines. 
The use of discrete lines adds complexity to the design of a 
serviceable spacecraft. In order to be replaceable, any 
component that is interconnected with discrete lines will 
need to have all of these connections wired to the docking 
interface (Figure 2). If the spacecraft can be designed with 
most of its components in a standard data bus architecture, 
then use of discrete lines can be minimized. ’ 
B1 
B2 
B2 
B2 
B2 
B2 
Mechanical Considerations - The physical layout of current 
spacecraft do not lend themselves to serviceability. Almost 
all external surface area and surrounding space is occupied 
by components that have a range of motion or field of view 
which cannot be blocked. In an effort to keep design 
modifications to a minimum a small region on the satellite 
needs to be accommodated to house a docking interface and 
accept a permanently docked payload module. The volume 
becomes available after the solar arrays are deployed. 
Docking the servicer in this area requires that the satellite 
solar arrays be temporarily repositioned to allow access. 
Figure 3 shows a servicer backing away from the payload 
module which it attached to the satellite. 
Encoder Modulator Unit 
Satellite Replaceable Components 
B2 
All of the host satellite components were evaluated for 
replacement potential. Components such as the bus core 
structure, the deployable communications mast and dish, 
and solar arrays were eliminated from the evaluation as a 
result of the assumed limitations of the servicer spacecraft. 
Certain components (e.g., Control Electronics Assembly 
Potentials of Satellite Servicing in the Geostationary Orbit. A. 
Hackel, E.-L. Klingelhoefer and J. Puls, 
American Astronautical Society AAS 89-188 
and Command Telemetry Control Unit) were found to be 
unreplaceable because they are mission critical. If a mission 
critical components fails, the vital functions of the satellite 
are lost, and servicing operations (such as docking) would 
be impossible. For the remaining components, design data 
were collected on properties such as redundancy, reliability, 
weight, power, and physical location. A detailed component 
level block diagram of the satellite was evaluated to 
determine interconnection and position within the electrical 
architecture. Reliability values were used to judge the 
probability of desired replacement by a service mission. The 
information was collected and used to categorize the 
replaceability of each component. 
Replaceability categories were defined: 
required of the component or the associated hardware to 
allow for replacement. 
modifications of the component or the associated hardware 
are required to allow for replacement. 
modifications to the component or the associated hardware 
are required to allow for replacement. 
Replaceabilitv Categow C: The component is not 
practically replaceable within the current architecture. 
Required design changes would be impractical or extremely 
costly. 
ReDlaceabilitv Category A: No design modification is 
ReDlaceability Category B1: Minor design 
ReDlaceabilitv Category B2: Major design 
Sensor I 
Star Tracker B1 
Reaction Wheel I B1 
Electromagnetic Torque Rods I B l  
GPS Receiver I B1 I 
Batteries I B2 
Command Auto-Track B2 
Jategory A, B 1, and B2 components are all considered 
practically replaceable. More than one-third of the satellite’s 
potentially replaceable component mass is practically 
replaceable (Table 1). 
230 
Anticipated Problems and Issues 
Some of the concepts for servicing developed in the SMAD 
study will need to be investigated in greater depth in order 
to verify their feasibility. There are questions and 
anticipated problems which could not be completely 
addressed within the scope of the study. These problems, as 
anticipated by spacecraft subsystem engineers, were 
recorded over the course of the study, and are listed as 
follows: 
In many cases, the available telemetry points are 
inadequate to pinpoint the exact cause of on-orbit failure. A 
serviceable spacecraft must have extensive fault detection, 
isolation, and diagnostic capabilities. When an anomaly 
occurs, engineers on the ground must be able to determine 
exactly which component or string of components has 
failed. 
Line loss issues make analog and radio frequency 
connections problematic for functional replacement. 
Replacement Attitude Determination and Control 
components need to be precisely aligned to the reference 
coordinate system of the serviceable spacecraft, or need to 
be designed to allow for on-orbit calibration. Specific 
requirements need to be identified.Design of the servicer 
structure and docking interface will be affected. 
The serviceable spacecraft will suffer some operational 
downtime (on the order of hours) during docking operations 
of a service mission. The functions of the serviceable 
vehicle will be unavailable to end-users during this period. 
The thermal control system may need to be designed 
for two modes of operation: before servicing and after 
servicing when a payload module is docked. The impacts of 
varying radiative surfaces and heat sources will need to be 
investigated. 
Subsystems such as electrical power and attitude 
control need to be designed with adequate margin to accept 
the extra load of a payload module. 
DERIVED REQUIREMENTS FOR THE RENDEZVOUS~DOCKING 
SERVICER 
A conceptual design for an on-orbit servicer spacecraft, the 
Rendezvous/Docking (IUD) Servicer, was developed as part 
of the SMAD study. The form and function of any servicer 
spacecraft is determined by the form of the spacecraft which 
it is expected to service. The components and architecture of 
the spacecraft were examined to determine a set of 
requirements for the R/D Servicer. Requirements for this 
design were derived by addressing the following issues: 
perform? 
spacecraft? 
What services should the servicer have the capability to 
How much mass should it be expected to deliver to the 
How is the servicer going to get to the spacecraft? 
Targeted Spacecraft Servicing Capabilities 
The SMAD study determined a set of anticipated servicing 
needs of the satellite system: 
(propellant, batteries, solar array) 
electronics and mechanical components) 
technology 
Replenishment of consumables and degradables 
Replacement of failed functionality (payload and bus 
Enhancement of the mission through insertion of new 
Payload Mass Goals 
Using the results of an extensive evaluation of the spacecraft 
components and architecture, a prediction of the required 
mass delivery of the IUD Servicer was made. The total mass 
of components which could be practically replaced is over 
1/3 the mass of the spacecraft. As a conservative estimate, it 
was assumed that 25% of these components will fail by the 
time of the first scheduled on-orbit servicing. Therefore, the 
R/D Servicer must be capable of delivering payload mass of 
at least 1/12 the satellite mass to each satellite. Since two 
satellites are assumed to be serviced by a single R/D 
Servicer, each servicer must hold a minimum of 1/6 the 
mass of the satellite. 
Launch Vehicle and Orbit Scenario 
The IUD Servicer deliverable payload mass requirement of 
1/6 the mass of the satellite suggested that the launch 
requirements could be met by a small expendable launch 
vehicle. Through an iterative orbital analysis and systems 
design process, it was found that the Lockheed Martin 
Launch Vehicle 1 (LMLVl) was the lowest cost alternative 
with adequate throw weight to meet the payload mass 
requirement. The highest payload capability is achieved by 
launch to a circular Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO) of 
approximately 200 nmi, and subsequent orbit transfer using 
on-board hydrazine propulsion. Another option considered 
was direct injection by the launch vehicle to the spacecraft 
orbit. 
Rendezvous Maneuvers 
In a three-axis stabilized mode, the R/D Servicer maneuvers 
using Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation from it’s 
transfer orbit to a target area at 100 meters range from the 
satellite (see Figure 5). 
The spacecraft, equipped with a GPS receiver, 
downlinks its position and attitude to the Space Ground 
Link System (SGLS), which uplinks them to the R/D 
Servicer command receiver. 
The servicer, also equipped with a GPS receiver, 
compares the spacecraft coordinates to its own, and uses 
autonomous rendezvous algorithms to maneuver to the 
target. 
The R/D Servicer downlinks its position coordinates to 
23 1 
SGLS periodically for ground support supervision, so the 
maneuver can be aborted at any time. 
Close Range Maneuvers and Docking - The servicer is 
equipped with a laser ranging system to provide position 
and attitude knowledge (relative to the satellite docking 
interface) within 100 meters range. It uses this system to 
autonomously maneuver and slowly dock with the satellite. 
The closing velocity can be controlled to as low as 1 .O 
centimeter per second (see Figure 4). 
Operations of the Docked RLD Seivicer - The docked 
servicer attaches a single enclosed structure called a payload 
module to the satellite docking interface. The payload 
module contains life extending or mission enhancing 
components for the satellite. Mechanical and electrical 
connections are made between the payload module and the 
satellite during docking. Electrical functions of components 
in the payload module are checked. Fuel couplings are 
seated and sealed, and propellant and pressurant are 
transferred to the satellite. If these operations are 
satisfactory, this payload module is left on the satellite as 
the rest of the R/D servicer jettisons. 
Baseline Configuration of the R/D Servicer 
As a result of the configuration trade study, a baseline 
configuration was chosen for development into a point 
design for the R/D Servicer. The configuration was selected 
for the following reasons: 
docked mass 
Less complex mechanisms 
The proposed configuration (shown in Figure 6 )  consists of 
a modular structure which houses bus and payload 
components in separate modules. Each of the three modules 
has identical structure and tankage, reducing the cost of 
non-recurring engineering and qualification testing. The 
single bus module houses all navigation, command, 
communications, propulsion, power, data processing, and 
attitude control hardware. The function of the bus module is 
to deliver each of the two payload modules to its respective 
satellite. The two payload modules house replacement 
propellant and components for each satellite. 
Low impact to the satellite design due to a small 
Ability to service multiple satellites 
Systems Design of the IUD Servicer 
Docking System - Two basic types of docking systems were 
considered for the IUD Servicer: teleoperated and 
autonomous. 
remote human operator, and “joystick” controlled 
maneuvering. Digital cameras mounted on the servicer 
provide a view of the docking operations which is 
downlinked to a ground based operator. Joystick operation 
is linked to the attitude control system to control the 
Teleoperated docking systems use video imagery, a 
position, attitude, and rates of the servicer. Without use of a 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) data 
link, the docking maneuvers need to be time coordinated 
with limited ground contact windows (about 17 minutes 
contact time per revolution of period 106 minutes). Because 
this amount of time is believed to be insufficient for docking 
the servicer to the satellite, a costly TDRSS link would be 
necessary if a teleoperated docking system was to be 
implemented. 
The autonomous docking system which has been 
baselined for the FUD Servicer incorporates a laser ranging 
system, body-mounted grappling mechanisms, and a manual 
ovemde feature. The laser ranging system determines range 
and attitude of the satellite docking interface relative to the 
servicer. This information is fed to the attitude control 
system. Grappling mechanisms are located on each of the 
two payload modules. They are used for mechanical 
connection of the R/D Servicer to the satellite docking 
interface. The autonomous docking has a manual ovemde 
feature which allows ground-based personnel to abort the 
service mission at any time during the autonomous 
rendezvous and docking maneuvers. 
Laser Ranging Systems - The laser ranging system is 
required as part of the autonomous docking system for the 
FUD Servicer. At 100 meters range from the satellite 
docking interface, the R/D Servicer will use the laser 
ranging systems to determine position and attitude (relative 
to the satellite). From 100 meters down to 10 meters, a laser 
pulse ranging system will be used; and from 10 meters 
down to zero, a fine tracking laser ranging system will be 
used. 
A laser pulse ranging system is used from 100 meters down 
to 10 meters range. Using the timing of pulse returns from a 
5 milli-joule, 2 pulse per second laser from three non 
collinear retro-reflectors located on the satellite docking 
interface, this system can provide range estimates to 5 
centimeters and attitude estimates to approximately 5 
degrees. 
A fine tracking laser ranging system is used within 10 
meters of the satellite’s docking platform. The system uses 
three one-milliwatt laser transmitting apertures, aligned in 
the same geometry as the target retro-reflectors, to 
determine precise range to one millimeter and attitude to 
about 0.1 degrees. 
A docking interface on the satellite needs to provide for 
permanent structural support of the payload module, 
coupling to propellant and pressurant lines, connection to 
the electrical power system, connection to both the digital 
and fiber optic data buses, and connection to various 
harnesses from individual replaceable components. The 
grappling features of the docking mechanisms can be 
located on the servicer spacecraft to minimize the 
complexity of modifications to the satellite. 
232 
W D  Sewicer Subsystems Overview - A preliminary design 
for the R/D servicer including subsystems was created and 
the key characteristics are summarized in Table 2. 
COSTING EVALUATION 
A costing evaluation was performed to determine the value 
of servicing on the life-cycle cost of the constellation. 
Results showed that from 10.3% to 38.2% savings could be 
realized. The variance of this number depends on the 
targeted life extension (2-6 years in this case) and the 
number of servicers used (1-2 in this case). The trend is that 
cost is minimized the longer the lives of the satellites are 
extended with the least number of servicers as possible. The 
net effect is to put into orbit the least amount of hardware as 
possible. The impact of procuring and delivering to orbit 
less hardware can be tremendous over the life of the 
constellation. 
SUMMARY 
An evaluation of an on-orbit servicing architecture for a 
actual satellite constellation using actual data was 
performed. This evaluation showed that a significant life- 
cycle cost benefit could be realized by using a low-cost 
approach to servicing. A low-cost servicing architecture 
design was also presented, highlighting the obstacles and 
technologies required in the selected approach. The target 
satellite constellation was not originally designed for 
servicing. This approach has shown that it is possible to 
take almost any satellite constellation, identify the 
replaceable components, and redesign the system for 
serviceability. Although this study was performed on an 
existing design, the most cost effective way to design a 
serviceable architecture is to establish the requirement at the 
beginning of the acquisition program. 
Biography for Dr. Charles Martin Reynerson 
Senior Systems Engineer, Ball Aerospace and Technologies 
Corp., Boulder Colorado. Dr. Reynerson received his 
Doctorate of Science in Astronautics from the George 
Washington University, Engineers (EAA) degree (between 
MS and D.Sc.) in Aeronautics and Astronautics from MIT, 
Engineers (NE) degree in Naval Engineering from MIT, and 
BS from U.C. Berkley. He has extensive experience in the 
development of space systems with NASA where he was the 
Assistant Deputy for Space Shuttle Integration and National 
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) Liaison for Space 
Technology Programs and was a Project Manager and 
Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative at the 
National Reconnaissance Office. He is an ex-Naval 
Engineering Duty Officer also qualified in submarines. Dr. 
Reynerson is member of the American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), American 
Astronautical Society (AAS), the Mars Society, the 
Experimental Aviation Association (EAA) and Tau Beta Pi 
(National Engineering Honor Society). Dr. Reynerson is 
also a licensed private pilot. 
233 
Table 2: Key Characteristics of the IUD Servicer 
Spacecraft 
Subsystem 
Attitude Determination 
and Control System 
(ADCS) 
Command and Data 
Handling (C&DH) 
Communications 
(COMM) System 
Electrical Power System 
(EPS) 
Ground Systems 
Thermal Control 
Mechanisms 
Orbits and Trajectories 
Propulsion 
Structure 
Characteristics 
3-axis stabilized 
Star Tracker 
Inertial Measurement Unit 
(16) one pound-force thrusters 
Command Telemetry Control Unit (CTCU) contains two 1750 Processors, 
Memory, and Data Handling 
Command Decoder and Telemetry Formatter 
Space Ground Link System (SGLS) Transponder 
Downlink: 32 kbps standard 
Uplink: 2kbps standard 
(2) Omni-Directional Antennas 
Power Control and Distribution Unit (PCDU) 
45 sq. ft. GaAs body mounted solar arrays on payload modules 
(20) NiCd “F’ Cells (6.3 Amp-Hrs) in bus module 
Worst case: 90 minute orbit, 36 minute maximum eclipse time 
Space Ground Link System (SGLS) 
Passive thermal design with heaters 
Adiabatic interface to satellite during servicing 
Satellite thermal design is not impacted by the addition of a payload module 
Launch vehicle separation with Marmon clamp 
Payload module separations accomplished with low shock separation 
devices (such as shape memory alloys) 
Other mechanisms include dockinglgrappling, and star tracker covers 
Parking orbit of 200 nmi, circular LEO 
Hohmann transfer to higher altitude using 2 delta-V maneuvers 
Mono-propellant for delta-V burns, attitude control, maneuvering 
4 - 10 lbf delta-V thrusters, mounted on bottom of bus module 
16 - 1 lbf ACS thrusters 
Modified LEO satellite “box” design 
Advanced lightweight composite materials 
High modulus graphite fiberskyanate ester resins 
234 
s 
Figure 1: Typical Data Architecture and Modular Data Architecture 
Figure 2: Wire Routing to the Docking Interface Enables Functional Replacement of a Component 
235 
Figure 3: Satellite Docked with Payload Module, R/D Vehicle Departing 
Figure 4: Close Range Maneuvering 
236 
Spacecraft 
RID Vehicle: 
3 Axis Stabilized to 
Maintain GPS Lock & 
Ground Communication 
During Maneuver 
Long Range: 
The WD Vehicle 
uses GPS to Guide 
its Maneuver to a 
Target 100 Meters 
From Spacecraft 
(3) Laser Retro-Reflectors Intermediate to Close Range: 
Within 100 meters, Pulse Laser 
Ranging and Fine Tracking Laser 
Metrology Systems are used for 
Distance and Relative Attitude 
Measurement 
/I** 
100 meters 
Figure 5: Rendezvous Maneuvering Scenarios: Long Range and Intermediate to Close Range 
St 
Thrusters 
WD Vehicle 
Maneuvering Fuel 
Figure 6: R/D Servicer and Module Configuration I-- ~ 231 
I I 
