Estimating Fire Properties by Remote Sensing'. 
Philip J. Riggan 
USDA Forest Service 
Pacific Southwest Research Station 
4955 Canyon Crest Drive 
Riverside, CA 92507 
9096801534 
PJ Rizgan (@ 1R M.net 
James W. Hoffman 
Space Instruments, Inc. 
4403 Manchester Avenue, Suite 203 
Encinitas, CA 92024 
7609447001 
JHofi'SI@AOL.com 
James A. Brass 
NASA Ames Research Center 
Moffett Federal Airfield, CA 94035 
6506045232 
JBrass@ mail.arc.nasa.~.ov 
Abstract-Contemporary knowledge of the role of fire in 
the global environment is limited by inadequate 
measurements of the extent and impact of individual fires. 
Observations by operational polar-orbiting and 
geostationary satellites provide an indication of fire 
occurrence but are ill-suited for estimating the 
temperature, area, or radiant emissions of active wildland 
and agricultural fires. Simulations here of synthetic 
remote sensing pixels comprised of observed high- 
resolution fire data together with ash or vegetation 
background demonstrate that fire properties including 
flame temperature, fractional area, and radiant-energy 
flux can best be estimated from concurrent radiance 
measurements at wavelengths near 1.6, 3.9, and 12 jm. 
Successful observations at night may be made at scales to 
at least 1 km for the cluster of fire data simulated here. 
During the daytime, uncertainty in the composition of the 
background and its reflection of solar radiation would 
limit successful observations to a scale of approximately 
100 m or less. Measurements at three wavelengths in the 
long-wave infrared would be unaffected by reflected solar 
radiation and could be applied to separate flame 
properties in a binary system of flame and background. 
However, likely variation in the composition of the 
background and its temperature limit the approach to 
measurements that are of high resolution in relation to the 
scale of the flaming front. Alternative approaches using 
radiances at wavelengths near 4 and 12 jm alone must 
fail absent a correction for the background, yet the 
correction is made imprecise by uncertainty in 
composition of the background where it comprises more 
than one-third of a pixel. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. ESTIMATING FIRE PROPERTIES 
4. MULTI-SPECTRAL FIRE IMAGING 
3. ESTIMATES FROM TWO CHANNELS 
5. APPLICATIONS FOR FIRE MONITORING 
INTRODUCTION 
More than 30,000 fire observations were recorded over 
central Brazil during August 1999 by Advanced Very 
High Resolution Radiometers operating aboard polar- 
orbiting satellites of the U.S. National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. At the same time an 
extensive smoke pall created a serious health hazard and 
hindered commercial aviation across large portions of the 
Brazilian states of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul. 
Clearly fire was an important part of the Brazilian 
environment, but limitations in satellite and airborne 
remote sensing prevented a clear picture of what was 
burning, what resources were threatened, or the 
magnitude of the potentially global environmental 
impacts. Indeed, these fires and others like them 
throughout the tropics may constitute an important source 
of greenhouse gases that may be contributing to climate 
change. 
The government of Brazil, through the Brazilian Institute 
of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources 
(IBAMA), is developing a national means to monitor and 
manage fire impacts. But the sheer number of fire starts 
is overwhelming, and the many recorded mask the few 
that are most threatening to resources or contribute the 
' US. Govemment work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
173 
most to air pollution and health concerns. A system for 
prioritizing fires based on measured impacts and 
threatened resources would be most welcome. 
Furthermore, a continental-scale assessment of impacts is 
needed to support development of national policies on fire 
management. Needed at tactical, strategic, and policy 
levels is fundamental information on fire extent, intensity, 
rate of progress, fuel consumption, and gas and particulate 
emissions. 
Advances in airborne thermal-infrared imaging systems 
over the last decade have produced the first quantitative, 
synoptic measurements of the thermal properties of 
wildland fires [l]. Furthermore, new imagers based on 
uncooled, thermal-infrared detectors are being developed 
as a low-cost means of monitoring fire size and intensity 
at a local or regional level [2]. What is needed to address 
fire measurements at a continental or global scale is a 
system that can similarly measure fire properties from a 
high-altitude or space-based platform. A design for such 
a system must take into account issues of scale and 
resolution in order to make meaningful environmental 
measurements. 
In this paper, we use fire measurements made by the 
NASAForest Service airborne Extended Dynamic Range 
Imaging Spectrometer, which was designed specifically to 
measure the high radiances associated with wildland fires, 
to consider how changes in measurement scale and 
channel wavelength would affect estimates of fire 
temperature, size, and radiant intensity. These properties, 
in turn, are key to the fundamental information 
requirements of fire management. 
ESTIMATING FIRE PROPERTIES 
Wildland fires present a complex remote sensing target 
comprised of a flaming front, ash, residual flaming 
combustion and smoldering of larger biomass elements, 
and unburned vegetation. Flames within the flaming front 
are highly dynamic and turbulent in comparison with the 
rate of spread of that front. 
To estimate fire properties by remote sensing we assume 
that the radiant emissions of flames are dominated by the 
radiation from glowing soot particles that behave as gray- 
body radiators with high emissivity. Individual flames 
may be optically thin so that upwelling radiation 
encompasses that from hot soil beneath the flames as well 
as from the entrained soot particles. For large flames or 
those of high soot-particle volume, upwelling radiation 
may reflect the temperature of upper flames alone. 
However, flaming zone turbulence may so great as to 
dictate that high-temperature flames occupy only a 
fraction of a remote sensing pixel, even for pixels falling 
well within a flaming front, and a parameter representing 
the product of emissivity and fire fractional area must be 
estimated. 
ESTIMATES FROM TWO CHANNELS 
The temperature, T, of a gray-body radiator and the 
product of its emissivity, E, and fractional area, Af, within 
a pixel can be independently estimated from emitted 
energy measured at two wavelengths, and & [I, 31. 
Planck functions for the target radiances, BA, and BA,, 
may be solved simultaneously yielding the relations 
and 
where h is the Planck constant, 6 .63~10”~  (J s); c is the 
speed of light, 3.00~10’ ( d s ) ;  k is the Boltzmann 
constant, 1.38x10-*’ (J/K); Tis specified in Kelvin; A is in 
meters, and BA has units of J m-2 s-l s i ’  pm-’. Equation 
(1) may be solved iteratively to yield T, and the product 
EAf can be computed from either wavelength via Equation 
(2). 
We have applied this approach to estimate temperatures 
and the combined emissivity-fractional area parameter, 
EAf, for a large Cerrado or tropical savanna fire 50 km 
north of Brasilia in the Federal District of Brazil. (Figure 
1). The fire was observed late in the afternoon on 
September 15, 1992, toward the end of the dry season. 
The fire burned freely in mountainous terrain with mixed 
grass and woodland plant communities. It attained a 
complex structure with narrow, hot flaming fronts in 
grasses and large areas of residual combustion in heavier 
fuels. 
Remote sensing observations were made in channels with 
wavelengths centered at 1.63, 3.9, and 11.9 pm and wit) 
resolution of 3.1 m giving a nominal pixel size of 9.6 m-. 
Fire temperatures were estimated from this high- 
resolution data using the two short-wave infrared 
channels at 1.63 and 3.9 pm. 
This fire had a complex thermal structure with 95 percent 
of the radiant-energy flux density obtained from pixels 
with temperatures ranging from 850 to 1400 K (Figure 2). 
High temperature pixels were associated with generally 
low values of the emissivity-fractional area parameter, 
even at high (3.1 m) resolution. This suggests to us that 
the flames were either optically thin or spatially 
heterogeneous at scales from one to several meters. 
To examine the effect of observation scale we simulated 
the radiant properties of a limited area of complex fire 
line viewed in isolation with differing amounts of 
background at temperatures of either 303 K, representing 
savanna vegetation, or 343 K, representing black ash in 
full sun. Synthetic pixels were constructed from the high- 
resolution hot pixels observed within a 50 m by 50 m area 
at the southwest comer of the Serra do Maranhiio fire. 
1 74 
Planar map of radiant temperature for the 1992 Serra do Maranhao fire: 
1622:15 local time 
8307000 
TM northing 
8306500 
8306000 
186000 
La 
186500 187ooO 187500 
UTM easting 
188000 
IW bound o 
class (K) 
0 1200 
0 1300 ii 0 1453 
Figure 1. Temperature map for a freely burning wildland fire in tropical savanna vegetation in the Serra do MaranhBo, 
Federal District, Brazil. Fire pixels are color coded by temperature class and shown on a background derived from a prefire 
Landsat Thematic Mapper image. Light green areas are grassland; darker areas are heavier woody vegetation. Universal 
Transverse Mercator coordinates are shown. The fire extends approximately 1.2 km from west to east. 
Dism%ution of radiant energy flux density by temperature 
Serra do Maranha0 fKe 
0 0.20 1 .- 1 v: s 
0.15 
3 E
"0 0.10 
c 
0 .- 
4- 8 0.05 
? 
0.00 
P 
1633:14 
16:4045 
700 900 1100 1300 1500 1700 
Temperature (Kelvin) 
Figure 2.  Distribution of radiant-energy flux density by 
temperature for four observations of a savanna fire in the 
Serra do MaranhBo of the Federal District of Brazil. 
Ninety-five percent of the energy flux occurred over 
temperatures between 850 and 1400 K. 
Spatial compression of this hot-pixel data by excluding 
the low temperature background would yield a single 
pixel with a linear dimension of 41.8 m. To simplify 
calculations we made the assumption that pixels are 
square and non-overlapping. 
Comparisons were made between the high-resolution 
blackbody radiance distribution with wavelength, as 
summed across all elements of the synthetic pixel, and the 
distribution derived from the bulk temperature and 
fractional area of that low-resolution pixel. The latter 
bulk parameters were derived from Equations 1 and 2 
using the sum of radiances across sub-pixel elements at 
each of two wavelengths. We also estimated the high- 
resolution radiance from flames alone. Emissivity of 
vegetation, ash, and soot particles are expected to be 0.9 
or greater [c.f. 41 so the assumption of a blackbody for 
our purposes was reasonable. 
The bulk temperature and fractional area estimated at 
wavelengths of 1.63 and 3.9 pm for the low resolution 
pixel described well the overall radiance distribution for 
the compressed hot-element data, despite the large range 
of incorporated temperatures and fractional areas. Th? 
wavelength-integrated radiance of 1155 J m-' sr-' s- , 
derived from an estimated bulk temperature of 1107 K 
and fractional area of 0.044, was nearly equivalent to the 
integrated high-resolution radiance of 1158 J m' s i '  s-' 
obtained by summing values from the individual high- 
temperature elements. A bulk temperature of 1057 K and 
fractional area of 0.052, as derived from radiances at 
wavelengths of 3.9 and 11.9 m gave a less successful 
estimate of 1126 J m-' sr-'s" for the wavelength- 
integrated radiance. 
175 
As the synthetic pixel was enlarged, the relatively low 
temperature of the included background quickly elevated 
the radiance at wavelengths longer than 6 pm, but had 
little effect on the radiance in the short-wave infrared 
(Figure 3). Thus, use of the radiances at 1.63 and 3.9 pm 
to estimate bulk temperature and fractional area produced 
a good description of the high temperature elements 
within synthetic pixels with a dimension less than 
approximately 100 m (Figures 4 & 5). 
The relatively strong contribution of the background to 
the long-wave infrared radiance dictates that any attempt 
to directly estimate the hot element properties from those 
of a low-resolution pixel using two wavelengths including 
the long-wave infrared must largely fail without some 
correction for the background. For a 75-m synthetic 
pixel, use of the 3.9 and 11.9 pm wavelengths produced 
an estimated bulk temperature, 708 K, that described 
neither the hot elements at 1107 K nor the background at 
303 K (Figure 6). 
The required background correction for daytime remote 
sensing using this scheme is at best problematical for the 
simple reason that fires generate an ash layer that under 
solar heating may be 40 K warmer than unburned ground, 
and there is no way to know a priori the proportion of 
these differing targets within a low-resolution pixel. 
Since the background may be all ash or all unburned 
vegetation, and the magnitude of this uncertainty amounts 
to half of the simulated fire signal in a 125-m pixel and 
Serra do Maranhao fire radiance 
-from 1.63 and 3.9 CLm & 75 m pixel- I 100r 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4  
Wavelength (pm) 
Figure 3. Simulated blackbody radiance distributions for 
a low-resolution synthetic pixel of 75 m linear dimension. 
Sub-pixel elements include an assumed 303 K 
background covering 69 percent of the pixel and all hot 
targets from within a 50- by 50-m area at the SW comer 
of the Serra do Maranhfo Fire as shown in Figure 1. 
Shown are the summed radiances as viewed at high 
resolution, for the entire pixel (“high res”) and the fire 
alone (‘‘high res fire”), and the low-resolution radiance 
distribution (“low res”) as computed from bulk 
temperature, fractional area, and the summed sub-pixel 
radiances at 1.63 and 3.9 pm. 
Estimated Fire Area-Emissivity Product (A&) 
250 
200 
pi- 150 
E 
U 
7 100 
50 
0 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 
Pixel Linear Dimension (m) 
Figure 4. Comparison of the estimated hot target area 
(the product of fire fractional area and emissivity with 
pixel area) as a function of synthetic pixel size as 
determined using wavelengths either of 1.63 and 3.9 ym 
or 3.9 and 1 1.9 ym. The former pair produces errors of 
less than 11 percent at pixel sizes less than 100 m; the 
latter produces substantial errors at even the smallest pixel 
size due to a lack of fit to the Planck function by the 
composite high-temperature data as viewed at those 
wavelengths. 
Radiant Energy Flux 
Low-resolution estimate from 1.63 and 3.9 pm 
2O.E+6 
1 5 .E+6 
2. 
E lO.E+6 
!3 5.E+6 
OO.E+O 
h - 
‘v) 
x 
x 
M 
63 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 
Pixel Linear Dimension (m) 
Figure 5. Comparison of estimates of the low-resolution 
radiant energy flux, determined at 1.63 and 3.9 pm, with 
the energy flux from included high-temperature elements. 
Background temperature was assumed to be 343 K. 
Pixels with a size of 125 m, for which the background 
comprises 0.9 of the pixel, introduce less than a 10 
percent error in this measure of total fire intensity. 
Uncertainty in the composition of the background and, 
therefore, the reflected solar radiation at 1.63 pm, 
produces only a small error in estimated energy flux for 
100-m pixels (“low res w/SR’). 
176 
Serra do Maranhao fire radiance 
-from 3.9 and 1 1.9 pm & 75 m pixel- 
100 
h - 
VJ 
- 80 0 highres 
- lowles 
’$ 60 
3 40 
.- 20 
0 
‘5 
“E 
8 
3 
+ high res fie 
- 1.63 wISR 0 
I 0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4  Wavelength (pm) 
Figure 6. Simulated black-body radiance distribution as 
in Figure 3, but with the low-resolution radiance 
distribution computed from the summed sub-pixel 
radiances at 3.9 and 11.9 pm. Use of the long-wave 
infrared signal produces a substantial error in pixels at 
any resolution less than that of the high-temperature 
elements. 
over twice the fire signal at 250 m resolution, this 
approach, too, fails when pixel sizes greater than 
approximately 50 m are used to view the sample fire data. 
At that scale the uncertainty is only 3 percent of the fire 
signal. 
Daytime remote sensing with the short-wave infrared may 
require a background correction for reflected solar 
radiation, primarily at 1.63 pm, but this is less critical 
than the correction for the long-wave infrared. The 
uncertainty in the composition of the background, 
between extremes either of all ash or all vegetation, 
produces only an additional 2 percent error in the 
estimated radiant energy flux with a 100-m synthetic pixel 
(Figure 5). 
So far we have analyzed the effect of embedding a 
moderate-size cluster of fire pixels within a series of 
synthetic pixels of increasing size. With a larger fire, 
increasing the area viewed in a single pixel must increase 
not only the background but also the amount of included 
fire. We simulated this effect with data from the Serra do 
Maranhiio fire by selecting all high-temperature pixels 
within areas of 100 by 100 m, 250 by 250 m, and 1 km by 
1 km beginning at the southwest portion of the fire. High- 
resolution, high-temperature pixels occupied 57.7 percent 
of the 100- by 100-m selection area, 42 percent pf the 
250- by 250-m area, and 6.5 percent of the 1-km- area. 
The result, considering emitted energy alone and a 303 K 
background, was that radiances at wavelengths of 1.63 
and 3.9 pm described well the radiance distribution and 
bulk temperature (withm 1 K) of the embedded high 
temperature targets for both 100-m and 250-m pixels. 
The low-resolution estimate was within 9 K of the bulk 
flame temperature and radiant,energy flux was within 3% 
of the true value for the I-km’ case. Use of 3.9 and 11.9 
pm wavelengths resulted in significant lack of fit to the 
high-temperature radiance distribution for 100-m and 
larger pixels. In this case, the bulk temperature of the hot 
elements was underestimated by 190 K for 100-m pixels, 
250 K for 250-m pixels, and 585 K for 1-km pixels with a 
background temperature of 303 K. 
MULTI-SPECTRAL FIRE &AGING 
The foregoing analysis has been based on a selection of 
fire data as measured at high (9.6-m‘) resolution and 
wavelengths of 1.63 and 3.9 pm. With generally low 
values of the apparent fractional area, it appears that there 
may be a substantial contribution to the 3.9 pm signal 
from hot background within the pixel. If so, then the 
flame temperatures we estimated may be low. 
In order to examine this possibility, we devised an 
algorithm to estimate the fractional areas and 
temperatures of flame and background within a high- 
temperature pixel based on radiances measured at three 
wavelengths and a model where the fractional areas of the 
two components sum to one. The three-wavelength 
algorithm proceeds as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Flame temperature and fractional area are 
estimated using Equations I and 2 and observed 
radiances at 1.63 and 3.9 pm. 
The flame radiance at 11.9 pm is estimated from 
the resultant values. 
The radiance of the background at 11.9-pm is 
estimated as the difference between the observed 
value for the pixel and that of the flames. 
Background temperature is computed from this 
radiance assuming the background acts as a 
blackbody. 
Background radiances at 1.65 and 3.9 pm are 
computed from the background temperature and 
fractional area, and flame radiances at these 
wavelengths are estimated from the difference 
between observed values and those of the 
background. 
Steps 1 to 5 are iterated using successive 
estimates of flame radiance until a stable 
estimate of flame temperature is achieved. 
We applied the three-wavelength algorithm to a selection 
of line-fire data collected by the Extended Dynamic 
Range Imaging Spectrometer in Central Brazil. In this 
case the 11.9-pm channel had a relatively low signal-to- 
noise ratio, so we estimated likely values for individual 
high-resolution pixels based on a regression of radiance at 
11.9 pm to that at 3.9 pm. The result was that estimated 
flame temperatures rose by an average of approximately 
60 K over that estimated by two channels alone, and the 
average background temperature within high temperature 
pixels was estimated to be 440 K. 
This three-wavelength algorithm appears to be useful for 
separating radiance contributions from flames and hot 
background across a wide range of temperatures and 
combinations of wavelengths. As an example, we 
177 
constructed synthetic radiance data (Figure 7) based on a 
pixel with flame temperature and fractional area 
equivalent to those of the spatially compressed hot pixel 
data from the 50- by 50-m area at the southwest of the 
Serra do MaranhHo fire (as simulated in Figure 3) together 
with a variety of background temperatures. 
Model fire radiance 
Estimates from three wavelengths 
0 high res 
low res 
-&- high res fire 
+- backgrnd 
4-3 test 
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4  
Wavelength (pm) 
Figure 7. Model fire radiance and estimation of flame 
temperature, background temperature, and fractional areas 
using three long-wave infrared radiances. Shown are the 
radiance distributions for flames at 1107.4 K with 
fractional area of 0.0439 (the average values for a portion 
of the Serra do MaranhHo fire), a 500 K background 
occupying the remaining fraction of the pixel, the sum of 
these two components, a low-resolution estimate derived 
from the combined radiances at 8 and 10 pm, and a three- 
wavelength estimate of flame radiance derived from the 
combined-element radiances alone at 8, 10, and 12 pm 
(“3 pt est”). The three-wavelength estimate, which 
successfully separated the radiance distributions of the 
flames and background, is coincident with that of the 
modeled fire. 
The algorithm successfully estimated the temperatures 
and fractional areas with any of three combinations of 
selected wavelengths: 1.63, 3.9, and 11.9 pm; 3.9, 8, and 
12 pm; and 8, 10, and 12 pm. Convergence to a solution 
was notably longer in the latter category, requiring 1050 
iterations to attain the specified flame temperature. Even 
so, estimated temperatures were within 0.1 K of that 
specified in the simulation regardless of the background 
temperature chosen. Thus, any high-resolution 
measurements at three wavelengths could be usefully 
applied to separate the temperatures and fractional areas 
of sub-pixel high-temperature and background elements 
in a binary system. 
The solution using three longwave-infrared wavelengths, 
however, is unforgiving to a violation of the assumption 
of a uniform background. Enlarging the viewing pixel to 
include equal areas of background at 340 K and at 400 K 
produced an error of 148 K in the estimated flame 
temperature. Such a simulation using wavelengths of 
1.63, 3.9, and 11.9 pm produced an error of only 3 K in 
estimated flame temperature. For a I-km pixel, this 
selection of wavelengths produced an error of 5.4 K in 
temperature and 4-percent error in fractional area. Thus, 
the use of 8-, lo-, and 12-pm wavelengths has utility for 
separating flame and hot background components within 
pixels where the background is uniform, such as with high 
resolution within a flaming front. Measurements at 
wavelengths of 1.63, 3.9, and 11.9 pm can separate flame 
properties from that of a non-uniform background 
including large amounts of unburned ground at pixel sizes 
to 1 km. 
APPLICATIONS FOR FIRE MONITORING 
The foregoing analysis has shown that fire properties 
including flame temperature, fractional area, and radiant 
energy flux can best be estimated from concurrent 
radiance measurements at wavelengths near 1.6, 3.9, and 
12 pm. At night, with no contribution of reflected solar 
radiation in the short-wave infrared, the observations may 
be made at scales to at least 1 km for the cluster of fire 
data simulated here. During the daytime, uncertainty in 
the composition of the background and its reflection of 
solar radiation would limit successful observations to a 
scale of approximately 100 m. Measurements near 
wavelengths of 1.6 and 3.9 pm alone could be made at a 
scale of 100 m, but the resolved flame temperatures may 
constitute an underestimate of approximately 60 K. 
Measurements at three wavelengths in the long-wave 
infrared would be unaffected by reflected solar radiation 
and could be applied to separate flame properties in a 
truly binary system of flame and background. However, 
likely variations in the composition of the background and 
its temperature, especially between the immediate vicinity 
of flames and areas beyond their influence, would limit 
the approach to high resolution in relation to the scale of 
the flaming front. 
A candidate system for this high-resolution application is 
the FireMapper, a multi-spectral, thermal-infrared 
imaging radiometer now under development as a research 
joint venture by Space Instruments, Inc., and the USDA 
Forest Service. The FireMapper employs an uncooled, 
micro-bolometer detector array manufactured by 
Lockheed Martin Imaging Systems [5] in a scientific 
instrument with automated radiometric calibration and 
real-time image control and display. FireMapper uses 
technology that has been demonstrated to have both high 
sensitivity and sufficient dynamic range to produce 
quantitative, unsaturated fire measurements [ 2 ] .  
FireMapper could also usefully contribute to a lower 
resolution, multi-spectral system employing the three- 
channel approach with both shortwave and long-wave 
infrared wavelengths. 
Estimates of active-fire properties obtained using existing 
low-resolution, two-channel sensors, such as those 
available on the NOAA polar orbiting and geostationary 
environmental satellites, are necessarily confounded with 
the background because of uncertainty in its composition, 
and not very meaningful beyond determination of a fire’s 
1 78 
presence. This information can be useful in showing 
regions in which fires are absent or numerous, and in 
providing a qualitative understanding of diurnal and 
seasonal patterns of occurrence. It should be used with 
great caution, however, as an indication of regional or 
global fire impact. 
Radiance measurements at a single wavelength, such as 
near 3.9 pm, do not provide sufficient information to 
estimate both fire fractional area and temperature without 
assuming a value for one property or the other. Thus, 
they do not constitute a measurement of the desired fire 
properties and only a very poor indication of overall fire 
radiance. 
We conclude that existing satellite-based systems are not 
now adequate for the task of providing the information 
needs for tropical fire management. A new approach is 
needed that employs unsaturated measurements at 
moderately high (100 m) resolution and wavelengths near 
1.6, 3.9, and 12 pm in a satellite-based system with wide- 
area coverage. As an alternative, multispectral thermal- 
infrared imaging radiometery now under development 
could be employed at high resolution from moderate- to 
high-altitude airborne platforms to provide the needed fire 
monitoring. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  P. J. Riggan, J. A. Brass, and R. N. Lockwood. 
"Assessing Fire Emissions from Tropical Savanna and 
Forests of Central Brazil," Photogrammetric Engineering 
and Remote Sensing 59(6): 1009-1015, 1993 
[2]  P. J. Riggan and J. W. Hoffman.. "Field Applications 
of a Multi-spectral, Thermal Imaging Radiometer," 
Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace Conference, Aspen, 
Colorado, paper no. 168,1999 
[3] M. Matson and J. Dozier, "Identification of 
Subresolution High Temperature Sources Using a 
Thermal IR Sensor," Photogrammetric Engineering and 
Remote Sensing 47:1311-1318, 1981 
[4] W. L. Wolfe and G. J. Zissis (eds.), The Infrared 
Handbook, Ann Arbor, Michigan: The Infrared 
Information Analysis Center, Environmental Research 
Institute of Michigan, 1978 
[5] R. A. Wood,. "High-Performance Infrared Thermal 
Imaging with Monolithic Silicon Focal Planes Operating 
at Room Temperatures," Proceedings IEDM., 
Washington DC., December 6, 1993 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by a Research Joint Venture 
Agreement between Space Instruments, Inc., and the 
Pacific Southwest Research Station, USDA Forest 
Service; by the USDA Forest Service, International 
Programs; and by the U. S. Agency for International 
Development. Trade names, commercial products, and 
enterprises are mentioned solely for information. No 
endorsement by the U.S. Department of Agriculture is 
implied. 
Philip Riggan is a scientist with 
the USDA Forest Service, 
Pacific Southwest Research 
Station, at the Forest Fire 
Laboratory in Riverside, 
California. He holds a Bachelor 
of Science degree in chemistry 
from San Diego State University 
and a Ph.D. from the College of 
Forest Resources at the 
University of Washington. His research has included 
development of technology for remote sensing of the 
dynamics of wildland fires, the impact of atmospheric 
deposition and fire severity on watershed processes, and 
the potential effects of wildland and agricultural fires on 
global climate change. Since 1991 he has led a bilateral 
program of the Forest Service and the Brazilian Federal 
Institute of the Environment and Natural Resources 
(IBAMA) that is assessing impacts of fire and 
environmental change in tropical forest and savanna of 
Brazil. 
James Hoffman has been 
Technical Director for Space 
Instruments, Inc., since 1980. He 
has over 25 years of experience 
in the design of electro-optical 
instruments for remote sensing 
and surveillance. He eamed a 
B.E.E. degree from Come11 
University and a M.S. E. E. degree 
from the University of Hawaii. 
He has been the principal investigator on contracts 
developing the Infrared Spectral Imaging Radiometer, the 
Thermal Imaging Radiometer, the NASA Cloud Top 
Radiometer and Earth Radiation Array, and Hi-Camp II. 
Previously he was a Senior Systems Engineer for Hughes 
Aircraft Company where he was systems engineer for  the 
design of the Landsat Thematic Mapper. He received a 
DARPA Strategic Technology OfJice Special Award in 
1987. 
James Brass is a research 
scientist and remote sensing 
specialist with the NASA Ames 
Research Center. He received 
from the University of 
Minnesota a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Forest 
Resources and a Master of 
Science degree in Forest 
Resources and Remote Sensing. 
His current research interests 
are the measurement of wildland fires and development of 
technological systems for natural disaster assessment. He 
received NASA National Achievement Awards in 1988, 
1989, and 1991. 
179 
