Venus Sample Return 
A Hot Topic ... 
David Rodgers, Martha Gilmore & Ted Sweetser 
Jonathon Cameron, Gun-Shing Chen, Jim Cutts, 
Robert Gershman, Jeffrey L. Hall, Viktor Kerzhanovich, 
Angus McRonald, Erik Nilsen. Walt Petrick, Carl Sauer, 
Brian Wilcox, Andre Yavrouian, Wayne Zimmerman 
JPL Advanced Project Design Team 
Center for In Situ Science and Sample Return 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA. 91 109-8099 
David.H.Rodgers @jpl.nasa.gov 
Within the Solar System, Venus presents a set of unique 
challenges to obtaining samples and returning them to 
Earth. High temperatures, a thick corrosive atmosphere 
and poorly characterized terrain are some obvious 
examples. Our only knowledge of the surface and 
atmosphere is from Radar images and the data from 
Soviet probes. A point design now exists for a single 
launch mission to return Venusian samples massing about 
1OOg. This paper discusses this mission, addressing the 
science return, how some of Venus’ attributes can be used 
to advantage and what technologies will be needed to 
make this mission a reality. It also explores possible 
future directions to make the mission more affordable. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
SCIEM~FIC GOALS 
MISSION AFTROACH 
A CLOSER LoOK AT THE MISSION 
SYSTEMS OVERVIEW 
MISSION ALTERNATIVES 
CONCLUSION 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
REFERENCES 
10. BIOGRAPHY 
Spacecraft exploration of Venus began in 1961 with the 
launch of the Soviet Venera 1 spacecraft (Figure l), 
designed to penetrate the atmosphere and land on the 
surface of the planet. The following year, the U.S. 
commenced exploration of Venus with Mariner fly-by 
probes, with the U.S. and the Soviets takmg advantage of 
the low energy transfer orbit to Venus, which occurred 
every 19 months. Mariner 2 was the first to successfully 
encounter Venus, in 1962, taking images and spectra of 
the planet and confirming Venus’ hot, dense COz 
atmosphere. In 1967, Venera 4 made successful in situ 
measurements of the atmosphere of 18 bars and 260°C 
confirmed by Mariner 5 the same year, recording surface 
conditions of -530°C and -100 bars. In 1972, Venera 8 
reached and recorded data on the surface of Venus, 
revealing that sunlight did reach the surface of the planet. 
This resulted in cameras on Veneras 9 and 10 which 
successfully imaged the surface in 1975 (Figure 2), 
yielding the first image transmitted from the surface of 
another planet. Veneras 9 and 10 landed -2000 km apart, 
but both reveal a surface with slabby rocks separated by 
soil. Gamma-ray spectrometers on Veneras 8-10 yielded 
U, K, Th abundances that were more like the Earth than 
the Moon [5] .  These observations were later confirmed by 
X-ray fluorescence measurements of major elements on 
Veneras 13 and 14, which are consistent with terrestrial 
basalts [6]. Panoramas from Venera 13 and 14 (Figure 3) 
also reveal slabby rocks, regoliths and fine materials. . 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The brilliance of Venus in the morning and evening skies 
has been the focus of attention of humans throughout 
time. Observations of Venus during its solar transit in 
1761 revealed Venus’ albedo as the result of an 
atmosphere and that Venus was of similar size as Earth; 
Venus was thought to host a tropical climate, akin to the 
Earth’s Carboniferous period, up to the early twentieth 
century [l]. Telescopic observations of the planet in the 
1930s revealed it to have a CO2 atmosphere [2], later 
ultraviolet telescopic analysis revealed the CO2 clouds 
rotated with a period of -4 days [3]. The rotation of the 
surface was not obtained until ground-based radar 
observations of the surface yielded a retrograde rotation 
every 243 Earth days [4]. This superrotation of the Venus 
atmosphere is still a debated topic of atmosphere 
dynamics. Figure 1 Venera 13. Credit : NASA 
0-7803-5846-5/00$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
473 
Figure 2 The Surface of Venus as Imaged by Venera 9 and 10. The panorama extends from the base of the spacecraft in the 
center, to the horizon on the edges of the frame. The metallic object on the right is -40 cm long. Both images reveal a 
surface comprising rocks and soil. 
Venera 13 color image taken on the surface or Venus  
BEHEPA-13 06Pf160TKA M CMHTE3 M f l f l M  AH CCCP M UflKC 
EEHEPA-14 OSPA60TKA M f l f l M  AH CCCP M U f l K C  
BEHEPA-14 06PASOTKA M f l f l M  AH CCCP M UflKC , ,  
t 
Figure 3 Panoramic images of Venus taken by Venera 13 and 14 in 1982 
474 
The Venera data yielded our first glimpse of what it would 
be like to stand on the surface of another planet. These data 
were supplemented by additional measurements of the 
atmosphere provided by the U.S. Pioneer Venus orbiter and 
probes which measured composition, temperature and 
pressure at three entry points. Wind speeds were measured 
from orbit for over a decade. By the 1980s, the spacecraft 
had revealed the shrouded Venus to be extremely hot, with a 
dynamic and oppressive atmosphere. Studies of the 
atmosphere revealed it to have a runaway greenhouse effect, 
which illuminated the burgeoning study of global warming 
on our own planet. The surface of our twin planet has rocks 
similar to our own, indicating volcanism. But it was not 
known how these observations fit into a global picture of 
Venus. This could only be accomplished by mapping the 
surface, which required radar. 
Radar mapping of the surface by Pioneer Venus and Venera 
orbiters and ground-based radar from Arecibo revealed the 
surface of Venus as having large (1000s km), contiguous 
areas of radar-bright (rough) highlands among radar-dark 
(smooth) lowlands. The Venera landers had imaged these 
lowlands, suggesting that the lowlands were basaltic in 
composition. Circular and linear features were discernable, 
but at such low resolution it was difficult to assign an origin 
to the features. This was changed when the Magellan 
spacecraft was launched in 1983 and began to return images 
of the surface at 75 &pixel. Venus is now revealed to be 
dominated by volcanism: plains, volcanoes both large and 
small, both viscous and fluid, round volcanic features called 
coronae that are unique to Venus, and lava flows of many 
different types. Some of the highlands on Venus are heavily 
deformed showing evidence of both compressional and 
extensional tectonics on Venus. While no evidence of 
terrestrial-type lateral plate tectonics is apparent on Venus, 
the -lo00 craters on the surface demonstrate that it is 
relatively young, -500 Ma, requiring that global-scale 
volcanic resurfacing occurred at that time. Large volcanoes 
may represent some of the youngest volcanism on the 
planet. 
The scientific community is now focussing on 
understanding how Venus evolved into such a volcanically 
dominated planet, the nature of the tectonism, and the 
relationship between the atmosphere and the surface. In 
addition to further analysis and modeling of the radar data, 
some fundamental measurements of the surface are 
required. These include: composition of the surface 
(particularly the non-plains terrains), age dating of the 
surface, in situ measurements of the lowermost 20 km of the 
atmosphere, and heat flow estimates of the crust. Sample 
return would provide the opportunity to perform detailed 
analyses of some of the key parameters that would go far to 
resolve these issues. 
As a result of the landed missions, conducted from 1967 
into the mid 1980s, we have an adequate understanding of 
the conditions at the surface of the planet for engineering 
purposes. There is, therefore, a good foundation on which 
to base our designs. The inhospitable nature of the Venusian 
surface makes in situ measurements extremely difficult as 
most measurements need complex equipment and long 
residence times on the surface. Thus, for Venus, even with 
the advanced analytical techniques being developed, sample 
return may remain the most viable option to study the 
surface of this planet in detail. Some aspects of Venus can 
be turned to our advantage and this will be discussed, 
together with the technology advances that will make this 
mission a reality. 
2. SCIENTIFIC GOALS 
Some of the highest priority problems about Venus (as 
echoed by the Campaign Strategy Working Group (CSWG)) 
are firstly the nature of the lower atmosphere and secondly 
the composition and age of surface terrains. 
The lowermost 20 km is 80% of the whole Venusian 
atmosphere. This region is predicted to contain vital 
information on atmosphere-surface interactions, which are 
likely to contribute significantly to the global greenhouse 
and atmospheric dynamics. This information will provide 
constraints on wind generation and the causes of the 
atmospheric supperrotation. Measurements of siderophile 
trace element abundances, radiometric ages, and the isotopic 
composition of oxygen, which cannot be measured precisely 
enough in situ, will help answer important questions about 
the evolution and origins of the solar system. This is 
particularly true given the similar measurements to be made 
on returned samples from Mars. 
Crater ages show the surface of Venus as a whole is -500 f 
300 Ma. The surface is dominated by two terrains: 1) plains 
which are presumed to be basaltic based on radar 
characteristics, morphology and compositions returned from 
Venera landers; 2) tessera terrain (10% of surface area): 
highly deformed, high standing (-1-3 km above Mean 
Planetary Radius (MPR)), radar bright terrains, many of 
which have a plateau shape. Despite a similar crater age, 
the tesserae have been considered by many as 
stratigraphically older than the plains, making them the 
oldest material on the surface. Their plateau shape and high 
standing characteristics also make them prime candidates 
for being composed of differentiated, silica-rich crust 
(granite). At this time, granites are only found on Earth, 
where their formation requires volatiles and crustal 
recycling. Silica-rich rocks are thought to play a key role in 
the mechanism of plate tectonics and the discovery of silica- 
rich rocks on Venus would be highly significant. Such a 
discovery would constrain the amounts of volatiles in the 
crust, and this, coupled with refined atmospheric 
measurements, can test models for the nature of volcanism 
and crustal production with time. Knowledge of the 
composition of the tessera would also enable a better 
understanding of the distribution of radioactive, heat- 
producing elements in the crust leading to better estimates 
of internal heat flow. 
The primary science goals of the mission are: to characterize 
the nature of the lower atmosphere with particular emphasis 
on supporting the analysis of a surface sample; to determine 
the mineralogical, chemical, and isotopic composition of 
Venus’ crust; and to investigate its structure and evolution . 
Detailed petrological and geochemical measurements of the 
sample, including radiometric dating, would address two 
big-picture questions about Venus: 1) the tectonic and 
volcanic history of Venus and 2) how thick and strong is the 
present-day elastic layer on the outermost surface? 
The most desirable locale for sampling is the tessera 
highlands, which contain extraordinarily rugged and highly 
deformed terrain indicative of the oldest surface on Venus (a 
“tessera” is a piece of cut rock or glass used in a mosaic). 
The next most desirable sample would be from the volcanic 
highlands, which may contain more recent volcanic 
475 
products; and finally, a sample from the basaltic plains is 
acceptable, even though they have already been sampled 
insitu by the Venera missions. Because the volcanic 
highlands (at 1 to 3 km altitude) are less rugged and not as 
high as the tesserae (at 2 to 4 km), these are the primary 
target areas considered for this mission. 
The following are the minimum requirements for the surface 
sample adopted for the mission described in this paper. 
They are believed to satisfy the science needs just discussed. 
They are as follows: ( 1 )  it will include a small (-1 cm3), 
intact, unweathered rock sample; ( 2 )  there will be good 
contextual information on the sample site (images of the 
sample site including spectrographic data); ( 3 )  a sample of 
the lower atmosphere will be taken (provides context to 
facilitate the understanding the interaction between the crust 
and the atmosphere and (4), atmospheric in situ 
measurements taken during the descent and subsequent 
ascent. These requirements can be met by recovering a 
sample from 10 to 20 cm below the surface or inside a large 
rock. A drill can obtain such a sample as part of a core more 
reliably than other approaches such as using explosives. 
This would expose a sample but among other debris, which 
could make sample correlation with the original surface 
seen by the cameras problematic. The following instruments 
would be used for real-time measurements just prior to 
landing and during landed operations: a descent imager, a 
panoramic imager with spectrometer, a miniature gas 
chromatograph/mass spectrometer, a pressure/temperature 
sensor, and possibly a nephelometer. 
3. MISSION APPROACH 
In outline, the mission can be accomplished using a single 
Delta IILllV class expendable launch vehicle. This launch 
vehicle will send the spacecraft on a ballistic transfer to 
Venus. The spacecraft consists of an orbiter and a lander, 
(Figure 4) where the orbiter also functions to provide 
transport back to Earth and the lander has on board 
equipment to obtain a sample, place the sample in the ascent 
vehicle, carry the “return to orbit” rocket above the bulk of 
the atmosphere and finally place the contained sample in 
Venus orbit for collection by the orbiter. After picking up 
the sample the orbiter r e m s  to Earth and injects the sample 
carrier so that it may be picked up at the Utah test range. 
Before discussing the mission approach in more detail, it is 
worth identifymg the key issues the lander will face at 
Venus. While the transportation to and from Venus is 
challenging and must be done effectively, the major 
differences between this and a mission to another body lie in 
the challenges faced by the landed equipment. Venus is a 
hostile planet with an environment very different than that 
on Earth. It presents an environmental challenge as difficult 
as any in the Solar system for equipment designed for use 
on Earth or in the relatively benign environment of space. 
The most challenging aspects of this environment, from the 
perspective of the landed equipment, is the high temperature 
at the Venusian surface - 460OC; the high surface pressure - 90 bar (mostly COz), and the presence in the atmosphere 
of highly corrosive species. These include sulfuric acid and 
corrosive species. This environment dictates that a 
lightweight, corrosion resistant and thermally isolated 
pressure housing be provided for all electronics 
components. These components provide the control, 
communications and power functions for the landed 
equipment. The surface pressure of Venus is sufficiently 
high that most available semiconductor and integrated 
I E m  I 
Figure 4 A Possible Launch Configuration for the Venus 
Surface Sample Return System. The Venus ascent vehicle 
(VAV) shown in the LandedAscent systems is just under 
3m long. 
circuit components will collapse and be destroyed. The 
landing gear and sampling system must be made of 
materials that can withstand the local environment for 
several hours. The inflation system for the ascent vehicle 
must be protected from the thermal environment to maintain 
safe pressures in the gas containers, and from exposure to 
CO2 as the COa will liquefy at Earth normal The 
temperatures and 90 bar pressures. The balloon need not be 
protected thermally but the ascent rocket must be isolated 
from both the thermal and CO2 environment. The pressure, 
per se, is not an issue. 
Counterbalancing these challenges are attributes of Venus 
that make the mission easier, and we took advantage of 
them. The dense atmosphere makes aerocapture of the 
arriving spacecraft realatively easy. We plan to accomplish 
this using a ballute, high in the Venusian atmosphere. The 
subsequent capture of the lander and its descent to the 
surface are made easier by the high atmospheric density. 
The Soviet lander shown in Figure 1 has a circular structure 
at the top, which is all that is required to provide a soft, safe 
landing on the Venusian surface. Surface winds are not an 
issue as we know from Venera measurements that the wind 
velocity at the surface is about lm/sec ( -2  mph). The dense 
atmosphere provides high lift from the He filled balloon 
lofting the ascent rocket to its ignition altitude. Finally the 
high solar flux at Venus is used to drive an Solar Electric 
Propulsion (SEP) stage returning the sample from Venus to 
Earth for analysis. Combining the effects of using these 
items to our advantage saved over a thousand kilograms - 
making the mission viable on the desired medium lift launch 
vehicle. The next section discusses the various phases of 
the mission in more detail. 
476 
4. A CLOSER LOOK AT THE MISSION 
Transfer to Venus 
Venus delivery is accomplished by a conventional launch 
into a direct ballistic transfer trajectory. This transfer is 
shoyy in Figure 5 and requires a launch C3 of just over 9 
km-/s- for a launch on March 26, 2004 and arrival on 
September 20, 2004, with the declination of the launch 
asymptote at 31.3". The opportunity in 2004 is chosen as 
representative of the energy demands and amval geometry 
of the next several opportunities. It is not meant to imply 
any programmatic commitment to that date. The actual 
launch date will be dependent on science priorities and 
technology development status. Typical trajectory 
correction maneuvers are planned en route. Solar electric 
propulsion (SEP) was considered as an alternative and while 
it does offer some mass advantage (adding perhaps 5% to 
10% to the delivered mass), the cost of the SEP system 
didn't seem worth the mass gain for the Earth - Venus 
transfer. 
Aerocupture at Venus 
Aerocapture is done using an inflated hypersonic drag 
device (also known as a ballute, a hybrid of balloon and 
parachute). Because of the relatively low ballistic 
coefficient of the ballute the atmospheric heating is spread 
over a much larger area and the larger diameter increases 
the thickness of the boundary layer; both effects make an 
ablative heat shield unnecessary, offering a significant mass 
advantage. For the approach velocity of 5.75 W s ,  
corresponding to an entry velocity of 11.75 km/s, the mass 
of a conventional heat shield and associated aeroshell 
structure was estimated to be about 30% of the entry mass; 
initial estimates of the ballute were that it would be about 
14% of the entry mass, which is the value used in mass 
estimates reported here. Since then, more detailed analysis 
of the ballute has been done and the mass fraction is reduced 
from the initial estimate [7]. 
The ballute also offers a much simpler control approach for 
aerocapwe. Given that the ballistic coefficient of the 
spacecraft is far lower than the ballute, the following 
approach is feasible. As the ballute enters the upper 
atmosphere, the deceleration of the combined ballute - 
spacecraft is measured and then integrated to provide a 
measurement of the AV versus time. From this a time can 
be computed to release the ballute when sufficient AV will 
have been accumulated. More precisely, when the desired 
AV is predicted based on the experienced drag. This 
approach eliminates the complex guidance and control 
systems required by conventional aeroshells to control the 
errors due to navigation and uncertainty in the atmosphere. 
The aerocapture reduces the periapse velocity of the vehicle 
from 11.77 W s  to 10.16 km/s at an altitude of 110 km, a 
AV of 1.61 W s .  This leaves the spacecraft in a 6.8-day 
elliptical orbit. 
Staging Orbit for  Lander Deployment 
The declination of the arrival asymptote is -24.3' (relative 
to IAU north, which is toward ecliptic north), so the initial 
orbit is inclined to Venus' equator, where the entry is aimed 
so that the apoapse of the ellipse is near a node on Venus' 
equator. A plane change maneuver at the node near apoapse 
puts the inclination at 0" relative to Venus' spin axis (180' 
relative to IAU north); this maneuver also raises the 
periapse altitude to 130 km. Aerobraking is then used to 
reduce the apoapse altitude to 300 km, when another 
maneuver raises periapse to the same altitude. A cartoon 
showing this arrival strategy is shown in Figure 6. 
The resulting final orbit is equatorial and circular. This was 
selected as it provides both access to all longitudes for 
science and keeps the orbiter coplanar with the ascent 
vehicle after sample acquisition. This latter fact greatly 
simplifies the rendezvous and recovery strategy for the 
orbital sample. This is acceptable from a science perspective 
since the equator crosses all types of Venusian terrain. Note 
that Venus rotates very slowly and has little J2 so that orbits 
precess very slowly, so at first thought a given landing site 
would stay on a ground track for a reasonable mission 
lifetime. But because of the density of the atmosphere a 
significant amount of time is spent during descent and 
ascent where high altitude winds are equivalent to a four- 
day rotation period, so the location of a lander and returning 
sample would move away from the plane of a non- 
equatorial orbit. A low circular orbit also minimizes the 
entry velocity for the lander and improves communications 
between the lander systems and the orbiter. 
Landing 
Descent to the surface must be as quick as practical to 
minimize exposure to the extreme atmosphere. M e r  
separation from the orbiter, the landing package uses a small 
solid rocket motor (about the size of a Star 17) to lower its 
periapse into the atmosphere. Another hypersonic drag 
device (possibly with the same inflation hardware as was 
used by the first one for aerocapture) is deployed to remove 
the entry velocity for landing and then released to allow the 
lander to fall as quickly as possible. One and a half hours is 
estimated for the descent. Because of the high atmospheric 
density near the surface, the terminal velocity at landing will 
3/26/04 
10 do" tics 
Figure 5 The Earth-Venus Transfer Orbit. The view is a 
projection of the ballistic transfer trajectory and Earth's and 
Venus' orbits into the ecliptic plane as seen from ecliptic 
north. 
477 
plane 
change 
msneuwer \ 
not io scale  
circular 
aerobrabngs 
Figure 6 A Cartoon of the Arrival Strategy at Venus. The 
view is a projection into Venus’ equatorial plane as seen 
from ecliptic north. The orbits are not to scale. 
be as low as a few meters per second; a small parachute (cf. 
the Venera drag shield visible at the top of the lander in 
Figure 1) may be deployed near the surface to reduce the 
velocity further and to provide stable orientation for landing. 
Like Viking and Pathfinder, this mission accepts the risk of 
landing “in the blind,” though pictures will be taken during 
the descent to the landing site for later transmission to the 
orbiter. This led to the selection of volcanic highlands for 
the landing site, because the tesserae are too rugged to 
assure a safe landing without terminal hazard avoidance 
equipment which carries a significant mass penalty. 
The Venus Ascent Vehicle (VAV) is thermally isolated 
within an insulated bag, which is maintained at ambient 
pressure through the descent, landing, and balloon ascent. 
The initial concept used the local atmosphere to fill the bag 
during the descent but this doesn’t work-carbon dioxide 
liquifies at the surface pressure at the temperature desired 
for the VAV. Either a separate gas tank must be brought for 
pressurizing the VAV container during descent or some of 
the balloon helium can be used. The use of helium presents 
its own problems since helium is a good thermal conductor; 
this would imply the presence of a double insulation layer 
on the VAV container with only the outer layer using the 
atmospheric CO2 as the insulating gas. On the other hand, 
clever plumbing would allow the helium in the VAV 
container to be vented into the balloon during ascent so that 
no extra helium would need to be brought to Venus. 
Landed Operations 
Sampling must be done quickly but with limited power. 
Ultrasonic coring has been demonstrated at JPL [SI. This 
technique can drill at high speed by exciting the drill tip into 
resonance with the rock. The rock disintegrates and rapid 
drilling occurs. This technique is at an early stage of 
development but a device based on this approach appears to 
have the best prospect for rapid sample acquisition. A 
hollow tube is used as the drill to enable collection of a 10- 
20 cm core. A mechanism to deploy and control the drill 
and transfer the sample to a canister was designed, by the 
study group to operate at Venus ambient conditions. 
Imaging would be done before and during drilling to 
provide selection and context for the sample. There may 
only be time to collect one core sample to the desired depth 
of 10 to 20 cm, depending on the surface properties. A 
cartoon of the lander on the surface is shown in Figure 7. 
The orbiter will pass over the lander every 93 minutes, 
which enables a 9-minute telecommunications pass. The 
link from the landed elements to the orbiter consists of a 
single MCAS UHF transmitter, a 5-W UHF SSPA, a UHF 
diplexer, and a UHF wide-beam patch antenna; the 
equipment on the orbiter side of the link is the same except 
for a 1-W SSPA and a narrower beam antenna (8 dBi). The 
timeline for the operations has been designed so that the link 
will be active at the beginning and end of landed operations, 
i.e., at landing and at the beginning of ascent. 
Communications to Earth from the orbiter will be done at 
X-band with the space transponding modem now being 
developed, redundant 10-W X-band SSPAs, and a 0.25-m 
X-band high gain antenna. 
Thermal and pressure protection would be provided to 
telecom and other electronics by a pressure vessel. Thermal 
capacity of the system elements would be supplemented by 
a phase change material to provide temperature control. 
Power for the electronics would be provided by primary 
LiS0Cl2 batteries, with a small thermal battery on the lander 
platform to provide supplementary power for pyrotechnic 
events. While the electronics would be part of the mass 
lifted by the balloon, the primary batteries would be sized so 
that one (with 1038 Watt.hr capacity) could stay behind on 
the lander and only the minimum necessary (with 824 
Watt.hr capacity) would need to be lifted. 
Balloon Ascent 
An ascent to an altitude of 66 km offers the opportunity to 
rocket the sample into orbit; a lower altitude would require a 
larger rocket, a higher altitude a larger balloon-the 
minimum total is achieved somewhere around 66 km, 
depending on the detailed characteristics of the balloon and 
the VAV. The balloon would be of the “zero-pressure” 
variety but would still need to survive the harsh 
environment. One candidate material is polybenzoxazole 
(PBO) for strength at high temperature. The PBO would 
have a Teflon coating for protection against sulfuric acid. 
Another coating over the teflon may be needed to prevent 
the balloon from sticking together while it is packed up and 
under the high Venusian pressure. The balloon would be 
inflated from helium tanks, which stay on the lander. 
478 
External Atmosphere 
HeliumPressurant /' L m . 1  positive pressure] 
peaible Membrane Helium TMkS 
Relum 
Canister 
Imager 
Housing 
YAY 
Sample Drill 
\Crushable Pad 1 Crushable Pad I 
Figure 7 The Landed System Collects a Venus Surface Sample. 
The electronics package (including telecom) would be 
carried up with the balloon to provide communications to 
the orbiter for three or four passes during the ascent. This 
would allow transmission of data stored during operations 
on the surface as well as provide engineering data on the 
ascent itself. When more Earth-like atmospheric conditions 
are reached at an altitude of 50 km or so, the bag protecting 
the VAV would be opened and the core sample transferred 
to the container which will be ultimately placed in orbit. 
Rocketing to Orbit 
Venus Ascent Vehicle designs were simulated with a variety 
of stage combinations and guidance schemes. A successful 
rocket ascent was simulated for a three-stage combination of 
off-the-shelf solid rockets, a Star 24C, a Star 17A, and a 
Star 13A. The VAV would use inertial guidance and control 
(which need to be developed and will be similar Mars 
Ascent Vehicle) to steer the first two stages and to orient 
and spin up the third stage to do the final insertion bum at 
altitude. A cartoon of the VAV and ascent design is given in 
Figure 8. 
Rendezvous and Capture 
The technology needed for this phase of the mission, both 
hardware and techniques [9], is being developed in the Mars 
Surveyor Program for sample return from Mars. Then the 
orbiter would change its orbit plane to match that of the 
orbited sample, which would typically be slightly dispersed 
&om the nominal equatorial orbit plane. Then, using the 
Mars Surveyor strategy, the orbiter would maneuver to 
match the orbit size and shape, but with a slight difference 
in semi-major axis so that the orbiter would gradually 
approach the sample carrier. On-board guidance would 
control the terminal phase of the rendezvous using both 
visual and radio beacon data to determine the relative 
positions of the orbiter and sample container. 
Return to Earth 
Trans-Earth injection is very demanding because of Venus' 
size. A comparison between conventional chemical 
propulsion and solar electric propulsion (SEP) showed a 
large mass advantage to SEP - more than a 30% reduction 
in total system mass leaving Earth at the beginning of the 
mission. This does not include the difference in the mass of 
the aerocapture ballute. In contrast to the use of SEP for the 
delivery of the spacecraft to Venus, the use of SEP for the 
return trip takes advantage of the closer proximity of the 
Sun and the lower mass of the returning vehicle, which both 
imply a smaller, less costly SEP system. The SEP system 
designed here consists of one advanced NSTAR thruster 
(under development) and a 2.5 kW GaAs solar array 
(capacity measured at 1 AU, end of life). 
The SEP system would spiral the orbiter out of Venus orbit 
into heliocentric space over the course of 437 days 
beginning on September 29, 2005. Arrival at Earth would 
occur on September 29, 2008 after a heliocentric transfer 
taking 536 days and with a final hyperbolic approach 
velocity of 3.2 W s .  Figure 9 shows the heliocentric 
transfer using SEP. 
479 
,,.% ..*_ ~* -~-\%-~+= 23 I d  
Orbiterinsettion 0 300km 
t =  321 7s-3rdstagecutoff 
t=305 7 s  -3rdstageignition a$P 
”, V-JJ+ t = 75 5s -2ndstagecutoff 
t=55 5s-2ndstageignition 
Orbit er altitude 
300km 
b” stages, rnertiallypointed third shg 
Note: distances we not to scale 
Figure 8 The Venus ascent vehicle (VAV) puts the surface sample into orbit. 
x 
A Dec 10. 2006 
B May 13,2007 
C Oct 15.2007 
D Jan 7, 2008 
E May 29, 2008 
. , O f . . * .  
. *  D 
$- t - 
‘bT 0 
, 1 - 
a T-, 
s \  * 
- . \  e . ,  
Figure 9 The SEP Return Trajectory from Venus to Earth. The view is a projection of the trajectory and Earth’s and Venus’ 
orbits into the ecliptic plane, seen from ecliptic north. The part of the transfer trajectory shown with a solid line is when the 
solar electric propulsion (SEP) is on. 
480 
5. SYSTEMS OVERVIEW 
Mass and AV summaries for this mission are given in 
Tables 1 and 2. The orbiter propulsion system is a bi-prop 
chemical system with an I sp of 328 s, somewhat advanced 
over today’s technology. The total mass estimated includes 
a 30% contingency, which is appropriate for this early stage 
of the design, except for the orbited sample container, which 
is aggressively allocated at 2 kg. All interstage adapters and 
other supporting structures have also been included. Further 
refinements of the mass for the sample container and the 
VAV, which puts it into orbit will benefit from development 
of the Mars Ascent Vehicle being proposed for the Mars 
Sample Return program. 
6. MISSION ALTERNATIVES 
The multitude of mission phases and relatively large number 
of system elements make for a large number of engineering 
trades which must be considered. Table 3 shows the main 
trades considered and gives the reason for making the 
baseline choice for each trade. In particular, the mission 
architecture baselined here depends on the ability of solid 
rocket motors to withstand the pressure at the surface (they 
will be protected from the heat). An alternative approach, 
also studied in some detail, would be to keep the VAV 
suspended by a powered blimp at a high altitude and use 
smaller balloons to acquire a sample from the surface and 
bring it back to altitude, where the blimp would rendezvous 
with it and transfer the sample to the VAV. 
Table 1. Mission AV Budget in d s .  
Table 2. System Mass Budget in kg. 
481 
Table 3. Engineering Trades Considered and Made 
Mission Trade 1 Baseline I Alternatives I Reason 
Launch single multiple cost 
Transfer to Venus chemical ballistic SEP, solar sail cost, simplicity 
Capture at Venus 
Initial Venus orbit ellipse circular AV, mass 
Lander entry orbit circular equatorial ellipse, direct entry site selection 
mass conic aeroshell, biconic aeroshell, propulsive b a 11 ut e 
tether from floating 
platform 
Sampler element full lander platform, freeflyer from risk, simplicity 
VAV handling take to surface hold at floating platform risk, simplicity 
Sample selection random selected, rover cost, simplicity 
VAV configuration “thin” cylinder toroidal cost 
VAV avionics 1 IMU on second stage 1 sensors, sun sensor, star I mass, simplicity radio beacon, horizon 
tracker, gyros 
3-axis 1’’ & 2”‘ multiple possible 
stages, spin 31d stage combinations cost, simplicity VAV control 
Rendezvous tech. I radio beacon + visual I visual only I risk 
Rendezvous mop. I chemical I SEP 1 risk, simplicity 
7. CONCLUSION 
Venus surface sample retum missions have been studied for 
over thirty years. The initial studies showed immediately 
that the use of a return rocket launching directly from the 
surface of Venus was impractical [IO]. All subsequent 
studies have assumed the use of balloon technology to put a 
launch platform high in the atmosphere [ll-141. For all 
these studies, the total system mass injected from Earth was 
10,OOO kg or more. Such a large injected mass mandates 
multiple launches from Earth and may also require on-orbit 
assembly in low Earth orbit. This study, conducted at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, is the first to identify a Venus 
surface sample retum with an injected mass sufficiently low 
that only a single Earth launch is required. 
The technologies that provided the greatest advantages in 
reducing the total system mass for this mission were: the 
use of hypersonic drag devices (ballutes) instead of 
aeroshells; the use of advanced SEP for the return from 
Venus to Earth and a hardware system for controlling the 
direction of the VAV’s first two solid stages. .This latter is 
accomplished by a small self-contained inertial 
measurements unit (IMU) initialized from the landed 
package. The ballute technology not only saves mass but 
provides a far simpler and more robust approach to 
controlling the spacecraft during aerocapture. The advanced 
SEP, using next generation NSTAR thrusters now under 
development, takes advantage of the solar energy available 
at Venus to reduce the mass requirements by over 1000 kg. 
A number of other technology developments are more 
obviously necessary, including high temperature balloon 
systems, thermal control systems, pressure-tolerant rockets, 
drilling and sample handling systems, rendezvous and 
capture systems, and low mass avionics. Some of these 
technologies will be developed for the Mars Sample Return 
mission, but Venus surface sample retum remains a 
technology driver for space exploration and the associated 
technology efforts. 
There are some technologies that were not addressed by the 
study but that could provide leverage to ease the mission 
constraints. Two examples, based on DoD technologies, are 
the use of radio tracking missile technology and that derived 
from kinetic kill vehicle (KKV) developments. The 
tracking technology could be used to provide orientation of 
the ascent rocket to the orbiter passing overhead. This 
would allow the rocket to “acquire and track” the orbiter 
radio providing guidance information at a lower mass1 
complexity cost that Inertial Navigation System (INS) based 
approaches. For the case of KKV technologies, the sample 
carrier would be spun and equipped with a ring of small 
solid rocket thrusters. These thrusters would be fired to 
change the low mass sample carrier orbit rather than that of 
the massive Earth return vehicle. Sensor and control 
technology from the KKV vehicle program exists to enable 
this rendezvous to take place. An alternate strategy, 
proposed by B Wilcox (private communication), would 
place the sensing and control equipment in the Earth retum 
vehicle and use radio control of the sample carrier. The use 
of either of these approaches would greatly simplify the 
482 
rendezvous process, perhaps even allowing multiple 
samples to be obtained on future missions. They would 
certainly simplify the orbiter propulsion requirements. 
From an affordability standpoint, the complexity and 
number of major elements required for this mission, place it 
well outside the scope of, for example, a Discovery project. 
It should, however, be possible to perform this mission for 
significantly less than the flagship missions of recent 
decades. This will be enabled by the reduction of the 
mission to a single launch, maintaining a tight focus on the 
science scope and combining this with today’s streamlined 
management and operations styles. Given these factors, this 
mission is well worth continued consideration, even in 
today’s constrained fiscal environment. It is anticipated that 
the technology developments needed will be accomplished 
within the current NASA technology program. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The senior author has taken the results of all the authors’ 
efforts and reported them here in narrative form; he takes 
hll responsibility for any errors that may have crept in the 
process. The Project Design Team at JPL was directly 
involved in developing this mission concept and contributed 
greatly to the success of this study. The author would like 
to extend special thanks to Ted Sweetser and Martha 
Gilmore for their assistance and involvement. 
The research described in this paper was performed at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. 
9. REFERENCES 
[l]  Cruikshank D. P. (1983) The development of studies of 
Venus. In: Venus (D. M. Hunten, L. Colin, T. M. Donahue, 
V. 1. Moroz, eds.) Tucson, Univ. of Arizona Press, pp. 1-9. 
[2] Adam W. S. and T. Dunham (1932) Absorption bands 
in the infra-red spectrum of Venus. Publ. Astron. Soc. 
[3] Boyer C. and P. Guerin (1966) Mise en evidence 
directe, par la photographie d‘une rotation retrograde de 
Venus en 4 jours. Compt. Rend. Acud. Sci., 263,253-255. 
[4] Shapiro I. I. (1968) Spin and orbital motions of the 
planets. In: Radar Astronomy (J. V. Evans and T. Hagfors, 
eds.) New York McGraw-Hill, pp. 143-185. 
[5] Surkov Yu. A. (1983) Studies of Venus rocks by 
Veneras 8 ,9 ,  and IQ. In: Venus (D. M. Hunten, L. Colin, T. 
M. Donahue, V. I. Moroz, eds.) Tucson: Univ. of Arizona 
Press, pp. 154-158. 
[6] Moroz V. I. (1983) Summary of preliminary results of 
the Venera 13 and 14 missions. In: Venus (D. M. Hunten, L. 
Colin, T. M. Donahue, V. I. Moroz, eds.) Tucson, Univ. of 
Arizona Press, pp. 45-68. 
PUC$C 44,243-247. 
[7] Angus D. McRonald, “A Light-Weight Inflatable 
Hypersonic Drag Device for Venus Entry,” AAS Paper 99- 
355, presented at AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, 
Girdwood, Alaska, 1999 August 16-19. 
[8] Yosi Bar-Cohen, JPL’s NDEAA Ultrasonic Drilling 
Homepage, http://eis.jpl.nasa.gov/ndeaa/nasande/utcd/utcd.htm 
[9] Louis A. D’Amario, Willard E. Bollman, Wayne J. Lee, 
Ralph B. Roncoli, John C .  Smith, Ramachandra S. Bhat, 
and Raymond B. Frauenholz, “Mars Orbit Rendezvous 
Strategy for the Mars 2003/2005 Sample Return Mission,” 
AAS Paper 99-306, presented at AIAA/AAS 
Astrodynamics Conference, Girdwood, Alaska, 1999 
[ 101 J. J. Schoch, “The 1975 Venus lightside flyby-ascent 
of Venus Surface Sample Return (VSSR) probe, Delta V 
requirements,” NASA Technical Report NASA-CR-154430, 
Bellcomm, Inc., 1967 May 26. 
[ 111 A.L. Friedlander and H. Feingold, “Balloon-Assisted 
Ascent to Venus Orbit,” AIAA Paper 78-1438, presented at 
AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Palo Alto, 1978 
August 16-19. 
August 7-9. 
[12] J. Blamont, “Balloons on Other Planets,” Adv. Space 
Res. 1:63-69, 1981 January 1; this concept was seminal in a 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory study whose results were 
presented to the National Commission on Space by Kerry 
Nock in 1985 August. 
[13] H. Feingold, Venus Surface Sample Return Study, 
SAlC Report 88-1002, January 1988. 
[I41 G.E.N. Scoon and J.-P. Lebreton, Venus Sample 
Return Assessment Study Report, ESA Report SCT(98)3, 
June 1998, Noordwijk, the Netherlands. 
10. BIOGRAPHY 
David Rodgers graduated from Nottingham University and 
spent the first years of his career in England and Australia 
developing high-speed computers and peripherals. He then 
developed an interest in systems with a broader scope 
including sonar (submarine location) and doppler position 
tracking (ballistic missiles). After moving to the U.S. in 
1966, he developed several space instrument packages and a 
satellite emergency location system while at Texas 
Instruments, Inc. in Dallas, Texas. Dave joined JPL in 197 1 
and became involved in the development of the VIKING 
lander payload, the biological and organic detection 
instruments. He was responsible for the development of the 
Seasat A synthetic aperture radar, the Wide Field Planetary 
Camera (WFPC) for HST and for the definition of the 
recovery program for HST imaging using the second 
WFPC. More recently he has led mission concept 
developments for a Kuiper object flyby, a Venus Sample 
Return Mission and acted as chief engineer for the MICAS 
advanced camera spectrometer flown on DS 1. 
483 
