The Triana Mission - Next Generation 
Systems Architecture Ready for Flight 
Jim Watzin 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Code 474, Bldg. 8, Room 400 
Greenbelt, Maryland 2077 1 
jim. watzin@ gsfc.nasa.gov 
30 1-286-7933 
Absfruct- NASA’s Triana Mission is the first to take full 
advantage of the powerful capabilities offered by modern 
digital electronics and comprehensive software architecture. 
Not only is the performance of these miniature systems well 
beyond that of their bulky predecessors, but the time to 
configure them for a particular mission has been 
dramatically reduced as well. As a result, the cost of these 
implementations is just a fraction of previous missions. 
This deep space Earth and solar science platform touts 
highly autonomous, 3-axis stabilized performance for only 
$77M. In just 21 months time, the Triana observatory will 
have gone from conceptual design to flight readiness, being 
launched by the Space Transportation System (STS) in early 
2001. After deployment in Low Earth Orbit (LEO), Triana 
will boost itself into a trajectory to the L1 libration point 
approximately 1.5 million kilometers from Earth. There it 
will make observations of space weather, Earth climatic 
behavior, and whole Earth radiometry. 
The budget includes the development of the spacecraft, 5 
scientific instruments, deployable booms and solar arrays, a 
hydrazine propulsion module, a new upper stage system 
based on the Thiokol Star-48 kick motor, all that goes with 
launching from the manned STS, and 2 years of continuous 
mission operations and scientific data analysis. 
The work is being implemented as an in-house project at 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), capitalizing 
on the extensive design, development, and operational 
experience that has been acquired during the past decade on 
the Small Explorer (SMEX) Project, Hitchhiker/Spartan 
Project, and the Hubble Space Telescope servicing 
missions. 
This paper will describe the novel approach taken to 
implement this mission, commenting on the technical 
architecture as well as the processes used. Experiences to 
date on the development status will also be discussed. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. MISSION BACKGROUND - A PATHFINDER 
3. MISSION TIMELINE 
5. OBSERVATORY CONFIGURATION 
7. MISSION UNIQUES 
8. THE MANAGEMENT APPROACH - TEAM EMPOWERMENT 
10. PERFORMANCE ACHIEVED 
11. REFERENCES 
12. BIOGRAPHY 
2. 
4. 
6. 
IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES - COST AND SCHEDULE! 
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES - SYSTEM WEIGHT 
CORE ARCHlTECTURE - SMALL AND MODULAR 
9. THE MISSION COST - LIMlTED AND CAPPED 
1. MISSION BACKGROUND - A PATHFINDER 
Triana will be the first Earth-observing mission to L1, the 
neutral gravity point between the Earth and the Sun. From 
this stable vantage point, the satellite will have a continuous 
view of the entire sunlit face of the Earth as it rotates 
beneath it 1.5 million km away. Named for the sailor on 
Columbus’ voyage, who first spotted the New World, 
Triana is an exploratory mission to investigate the scientific 
and technological advantages of Ll for Earth observation. 
The L1 perspective provides a global, all day view from 
sunrise to sunset, where daily climatological phenomenon 
will unfold in clear view of Triana’s instrumentation, 
allowing for continuous measurements over large areas for 
long periods of time - a viewpoint that is not possible from 
LEO and Geosynchronous Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites. 
Diurnal variations in the atmosphere will be clearly 
observed for the first time over widely dispersed geographic 
areas. 
Global climatic studies focus heavily on determining the 
interaction of incoming solar radiation with the clouds and 
other constituents of the Earths atmosphere. Triana is 
flying five scientific instruments that will make a broad set 
of measurements in this field, some unique to this mission, 
others collaborative with data from other sources, and some 
complimentary to previous work. Taken together as a 
whole, this data will make significant advances in 
completing the “patchwork mosaic” of geographically and 
“ U S  Govemment work not protected by U.S. copyright.” 
277 
time-of-day restricted measurements collected by other 
observing platforms. 
Triana’s Earth Polychromatic Imaging Camera (EPIC) 
spectroradiometer will image the Earth in 10 wavelengths 
from ultraviolet through visible to near infrared with 8 km 
resolution. The EPIC data will be used to construct hourly 
maps of ozone, aerosols (dust, smoke, and pollution), cloud 
thickness. cloud height, sulfur dioxide, precipitable water 
vapor, and volcanic ash. The aerosol maps will be made 
available nearly real-time to the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), U.S. Park Service, and 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for their 
operational needs, such as aircraft hazard warnings. EPIC 
will capture visible wavelength, color images every quarter 
hour - providing the first continuous view of the planet as it 
travels through space. EPIC will also capture imagery of 
the Sun-side of the moon as it passes regularly between the 
Earth and the spacecraft. 
Figure 1 Triana Earth Imaging View 
the PRODUCTS 
1. 
2. Foundation for Educational Programs 
3. Public Outreach 
4. Scientific Research Investigations 
5. Solar Radiation and Climate 
6.  Cloud Microphysical Properties 
7. Vegetation Canopy Emmitance 
8. 
9. Global Ozone Levels 
10. Atmospheric Aerosol Levels 
1 1.  Ultraviolet Surface Radiation 
12. Cloud Cover Physics 
13. Aerosol and Ozone Plume Tracking 
14. Solar Wind Research and Monitoring 
15. Solar and Plasma Physics 
Continuous Web-based Imagery & Data 
Products 
Climatology of Upper Atmospheric Waves 
.................................................................................................................................... . ................ 
Figure 2 Triana Science Data Products 
Triana’s three cavity radiometer, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology Advanced Radiometer 
(NISTAR), will measure the total Ultra Violet (W)-visible- 
Infrared (IR) radiation environment emanating from the 
entire sunlit Earth, capturing total radiant power, reflected 
solar radiance, and reflected IR solar radiance data. The LI 
observing position will permit long integration times, 
providing a tenfold improvement in the accuracy of these 
measurements over previous data. The full Earth view will 
allow for a global characterization of variable albedo 
effects, a major variable in current radiance models. The 
Triana radiance measurements will be the only 
measurements of the Earth’s radiation balance at the retro- 
reflection angles, i.e., directly back towards the Sun. This 
data will be used to better characterize the Earth’s net 
radiation balance, an important driver in global climate 
models. 
Triana’s suite of space weather instruments, Plasma 
Magnetometer (PLASMAG) consisting of a magnetometer, 
electron spectrometer, and faraday cup, will capture high 
temporal resolution data on solar wind energetics and 
magnetic field dynamics. PLASMAG will provide nearly 
an hour-advanced warning to the Earth of impending solar 
storm onset, allowing the power and telecommunications 
industries to take precautionary actions to minimize 
disruptions and equipment damage. 
The Triana data products will be used for scientific 
research, real-time advisories (volcanic ash locations, solar 
storms, UV index, etc.), and for public outreach and 
education. NASA is planning an Earth science education 
initiative around the Triana imagery, and plans to issue an 
open, competitive solicitation for educational tools and 
applications. Because Triana provides a continuous, full 
disk view, its imagery and data products are expected to be 
extremely useful in teaching students about continental and 
global scale phenomena. 
2. IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES - COST AND 
SCHEDULE 
The Triana Mission has many challenges confronting its 
implementers. Firstly, its cost is capped at $77M, to include 
all direct expenditures (except for civil servant salaries) 
associated with design through two years of mission 
operations. As such, a launch on the STS as a secondary 
payload of opportunity makes great sense, since the STS 
would fly with or without Triana, separating the STS costs 
from the mission cost cap. However, the STS is a large and 
complex launcher to interface to and as such creates 
substantial and unique payload requirements that increase 
system cost considerably. Additionally, in this timeframe, 
the STS will primarily be used to support the construction 
of the International Space Station (ISS) Freedom and has 
few openings for research flights. Triana has been 
manifested on STS-107, the only research flight in the next 
several years with the available payload resources, resulting 
in the project having less than two years time to initiate and 
complete all development work for the mission. 
278 
With limited funding and an extremely compressed 
schedule the mission designers looked for previously 
qualified and/or readily available hardware to form the basis 
of the system architecture, particularly systems which had 
been through the exceptionally lengthy and detailed STS 
review and qualification process. This approach drove the 
Triana team to baseline the Agenzia Spaziale Italiana 
(ASI)/Alenia Italian Research Interim Stage (IRIS) system, 
flown in 1992 in support of the LAGEOS mission, as the 
primary interface to the STS. As a consequence, the 
observatory is required to conform to the IRIS interfaces. 
A survey of kick motors that had been previously qualified 
for STS launch revealed only two still in production, the 
Thiokol Star-37 and Star-48 motors, of which only the Star- 
48 had adequate performance. The search located one that 
Boeing had in storage that wasn’t being used, so it was 
quickly procured and adapted for Triana’s upper stage. 
The SMEX*Lire[” modular, mission configurable spacecraft 
architecture prototype had just successfully completed 
qualification testing and had matured sufficiently for a first 
mission application. A quick review of the SMEXeLite 
performance parameters and interfaces showed this 
architecture to be readily adaptable from its LEO baseline to 
a deep space platform so it was baselined. The choice of 
this architecture allowed the project to pursue early 
manufacture of the core spacecraft elements and focus 
engineering efforts on the mission uniques, a significant 
advantage given the mission development schedule. 
Liquid propulsion system tanks are notoriously long lead 
time items, often taking two years to manufacture, so a 
survey of excess U.S. government/industry assets was 
conducted to determine if anything close to Triana’s needs 
already existed. A spare CASSINI tank was found that 
could be used for a hydrazine system and was quickly 
baselined. 
As a result of these series of rapid cost, schedule, and 
engineering trades the performance envelope of this mission 
became fixed. The technical team then needed to work 
within these boundaries to craft the mission. 
3. MISSION TIMELINE 
The Triana Mission unfolds in three distinct phases. The 
first phase begins with the STS launch and deployment into 
LEO, ending with the bum of the kick motor and the safe 
deployment of the observatory. The second phase consists 
of the long transit to Ll ,  taking over six months to 
complete. And the third and final phase is the normal 
mission operations from L1. 
Table 1 Triana Mission Timeline 
Deployment Sequence 
279 
4. TECHNICAL CHALLENGES - SYSTEM WEIGHT 
Space flight from Earth to L1 presents a myriad of 
limitations on the satellite and its designers, the foremost 
being the effective energy management of the trajectory. 
This is a very precise orbit that requires exacting execution 
in both orbit determination and thrusting performance. 
Triana has chosen a direct insertion approach for its 
simplicity and speed. However, a direct insertion trajectory, 
unlike its lunar assist counterpart, leaves little margin for 
error. Simply stated, a missed approach cannot be corrected 
no matter how much propellant exists onboard because the 
energy requirements are just too enormous. Triana will be 
the first mission to attempt a direct insertion into an L1 
orbit. 
Triana utilizes the STS as its first stage to LEO. From there 
the Star-48 motor will boost its velocity by -3170 meters 
per second to enter the deep space trajectory towards L1. 
Then to capture into the Lissajous orbit about L1, the 
observatory can carry -660 meters per second of propellant 
for course correction and braking maneuvers. 
Ll 
/--, , .  
I '. 
1 :  
: i  
: :  
. .  .. .  
. .  : .. 36 Moon's Orbit 
Figure 3 Triana Trajectory 
With the energy limitations of the mission defined, the 
satellite weight budget became deterministically bounded, 
limited in three areas according to the performance of each 
propulsive stage. The first budget, and most forgiving, was 
the STS control weight. This represented the weight that 
the STS had allocated to Triana. This weight, indirectly 
influenced the LEO that could be reached, a minimum of 
135 km to be compatible with the Star-48 performance. 
Indirectly, this weight allocation is more firmly fixed by the 
load carrying capacity of the IRIS. 
And the third and most challenging weight budget was set 
by the hydrazine capacity of the propulsion system tank. 
Together, all three weight budgets have a strong influence 
on the implementation of the Triana observatory. The 
baseline observatory configuration began hardware 
fabrication with less than one percent margin against 
hydrazine system performance, two percent margin against 
kick motor performance, and two percent margin against the 
STS control weight. Weight management is a continual 
effort. At the time of the writing of this paper the hydrazine 
margin has been rebuilt to -7% and the kick motor margin 
to -5%. 
5. OBSERVATORY CONFIGURATION 
The Triana flight system consists of three major elements, 
the observatory which when mated with Gyroscopic Upper 
Stage (GUS) forms the spacecraft, which in turn mated with 
the IRIS forms the STS payload. These systems, in launch 
configuration, are shown in Figure 4. 
The Triana spacecraft is ejected by springs from the IRIS 
cradle while spinning at 60 rpm. The STS orients the spin 
axis in the kick motor bum attitude prior to ejection. 
Approximately 1/2 orbit later the GUS ignites the kick 
motor through a two fault tolerant system of interlocked 
timers. When the motor has burnt out, it is separated from 
the observatory by a similar series of timers. Once 
separated, the observatory autonomously despins itself, 
deploys the solar arrays, and orients itself in a power safe 
attitude awaiting ground command. 
Gyroscopic 
Upper Stage 
(53091bs.) k k  
Table 
Observatory 
(1279 lbs.) 
IRIS (2362 lbs.) 
w/HASE ( 4 2 0  lbs.) 
Figure 4 Triana Payload 
The second weight budget was set by the Star-48 
performance limitations. This budget was unique in that an 
exact weight was required to yield the proper trajectory. 
Overweight was unacceptable. Underweight required 
ballasting. 
280 
NISTAR 
Faraday Cup \ 
‘ EPIC 
ESA /Magnetometer propulsion 
Module 
Figure 5 Ti-iana Observatory 
The Triana observatory is a _?-axis stabilized, precision 
pointed satellite. It utilizes four reaction wheels, mounted 
in a tetrahedral configuration to actively maintain pointing, 
keeping the EPIC and NISTAR instruments oriented 
towards the Earth and rolling about that axis to keep the Sun 
vector as close to the PLASMAG boom axis as possible. 
Momentum management of the Integrated Reaction Wheel 
Assembly (IRWA) is done with the hydrazine thrusters 
during the tri-monthly orbit maintenance maneuvers. A star 
tracker, Sun sensor, and a ring laser Inertial Reference Unit 
(IRU) are used to derive spacecraft attitude. Additionally, 
the EPIC telescope can provide Earth centroid information 
to the Attitude Control System (ACS) to aid in the 
determination of pointing errors. 
The power system consists of 36 strings of GaAs cells, 
assembled in the SMEXoLite modular array configuration. 
A single 9-Amp hour super NiCd battery is used to support 
early mission activities and in-flight emergencies. A single 
rad-hard RAD6000 kprocessor controls and operates the 
spacecraft. Data is buffered in a 320 MB DRAM 
technology solid-state recorder. Each instrument is 
controlled by a dedicated pprocessor. EPIC and NISTAk? 
each utilize a SMEXoLite derived RAD6000. An 8086 
pprocessor is used to control PLASMAG. All-of the 32-bit 
processors communicate over the spacecraft 1553 data bus. 
The 8086 uses a serial port. The communication system 
nominally broadcasts telemetry continuously at a rate of 140 
Kbps in through a S-band transponder and a planar high 
gain antenna. Low gain hemispherical omni antennas can 
support lower rate communications for engineering debug in 
the event of attitude pointing problems. 
High Gain Antenna 
A structure unique to this mission supports the science 
instruments and ACS sensors. The PLASMAG electron 
spectrometer and magnetometer are mounted on a 3-meter 
stowable boom to minimize electric field and magnetic 
interference with the spacecraft. 
The flight configuration of the observatory is in Figure 5. 
The dry spacecraft-to-instrument weight ratio is -2: 1. 
6. CORE ARCHITECTURE - SMALL AND MODULAR 
The Triana observatory is based on the SMEXoLite 
spacecraft architecture. The SMEXoLite is a next 
generation system architecture recently developed by GSFC 
that has dramatically reduced both the size and cost of 
spacecraft systems. It leverages modern, digital electronics 
and comprehensive software designs to shrink a highly 
autonomous, full performance, 3-axis stabilized spacecraft 
bus to just 12 inches in height for a cost less than $10 
million. Triana will be the first flight application of this 
system. 
The SMEXoLite approach separates the traditional 
subsystem boxes into smaller, more distributed elements 
that encompass only one basic function each. These 
“functional slices” are easy to interface, essentially 
transparent to each other, much like the “plug-and-play’’ 
equipment found within the commercial computer industry. 
SMEXoLite relies heavily on industry standards to couple 
(or rather, decouple) these functional slices. The entire 
spacecraft is controlled by one 32-bit microprocessor. 
Functions that require high-speed access to the processor 
28 1 
such as telemetry data storage (and manipulation) and 
downlink are connected via a standard PCI bus. Functions, 
which require support from the processor (including the 
instrument) are linked on the standard 1553 data bus. High 
speedhigh volume data transfers are conducted over a 
dedicated serial link. Analog connections are limited 
simply to distribution of unregulated 28-volt power. Except 
for the reliance on the flight processor, each functional slice 
is independent of the others. The total volume of spacecraft 
electronics has been reduced by a factor of 3 over previous 
SMEX spacecraft. This was made possible through the 
extensive use of surface mount, Leadless Chip Carrier 
(LCC) packaging and Field Programmable Gate Array 
(FPGA) programmable logic device technology. The 
dramatic reduction in parts count also made for a significant 
improvement in the calculated system reliability, increasing 
the probability of completing a failure free one-year mission 
by nearly 50% over previous SMEX spacecraft. 
The heavy reliance on programmable devices allowed for 
rapid and thorough prototyping via convenient workstation 
based simulation design tools. Part programmability 
provided the flexibility to make changes to flight circuitry 
by simply replacing a part with a reprogrammed version. 
This greatly shortened the debug cycle and even allowed for 
relatively easy modification of flight hardware late in the 
development cycle - important attributes for a mission 
with a tight development schedule. 
Figure 6 SMEXOLite 
The SMEX-Lite architecture requires considerably less 
design work. The decoupling effect of the functional slices 
minimizes the amount of electrical engineering support 
required. The decoupled functional slices of the 
SMEX-Life architecture allow the mission designer to 
easily alter the content of the spacecraft systems as well as 
the sequence of system integration and test. The use of 
standard interfaces allows for quick integration of a new 
function. Functions that are not needed can be simply 
removed without any deleterious affect on the other 
elements of the mission. In short, the SMEX-Lite design is 
optimized for change and adaptability, a feature that 
Triana exploited. 
SMEXdite extends the plug-and-play approach of its 
electronics to achieve cost savings on both the power 
system and mechanical system as well. Standard solar array 
modules have been developed. These modules consist of 
small full string cell configurations assembled on a standard 
composite mini-panel. These modules are then assembled 
by the end user into a larger framework, forming the 
completed solar array. This removed the solar array from 
the critical path and significantly reduced its cost. 
The dramatic reduction in the size of the SMEX-Lite 
spacecraft electronics made it practical to develop a 
standard mechanical bus configuration. The SMEX-Lite 
spacecraft is packaged in a structure that is only 12 inches 
tall with multiple instrument, solar array, and launch vehicle 
attach points. The small size has allowed the use of a one- 
piece aluminum casting for the primary structure, 
eliminating costly piece part design, fabrication, and 
assembly. The SMEX-Lire structure was easily nestled in 
the center of the Triana observatory stack, making it a “clip- 
on resource for the instruments” as intended in its original 
design. For a slight weight penalty, mechanical design and 
fabrication has been greatly simplified. 
Designed to be modular and mission configurable from the 
onset, this architecture readily lent itself to meeting Triana’s 
requirements - small, high performance, and inexpensive. 
SMEX-Lite ’s reliance on industry standard interfaces made 
it easy to accommodate all of the unique instrument support 
requirements. The spacecraft single-board computer was 
replicated within the EPIC and NISTAR instruments. 
System software was provided to the instrumentors. ACS 
magnetic torquer controls were replaced with the propulsion 
system controller and ACS sensors were added to meet 
mission performance goals. The LEO communication 
system was replaced with a deep space high gain system. 
The power node was modified to include more switched 
services. Architecturally, an “inhibit system” was inserted 
in series with the power distribution to meet STS safety 
requirements. The Triana block diagram is shown in Figure 
7 superimposed upon the SMEX-Lite block diagram for 
comparison, illustrating the ease of adaptation for the Triana 
mission. 
282 
Figure 7 Triana Block Diagram 
by ground controllers and the crew during the STS phase of 
the mission. 
7. MISSION UNIQUES 
The Triana mission unique developments are focused on 
meeting the STS safety requirements, controlling the GUS, 
operating the propulsion system, managing the thermal 
performance of the overall observatory, and establishing the 
structural integrity of the payload as a whole. Of these, only 
the STS/GUS/propulsion related efforts involved interfacing 
new functional slices into the SMEXoLite architecture. All 
three were quickly and easily interfaced to the spacecraft, 
allowing the designers to focus on internal functionality. 
STS safety requirements call for two fault tolerant 
protection against inadvertent execution of a potentially 
catastrophic hazard - of which Triana has many. An 
elegant solution was derived wherein a universal and 
modular inhibit system, called the Safety Inhibit Unit (SIU), 
was placed in-line between the power node and the potential 
hazard to control the application of power. The SIU utilizes 
a series of independent timers and event monitors to control 
these hazards. The status of the inhibits can be monitored 
The control of the GUS was completely decoupled from the 
observatory by having the observatory lay idle until 
separation from the GUS. Since the system designers had 
more flexibility with the GUS weight margin than the 
observatory weight margin, they concluded that there was 
no performance advantage in merging the two systems, 
though it was considered early on. 
The propulsion system control was implemented by adding 
a new, single board functional slice to the Utility Hub. 
Given the architecture of the SMEXoLite, this was a 
straightforward modification. The IRWA rim mass was 
optimized for this mission, adding increased momentum 
storage capacity. 
In addition to the hardware modifications, a different 
communication subsystem was substituted for the baseline 
SMEXoLite subsystem. Triana has a difficult 
communication problem, to retum maximum imagery data 
over a very large distance (i.e., to maximize the information 
bandwidth within the constraints of practical 
283 
implementation), and to provide coherent ranging for the 
derivation of a very accurate orbit position. Triana had 
limited power capacity due to its weight limitations. Trade 
studies determined that a 5-watt transmitter was a 
reasonable trade-off between solar array size, probable data 
rates, and reasonable ground receiving antenna aperture 
size. A one-meter high gain antenna was about the largest 
fixed antenna that could be packaged into the IRIS 
envelope. In order to minimize the on-orbit data bandwidth, 
a selectable data rate capability was incorporated into the 
Computation Hub so that conservative link margins need 
not to be carried through the design into flight. This 
flexibility allows the science team to maximize the 
productivity of the observatory. Given the desire to 
maximize data bandwidth, the communication trades 
resulted in the need for a continuous data link. This 
requirement could not be met with NASA ground assets, so 
a commercial network service was purchased to satisfy the 
need. A minimum of three stations was necessary to 
provide this support. 
WBS Element 
Science Program 
Spacecraft 
Launch Segment (STS 
integration and safety, GUS, 
and IRIS) 
Ground System 
Integration (project support, 
reliability and quality 
assurance, integration and test, 
EEE pans) 
TOTAL 
Mission Management and 
8. THE MANAGEMENT APPROACH -TEAM 
EMPOWERMENT Estimated Cost ($M) 28.8 
16.0 
14.2 
13.5 
4.5 
77.0 
Triana is being implemented as an in-house mission with an 
external Principal Investigator (PI) in much the same 
manner as NASA GSFC managed the initial five SMEX 
missions. Key to this approach is the development of an 
empowered, hands-on team that follows the development 
effort from early design through launch[”. 
The spacecraft systems are being designed, built, and tested 
at GSFC. Triana is taking full advantage of GSFC’s 
heritage and investments in the SMEX Program. The 
mission team, about 200 combined civil servants and local 
engineering support contractors, is involved in the overall 
design from spacecraft development to launch and data 
delivery to the research community worldwide. One 
Maryland company, Swales Aerospace, has been 
competitively selected by NASA to participate in this 
mission in a cooperative partnership arrangement. This 
agreement will facilitate the commercialization of the 
S M E X d i t e  spacecraft architecture within the aerospace 
industry. 
Science instrument development is being managed by the PI 
at Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of 
California at San Diego, with development underway at 
Lockheed in Palo Alto, Calif., Ball Aerospace in Boulder, 
Co., National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
in Gaithersburg, Md., MIT in Boston, Mass., and at GSFC 
in Greenbelt, Md. 
in the past. Simple standard interfaces and modular 
construction lend themselves to relatively easy debug and 
component deintegration if necessary. This paradigm shift 
in testing is an integral theme in the SMEXdite approach 
and was successfully utilized in the build of the prototype 
unit. 
9. THE MISSION COST - LIMITED AND CAPPED 
The budget for the entire mission from design through 
operations is capped. As such, a detailed implementation 
plan was developed, which at the time of this writing has 
been fairly accurately adhered to by the mission team. The 
top level of the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is 
decomposed in Table 2. Reserve has been apportioned in 
accordance with remaining development risks. Note that 
the spacecraft consumes only -20% of the total mission 
budget. 
Table 2 Triana Mission Cost Profile 
10. PERFORMANCE ACHIEVED 
The Triana mission development is progressing well. Cost 
objectives are being met. Critical schedule milestones are 
within a month of their goals. Within six months of start-up 
the mission team had completed their design review and had 
begun hardware fabrication. In less than a year integration 
of the observatory was underway. All technical 
performance requirements have been met by the system 
design. The SMEXdite architecture has passed its first 
trial by fire, proving itself to be extraordinarily versatile and 
configurable. It easily met the Triana mission requirements 
and interfaces with minimal modifications. Mission 
uniques were readily incorporated. Engineering efforts 
have been concentrated on the new elements, minimizing 
the efforts associated with building the bus. Spacecraft 
costs remained modest. This next generation architecture 
appears ready for flight. Given the tremendously compressed nature of the schedule, work has been broken into as many parallel paths as 
possible. Much component qualification testing is being 
shifted to observatory level testing, increasing schedule risk 
slightly, but dramatically reducing overall schedule length. 
As spacecraft systems shrink to the size of previous 
generation subsystems, it no longer appears prudent to 
conduct as much pre-integration testing as historically done 
284 
11. REFERENCES 
[l] Jim Watzin, “SMEXOLite - An Innovative System 
Architecture for Reducing Spacecraft Size and Cost”, 49”’ 
lnteniatiorial Astronautical Congress, Melbourne, 
Australia, September 28-October 2, 1998. 
121 Jim Watzin, “A GSFC Perspective on the Execution of 
Faster, Better, Cheaper,” 1999 IEEE Aerospace Coiferenee, 
Snowmass, Colorado, March 6-13. 1999. 
12. BIOGRAPHY 
Recently, Mr. Watzin has 
been assigned the role of 
the Triana Project 
Manager. He is leading 
the development of this 
fast paced, innovative 
mission to an STS launch 
in early 2001 for  a multi- 
w a r  mission from the L1 
libration point. Triana will provide real-time whole Earth 
observations to Earth science and educational 
organizations throughout the world. 
Jim Watzin was the project manager for  the NASA GSFC 
SMEX Project. This project developed low cost, quick 
reaction spacecraft in support of NASA’s space science 
community. He was with the project since its start in 1988 
where he previously served as the Chief Systems Engineer. 
In  that capacity he led the design and development of the 
initial three SMEX missions (SAMPEX, FAST, and SWAS). 
As Project Manager, he led the developnient efforts of the 
TRACE and WIRE mission teams. 
The project has launched five satellites. The project has 
completed the prototyping of SMEXmLite, a high technology, 
next generation spacecraft that finished qualification testing 
in early 1999. 
Mr. Watzin has been employed by NASA since 1980 and has 
a background in Attitude Control and Systems Engineering. 
He is the author of 15 technical papers originating from his 
work at GSFC. He eamed a BS in Mechanical Engineering 
from the University of South Carolina and a MS in 
Dynamics and Control from the School of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics at Purdue University prior to working fo r  
NASA. 
285 
