 1
Distributed Mission Planning And Operations.  
Data Integration. 
 
Alexandre Popov  
Canadian Space Agency (CSA)   
6767 route de l'Aeroport 
Saint-Hubert, Quebec J3Y 8Y9 
450-926-6537 
Alexandre.Popov@space.gc.ca 
 
Abstract—Combining the experience gathered on MIR and 
International Space Station (ISS) programs along with  
“lessons learned” this paper1,2 evolves a planning-centered 
approach [1] based on the data integration in terms of the 
NNED2 (No Need to Enter Data Twice) principle [2]. 
Though distributed mission planning and data integration 
may be the most cost-effective (if not the only) way to add 
value to the mission planning and operations process on the 
International Space Station Program (ISSP), some of 
decision makers on the program put off integration efforts, 
concerned that they will be costly, complicated, and lacking 
clear returns on the efforts invested. The paper dispels these 
misperceptions and details tangible benefits of bringing 
mission planning data integration onto next maturity 
level[2]. Covering topics such as planning team 
empowerment, data integration for mission planning, and 
application development, the paper could serve a useful 
primer for executives and decision makers on space 
programs who want a better understanding of the 
advantages of distributed mission planning and 
corresponding data integration. A demand is currently 
appearing to develop a holistic mission planning business 
model and, eventually, a globally distributed space 
operations planning system based on a planning-centered 
mission operations concept, well-structured planning data, 
and up-to-date tools. The proposed approach and 
corresponding data architecture give rise to an enabling 
collaborative process that facilitates the creation, capture, 
and dissemination of information. 
From "Moon-to-Mars" exploration program perspective the 
paper examines issues of long duration mission planning for 
future exploration missions. The success of almost every 
new initiative space community launches relies heavily on 
successful data integration between existing and new 
heterogeneous applications and databases. But, choosing the 
right data integration product - one that will meet particular 
mission planning needs of today and tomorrow - is not an 
easy task. This paper was written also to help end users 
obtain a clear understanding of the various types of data 
integration products that exist, along with the typical 
product architectures, costs and functionality. One of the 
                                                          
1 0-7803-8870-4/05/$20.00© 2005 IEEE  
2 IEEEAC paper #1199, Final, December 10, 2004 
paper's goals is to help readers intelligently select a data 
integration approach that is best suited to meet the needs of 
their mission planning data integration initiatives. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ..................................................... 1 
2. TERMINOLOGY ..................................................... 2 
3. DISTRIBUTED PLANNING ARCHITECTURE AND 
IMPLEMENTATION DRIVERS .................................... 2 
4. DISTRIBUTED MISSION PLANNING PROCESS ....... 4 
5. PLANNING DATA INTEGRATION ........................... 9 
6. PROPOSED APPROACH TO DATA INTEGRATION 10 
7. CONCLUSION....................................................... 11 
REFERENCES........................................................... 12 
BIOGRAPHY ............................................................ 12 
1. INTRODUCTION 
''Good judgment comes from experience, and experience 
comes from bad judgment.'' 
Barry LePatner 
Mission planning is the core of what is being termed as 
space mission preparation and support. While conducting 
mission planning, whatever the nature of the operations 
currently is, the following fundamental rules together with 
strategic, tactical and operational considerations should 
always be kept in focus [1]: 
a) keep and maintain consistency with established 
mission planning processes and approaches, that 
have been adopted on the particular program ("do 
not reinvent wheels") 
b) harmonize the system-level planning product 
development with higher level planning processes 
Preparing for deep space exploration we have a unique 
opportunity to verify and validate mission planning 
concepts, approaches and tools on the ISS program, 
particularly in the robotics field. Unlike previous projects in 
manned space mission area the ISS operates on a 
continuous basis with execution planning, logistics 
planning, and on-orbit operations occurring simultaneously 
 2
for long periods of time. That is an essential part and 
inherent feature of mature space exploration programs. 
Resource management is also inherent within the overall 
planning process on the programs.  Hierarchical planning 
and "just-in-time" principles are used since it is the only 
practical way to deal with the fact that “inherited 
resources/inherited problems” will continue to plague 
advanced planning [1].    
The concept of "distributed planning" is not a new one 
[1,3]. For example, unlike a centralized mission planning 
approach adopted on the Space Shuttle program the ISSP 
nature and unique characteristics of payload operations 
planning on the program drive the need for a distributed 
payload operations planning concept. Specific planning 
functions are distributed across a hierarchy of payload 
planning organizations based on their particular needs and 
expertise. The concept [3] has been implemented on the 
ISSP and is based on the use of time-dependent resource 
envelopes to distribute or assign available resources to 
lower level planning organizations.  
Now it is time to take a look closer at the distributed 
mission planning and, in particular, distributed system 
operations planning as well as at the subsequent integration 
of the plans, developed by geographically dispersed 
organizations on the ISSP within their respective resource 
envelopes.   
2. TERMINOLOGY 
''Great things are done by a series of small things brought 
together.'' 
 Vincent Van Gogh 
The terminology introduced in this section refers to a 
planning team located at a planning site as a planner,  a set 
of planning tools to develop respective planning products as 
a planning system, and a planner and planning system 
together as a planning cell. 
Planning approach used on each space program is tailored 
to meet the specific needs of the program itself and its 
particular missions. For example, since the knowledge and 
expertise on the ISSP is spread across the various 
organizations from different countries, it makes sense to 
distribute the planning as well, because no one organization 
has the knowledge and expertise required to perform all of 
the detailed planning. While there are many possible ways 
of supporting distributed planning, the hierarchical 
distribution of resources appears to be the approach, which 
is best suited for mission planning on the ISSP.  
What is mission planning and what is distributed mission 
planning? Below are the definitions proposed.  
Mission planning – the process of allocating elementary 
planning items on a timeline within given timeframe to 
satisfy chosen criteria in terms of existing operational 
constraints [1]. 
Elementary planning item - a crew or ground procedure 
(or a procedure step) with the corresponding resources 
(which are usually attributes of the procedure) that are 
required to complete the procedure [1]. 
Therefore the distributed planning process is one, which 
allows multiple planning cells to participate in the 
development of a single integrated plan. In general, mission 
planning is comprised of four basic functions:  
Constraint Definition - the definition of resource 
availabilities and other constraints on scheduling  
Requirements Definition - the definition of the scheduling 
requirements for all operations, which must be scheduled 
into the integrated plan  
Scheduling - the scheduling of the defined onboard 
operations within the defined constraints. Scheduling 
defines the time-dependent assignment of the resources 
necessary to support the operations and utilization onboard 
the station. Scheduling is performed to some degree at all 
levels of the planning architecture, with the results of one 
planning level used to feed the appropriate planning tasks 
at the next planning level  
Product Generation - the development of the ground and 
onboard product(s) required to execute the plan/schedule 
(e.g. onboard and ground procedures) 
In a distributed planning environment, the responsibility for 
performing these functions is spread to some degree across 
all planners in the process, based on their particular needs 
and expertise. 
3. DISTRIBUTED PLANNING ARCHITECTURE AND 
IMPLEMENTATION DRIVERS 
"Everything that can be invented has been invented." 
 - Charles H. Duell, Commissioner, U.S. Office of Patents, 
1899 
The Figure 1 provides an overview of the distributed 
mission planning architecture proposed on the ISSP to meet 
the planning needs of the program and all international 
partners. Development of planning products for respective 
levels is distributed from a coordinating planning cell (later 
on the cell plays an integrating role) down to lower-level 
planning cells, which exchange information with each other 
as they expand their subplans. Technically speaking, a 
lower-level planning cell can itself act, if required, in the 
role of a coordinator/integrator for additional planning cells, 
 3
resulting in the hierarchy of cells. Each planning cell gets 
all information required on the other cells' subplans, with 
explicit dependencies and relationships with the local cell's 
subplan. 
This architecture consists of three levels of planning, which 
are: 
-  station-wide planning  
- segment planning  
- system planning 
The station-wide planning level is the level which final 
integrated planning products are developed on. More about 
the products and the planning could be found in [1]. The 
International Execution Planning Team is responsible for 
overall plan integration, approval, and management 
functions at the level. 
The segment planning level represents the 
owners/providers of specific station "segments". A space 
station segment may include modules, nodes, external 
elements, robotics, and/or systems. A station segment 
typically consists of the elements and components of the 
station vehicle supplied by a particular partner, though 
Unites States on-Orbit Segment (USOS) is an exception 
since the built-in-Canada Mobile Servicing System (MSS) 
and built-in-Russia Functional Cargo Block (FGB) are parts 
of the USOS. For example, Japan provides the Japanese 
Experiment Module-Pressurized Module (JEM-PM). This 
station component will be managed and operated by the 
Japanese segment planners via the Space Station Integration 
and Promotion Center (SSIPC) in Japan. The segment 
planning function is responsible for both operations and 
utilization, within a given segment. 
The system planning level represents the system owners 
(suppliers) who conduct planning for both onboard and 
ground operations. This function is responsible for defining 
the individual system scheduling requirements and 
performing the detailed system planning required to 
accomplish a specific mission (e.g. an ISS module 
installation) or support a higher level task planned. 
Respective system level planning cells, geographically 
distributed for system owner location reason. The planning 
cells have adequate facilities for purposes of planning and, 
where it is required, operations support. For example, the 
Canadian Space Agency (CSA) delivered the MSS and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 - Distributed mission planning architecture overview 
 
International Execution 
Planning Team (IEPT) 
Guidance Navigation 
& C t l (GNC)
Electrical Power  
S t (EPS)
Japanese  
On-orbit Segment  
 Planning Cell 
European 
On-orbit Segment 
Planning Cell 
United States  
On-orbit Segment (USOS) 
Planning Cell 
Russian  
On-orbit Segment (ROS)
Planning Cell 
Station-wide Planning Level 
Segment Planning Level 
Mobile Servicing 
S t (MSS)
Service Module 
(SM) Thermal Mode
"Columbus" module 
Pl i C ll
JEM-PM 
Pl i C ll
 4
provided the ISSP with the system and services to maintain 
the system to keep it operational.  
As the system owner, CSA has full-blooded facilities for 
system level planning as well as real-time operations 
facilities such as Engineering Support Centre (ESC) and 
Remote Multi-Purpose Support Room (RMPSR) to support 
MSS operations. Besides that, there is an advanced Payload 
Operations and Integration Centre (POIC) at CSA for 
purposes of payload planning and operations support. 
However, CSA currently is not involved in planning 
process.  
Within this architecture, planning is implemented via 
interfaces between the station-wide and segment planning 
levels and between segment and system (payload) levels 
respectively. The documented interfaces (e.g. Interface 
Control Document (ICD)) specify planning data input for 
each planning level and ensure that program objectives and 
partner agreements are implemented within the planning 
process.  
A number of considerations must be factored into the 
specific implementation of distributed planning for ISS 
operations. Obviously, the implementation is driven by the 
expected geographical location of ISS system experts. 
Major operations control centers and smaller ones with the 
necessary capabilities and expertise to support the 
distributed planning and operations have been developed by 
international partners on the ISSP in many countries. 
4. DISTRIBUTED MISSION PLANNING PROCESS  
''It is no use saying, 'We are doing our best.' You have got 
to succeed in doing what is necessary.''  
Winston Churchill 
Mission planning and operations on space programs such as 
ISSP and Shuttle program is a process-driven business. The 
process itself and deviations, if any, from the process 
happen during mission planning and real-time operations, 
are documented.  That makes the mission planning and 
operations different. The system-planning-level process, 
outlined in Figure 2 below, is the proposed implementation 
of the distributed system operations planning concept. 
The main purpose of the constraint identification function is 
to identify and document the characteristics of the station 
systems, crew complement, and vehicle environment which 
limit the ability to perform onboard operations. This 
definition ensures that a single and consistent source of 
scheduling constraint information is used by all levels of 
planning.  
 5
The ISS Resource Capabilities and Constraints task 
identifies the constraints that affect or have implications on 
resources at the overall station level. Examples of resources 
at this level include crew and power. Particular attention is 
paid to the resources that support both operations and 
utilization across the station. The results identify the overall 
set of resources within which planning across the station 
must be performed.  
The Segment Resource Capabilities and Constraints task 
identifies the segment unique resources and capabilities, and 
further decomposes the station-wide resources within the 
segment. The definition of these resources establishes the 
complete set of resources that must be used for planning 
within the segment, and is performed to account for the 
differences that exist between segments. The results of this 
task are used to support segment level planning and 
resource distribution to system planning level.  
The System Planning Requirements task identifies the 
resource, timing, and relationship constraints necessary to 
define the time-dependent resource distributions to the 
system. Requirements can be defined to provide for 
flexibility in detailed planning and operations. The 
definition of requirements is highly dependent on the 
physical location of the system. Requirements must 
therefore be defined in context with the segment in which 
they are to be implemented. The results are requirements 
provided to the segment planners to support the planning 
and distribution of resources within station segments.  
The Distribute Resources to Segments task determines the 
sub-division of the resources to each of the segment 
planning cells. This division of resources is based on the 
station-wide resource availabilities and agreements made by 
international partners. This task is performed by the IEPT 
function at the station-wide planning level. Partner 
guidelines and constraints are included with the resource 
distributions to ensure that the planning requirements of 
systems in other partner segments are adequately accounted 
for in the planning process.  
The Perform Planning and Distribute Resources to Systems 
task determines the distribution of resources to the systems 
located in each station segment. These distributions are 
based on the planning requirements defined by the system 
planning cells, planning agreements made by the partners  
(guidelines and constraints), and the station-wide and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 - High-level view of the distributed planning architecture for execution planning 
ISS Resource 
es and Constraints 
Resources and 
to Segment 
ells 
gment Planning  
etailed Planning and 
pporting Products 
Develop Segment Planning Products 
and Inputs to Integrated Planning  
Develop System Planning Products 
and Inputs to Segment Planning  
Evaluate Plan for 
Concurrence 
Draft Segment Planning 
ogether with Resources 
aints to System Planning 
Evaluate Plan for 
Concurrence 
Short Term Plan (STP)
Integrate Segment Plans 
and Supporting Products 
 6
segment-unique resource distributions. The resulting 
distributions are provided to the systems and clearly define 
the constraints within which detailed planning is to be 
performed. The task also accomplishes the planning 
required to configure other station systems and elements to 
support the system operations. This planning is based on the 
resource distributions and does not require in-depth 
knowledge of the detailed system operations. The products 
of this task include the plan of segment operations required 
to support system configuration changes, and the resource 
distributions for each of the systems.  
The Detailed System Planning and Supporting Products 
Development task determines which operations are to be 
performed within the system resource distributions. System 
level planners perform their detailed planning to define the 
sequence and timing of specific operations with the system. 
The amount of flexibility provided at this level of planning 
is a function of the planning requirements that were 
provided to the segment planning level. Once the detailed 
planning has been performed, the system planning cell 
develops the data necessary to produce the products 
required to execute the scheduled operations. This detailed 
data includes items such as crew and ground procedure 
references, system configuration and mode for each given 
time, and notes including (where it is appropriate) 
references to planning rules/constraints applied. Operations 
within the system specific plan and products are consistent 
with the respective segment specific plan and products, and 
are subservient to them. The results of this task are provided 
to the segment planning cell. The products of this task 
include the detailed system level plan(s) (SLP) in ISSP 
adopted STP format (presented in Figure 3) and the inputs 
required to build the execution products.  Ground consoles 
are considered as subsystems in SLP (like crew members in 
STP) so corresponding checklists and ground procedures 
are part of SLP.        
The Segment Products and Inputs to Integrated Products 
Development task collects the detailed plans and products 
from the system planning level and integrates them with the 
segment specific planning data. The resulting plans and 
products provide an integrated set of data representing all 
operations to be performed within a segment. This data is 
used to generate the segment-specific products, as well as 
the products required to manage and control segment 
operations from the appropriate ground control facility. 
Integrated products are provided to the station-wide 
planning level to support the development of station-wide 
plans and products, and segment-unique products are 
provided to the facilities responsible for operating the 
segments.  
The Station-Wide Plans and Products Integration task 
integrates the segment level planning data necessary to 
generate and verify the products required to support 
operations across the station. This integration is required 
due to the interdependencies that exist between the station 
segments and station systems that support operations within 
those segments. The minimum amount of data possible will 
be used to build and verify these integrated plans and 
products, with as much detail as possible left for inclusion 
in the segment-specific plans and products. Operations 
within the segment specific plans and products are 
consistent with the station-wide plans and products, and are 
subservient to them. The station-wide plans and products 
are developed by 
 7
Figure 3. Detailed System Level Plan (SLP) in the STP format. 
 8
the International Execution Planning Team at the station-
wide planning level. These products are used by the crew, 
automated systems, and ground controllers to implement, 
manage, and control onboard operations at the integrated 
station level.  
The Integrated Plan Evaluation for Concurrence with 
Partner Agreements task is performed by each of the 
partners to ensure that the resulting plan is consistent with 
the program defined agreements and commitments. This 
evaluation takes into account not only the results of the 
current planning cycle, but also the results from previous 
planning cycles. While the agreements and commitments 
may not be satisfied within the context of the results of a 
single cycle, the results from a number of cycles should 
satisfy partner requirements. This evaluation also considers 
whether the requirements of payloads located in other 
partner segments are being properly accounted for by the 
responsible partner at the segment level planning. 
Inconsistencies or the lack of satisfaction of the partner 
agreements and commitments are identified and provided to 
the station-wide planning level for resolution and 
incorporation in subsequent planning cycles.  
To ensure smoothness of the information exchange during 
distributed planning process a high level board (e.g. 
Internaional Execution Planning Control Board (IEPCB) on 
the  ISSP) should  make all data-sharing decisions and the 
onus should be on proving why data should not be shared, 
not why it should. The goal of data sharing is to provide 
conflict detection and resolution early in the planning 
process. In some cases this goal is accomplished by sharing 
with constraints that arise during each cell's planning 
process to other cells that might need to use the constraints 
or that might generate subplans that conflict with them.  An 
excerpt from a ISSP Flight Rules document below is an 
example of the constraints .  
 
 
  
  
Specific implementations of the tasks at the segment and 
system planning levels may vary depending on the 
processes and interfaces defined by each of the segment 
planning cells. The distributed planning architecture 
supports these differences through the use of resource 
distributions and concurrent planning. 
Implementation Challenges on the System Planning Level  
There are a number of challenges [3], which must be 
addressed to successfully implement this concept:  
• Numerous interfaces, for both coordination and 
data exchange, must be defined, negotiated, and 
implemented between the segment planning level 
(various segment planning cells) and the system 
planning level (the individual system 
owners/suppliers).  
• The planning process must allow sufficient time 
for each planning cell to perform its assigned 
functions while keeping the overall planning cycle 
to a reasonable duration. This requires that tasks be 
performed concurrently as much as possible.  
• The various planning cells are geographically 
distributed around the globe. A significant amount 
of coordination, with regular teleconferences is 
required to ensure that program objectives and 
agreements are satisfied.  
• State-of-the-art software, which provides the 
capabilities to distribute resources across multiple 
planning organizations and to integrate multiple 
plans and products, is required to implement this 
distributed planning process.  
• Common data exchange formats are required.  
• Rigorous configuration management processes 
must be established and adhered to in order to 
ensure that all planning organizations are using a 
consistent set of planning data, and that planning is 
performed within defined constraints and resource 
distributions.  
• Changes in the current space operations culture 
must be implemented to enable or empower 
distributed planning teams to actively participate in 
the planning process. These changes must be 
implemented in a manner that ensures crew and 
station safety.  
 
Figure 4. Exp10_B2-4 Flight Rule 
 9
5. PLANNING DATA INTEGRATION 
''The chief cause of problems is solutions.'' 
Eric Sevareid 
During the last few years, as data on the ISSP have become 
increasingly decentralized and distributed, the importance 
and challenges of planning data integration have increased. 
The volume of data that planning teams are managing, the 
variety of data formats, and users’ velocity requirements for 
access to information have all increased dramatically. 
Likewise, data integration technology has advanced to meet 
the more challenging data consistency management 
requirements created by these demands for access to 
information. Today, planning teams on the ISSP have a 
wealth of technologies from which to choose to meet their 
various data integration requirements, including database 
replication, Extraction, Transformation, and Loading (ETL), 
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI), Enterprise 
Information Integration (EII), database gateways, data 
quality and cleansing, metadata management, portals, and 
information logistics agents. Which technology is the most 
appropriate for the planning data integration on the ISSP 
and, particularly, on the system planning level? Each 
technology satisfies different data volume/velocity/variety 
and business requirements. However, a more pragmatic and 
unified approach is needed to simplify this complexity. 
Business user requirements for access to and manipulation 
of planning information dictate requirements to the 
integrating team for data integration technologies. These 
requirements fall into five patterns tailored from [4]. 
Pattern 1: Mission Planning Continuity 
With planning cells dispersed on the ISSP across many 
different geographies and time zones, it is a requirement 
that access to planning information has to be provided 24x7, 
365 days a year. To accommodate all users’ needs for 
access, data for one application may be artificially 
distributed for some reasons. In these scenarios, typically, 
data from the source system is moved on a regular schedule 
to the receiving target system. Once updates to the source 
are complete and maintenance is finished, a new replica 
copy can be delivered to the receiving system again, 
overlying the previous version. Duplicate copies can be 
created so they can be maintained offline while users 
continue to access the alternative copy. In addition, for 
disaster recovery reasons, duplicate copies of data may be 
kept in separate locations. 
Pattern 2: Business Intelligence 
Different planning teams require access to data for their 
own unique analysis in support of their decision making [4]. 
Even the same planning information on a particular system 
may need to be organized and refined in various different 
ways (such as varying degrees of detail versus summarized 
records – e.g. STP[2] versus SLP proposed on the Figure 3) 
to meet different analytical requirements. To meet a broad 
and diverse set of business intelligence (BI) requirements, 
planning and operational data from various sources on the 
ISSP have to be consolidated, reorganized, and refined into 
planning data warehouse, operational data stores, reporting 
systems, and other applications to support analytical needs. 
Here again, data typically moves in a unidirectional manner, 
but from multiple sources into one target. The Integrated 
Planning System (IPS) existing on the ISSP is one of the 
planning data warehouses on the station-wide planning 
level. A key characteristic of this pattern is that the data is 
being transformed or aggregated along the way to meet the 
specific needs of planning. 
Pattern 3: Multi-Step Planning Process Coordination 
Because operational applications including planning tools 
on the ISSP have been developed over many years 
independently of each other, most planning cells have a 
number of "siloed" applications. Over the years, many of 
the silos have been integrated by shipping files from one to 
another, often by manually writing scripts that move data 
from one point to another, reflecting the recognition that the 
output of one silo is in fact the input required by another 
silo. Any singular system may potentially create multiple 
output files to be sent to various receiving systems, each 
designed independently, such that the output file must be 
reformatted into multiple unique files. The same systems 
can also be accessed by multiple scripts, processing the 
same information over and over again. Consequently, many 
on the ISSP have found their operations hampered by the 
resulting "spaghetti" network of cross-application 
interdependencies manifested as point-to-point interfaces. 
However, what these interface networks accomplish is the 
automation of a multi-step planning process. Information is 
moved from system to system in the sequence required by 
this overarching planning process. Key to this pattern, 
however, is that the sent information is used as the input for 
a particular function to develop a planning product. The 
receiving system rarely accepts this input as direct updates 
to its database or data model. Rather, by using native 
application-layer interfaces and its native validation and 
editing logic for input, the receiving system’s data integrity 
and transactional integrity are preserved (see Figure 5) [4]. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Figure 5. Basis for data integration: Business Events vs. 
Data vs. Messages vs. Transactions 
 10
Pattern 4: Synchronization of Distributed Planning Data 
With distributed copies of similar or related data and 
requirements for reducing the latency of the shared 
information, various copies of planning data may have to be 
synchronized in a near-real-time fashion. This occurs when 
the processes of the various systems are unrelated, yet there 
are common data elements. Logic must be written to 
reconcile both formatting (syntax) and semantic variations 
in the copies. This logic is encapsulated as an information 
logistics agent (ILA), running independently of any singular 
application. The ILA essentially represents a new process 
that is laid over existing data structures to resolve 
inconsistencies in the data resulting from prior distribution. 
The risk in this design, however, is that this new logic lives 
outside of any process/application and creates an alternative 
method by which data state is changed. For example, this 
kind of update logic circumvents any editing and validation 
rules that are coded into the business application that 
natively owns the data model/database. In this 
circumvention, transactional integrity can be corrupted [4]. 
Pattern 5: Visibility of Planning Information Assets 
Certain pieces of information on mission planning and 
operations should be available to senior-level managers and 
executives at their fingertips. Usually, the need is for access 
only, not updating. Thus, direct online access to information 
sources has to be provided in such a way that is secure and 
that is not have too much of a performance impact on the 
native application and users utilizing the data source [4]. 
Planning Data Integration Architectures 
What is common in most of these scenarios is the need for 
planning data — planning data that is up-to-date, relevant, 
and provided in a timely manner. Data integration 
technology, in all of its various flavors mentioned earlier, 
can be appropriate for each of these patterns. It has to be 
noted that, in each case, the movement of information starts 
(with data extraction) or ends (with data loading) at the 
database level of the application architecture. Furthermore, 
the data integration engine can exist either close to the 
source, on the target, or on a distinct platform altogether — 
whatever is most appropriate given the physical 
connectivity between them, the available skills, and the 
available resources to host the middleware [4]. 
EAI and Data Integration 
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) technology (also 
known as an integration server) is one form of integration 
technology that has been often used for data integration on 
the ISSP. In this scenario, data is written into a message 
queue (acting as the envelope and mailbox) and forwarded 
to the EAI broker. The intelligence in the EAI broker 
decides how to route the information to the target database. 
However, the information is received via a message queue 
or the target application’s native application program 
interface (API) before the receiving database is updated. For 
this reason, EAI is not a true data integration technology. 
However, its most frequent use is in such data integration 
scenarios. 
6. PROPOSED APPROACH TO DATA INTEGRATION 
"Nobody can pull a rabbit out of a hat unless somebody has 
put it in first!"  
Wernher von Braun 
Even if the integration office can appropriately identify the 
right integration technology to the planning data integration 
problem as described above, it still has the puzzle of what 
resources are needed to implement these technologies and 
integration scenarios. Each of these disparate technologies 
has its own user interface to the developer, brings its own 
development environment, has its own metadata repository 
to document the interface, has its own security framework, 
and has its own management framework. Rather than 
having multiple data integration technologies, ideally the 
integration office would like to have one product that 
supports all data integration requirements with a single user 
interface, development language or tool, metadata 
repository, security framework, and management 
framework. A consolidated data integration platform should 
support data consistency management requirements across a 
broad, diverse set of Database Management Systems 
(DBMSs), platforms, and data types. To do this, it should be 
able to leverage native DBMS-provided interfacing 
mechanisms (such as bulk loaders, APIs, and load utilities) 
as well as support portable, standards-based access 
mechanisms for reading and writing into the databases. 
In addition, to accommodate both the shrinking 
maintenance window and users’ appetite for increasingly 
current information, a unified data integration platform 
should be able to capture net changes at the source and 
reduce the volume of incremental updates to the target. This 
changed data capture capability can be achieved through 
various means (e.g., timestamps, database logs, event-based 
flagging of data, DBMS triggers, DBMS stored procedures) 
[4]. 
This is important in mission planning continuity scenarios, 
BI scenarios, multi-step planning process coordination 
patterns, and synchronization of distributed planning data 
patterns. Furthermore, the unified platform has to provide 
an adequate metadata management layer to define and easily 
refine the reconciliation of semantic and syntactic 
differences between sources and targets. The data 
integration technology should not pretend to replace the 
centralized metadata management for the planning process 
on the ISSP. Rather, the enterprise metadata management 
architecture should interface with the metadata management 
layer of the data integration platform. This metadata 
management layer is of utmost importance for information 
consistency. The metadata repository should house the data 
 11
definitions and the business rules for driving semantic 
reconciliation. An example of a repository structure 
component proposed for data integration on the ISSP at 
Canadian Space Agency is presented in Figure 6.  
A unified product would present a single user interface to 
developers. A data integration specialist have one tool with 
one learning curve and one development language (such as 
Structured Query Language (SQL)) or paradigm to learn 
that can be applied to various data integration projects in the 
future. Ideally, the development environment should be 
graphical, iconic, easy to learn and easy to use, generating a 
standard programming language (such as SQL or Java) to 
simplify data access. 
The latency of data is also important to mission planners. 
There is their huge interest in real-time or near-real-time 
information. The “real time” should be also defined as a 
term related to mission planning and operations business 
event integrity, not only to absolute time. Planning system 
must deliver data (and make it available) to users that is 
“fresh, but mature enough” (or “current within an 
established degree of certainty”) for the individual or 
process using it. 
Thus, a consolidated data integration platform should be 
able to support multiple degrees of latency, ranging from 
batch to real-time, and multiple transport technologies such 
as direct database connections, file transfer, message 
queues, event-driven operations, and even e-mail 
attachments. Finally, when data is accessed for analytical 
purposes, such as in BI and information visibility patterns, it 
represents a secondary, independent usage of the 
information.  
7. CONCLUSION 
"One of the symptoms of an approaching nervous 
breakdown is the belief that one's work is terribly 
important.'' 
Bertrand Russell 
Because of the ISSP nature and its unique mission 
characteristics, fully centralized planning is not a viable 
option. A planning process should be designed the way, 
which includes the participation of the geographically 
dispersed experts. Therefore a distributed planning 
approach could be adopted to satisfy the requirements of the 
ISSP.  
 
The key to a successful planning is to develop an approach, 
which meets the needs all of the planning community and 
the ISSP. The distributed planning approach provides a 
robust and flexible planning which support the phased 
development of the Space Station, accommodate a large 
number of geographically distributed planners, 
accommodate diverse and dynamic system complements, 
such as the Mobile Servicing System, as well as provide for 
operational flexibility.  
Integration of distributed planning data on the ISSP is 
simple from a communication perspective, but it is 
extremely challenging from a data perspective.  
A data integration solution on the ISSP should rely on 
industry standards for software engineering to achieve 
connectivity, reliability and data integrity required. The 
ideal solution supports any version of any database used on  
 
ON_ORBIT_OBJECTS
ON_ORBIT_O_DEFINITION
ACRONYM
ID
DESCRIPTION
COMMENTS
NAME
ON_ORBIT_O_ID
ON_O_OBJ_T_ID ON_ORBIT_OBJECT_TYPES
COMMENTS
DESCRIPTION
ID
ON_O_OBJ_T_DEFINITION
NAME
ON_O_OBJ_T_ID
ON_O_OBJ_T_ON_O_OBJ_T_FK
ON_ORBIT_O_ON_O_OBJ_T_FK
ON_ORBIT_O_ON_ORBIT_O_FK
Figure 6.  An example of a metadata repository structure component  
 12
the ISSP, any file format and any application, including 
legacy, as well as future versions.  
The ideal data integration solution takes full advantage of 
all advanced integration tools currently exist so that the 
entire data integration process can be defined graphically 
without the need to write code. Once the specifications for 
the data integration process are expressed, the tool should 
automatically generate the native code and direct it to the 
appropriate components for execution. Manual scripting is 
eventually only be used to perform small batch integration 
processes, since they are time-consuming, not portable, and 
very costly to maintain. The proposed approach to 
implement planning data integration on the ISSP is one 
which enable development without manual coding and offer 
powerful code generators such as Computer Aided Software 
Engineering tools (e.g. ORACLE 9i Designer) that use 
reliable Relational DataBase Management System 
(RDBMS) engines to do the work – ensuring portability, 
consistency, and high-performance across platforms. 
With the escalation of planning data management issues 
(e.g. increasing volume of data to be managed, increasing 
variety of data sources to be integrated, etc.), planning 
community on space programs, such as the ISSP and the 
"Moon-to-Mars" program, should adopt data integration 
solutions that accommodate a broader set of mission 
planning needs. Data integration tools with singular 
abilities, such as data warehouse populating, application-
level integration, database replication, data synchronization, 
virtual data integration, are not workable solutions for 
nearest future projects.  
The author feels the approach proposed for both distributed 
system planning and corresponding data integration is a 
viable and is being actively pursued for implementation. 
The approach will need to be revisited to accommodate 
changes as the ISSP evolves. Also, it is acknowledged that 
certain functions associated with the approach are required 
further study and development. 
REFERENCES  
[1] Alexandre Popov, “Mission Planning on the International 
Space Station Program. Concepts and Systems”, 2003 
IEEE Aerospace Conference proceedings, March 2003 
[2] Alexandre Popov, “Mission Planning and Data Integration 
on the International Space Station Program”, 2004 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference proceedings, March 2004 
[3] Jeff Hagopian, Theresa Maxwell, Tracy Reed, "A 
Distributed Planning Concept for Space Station Payload 
Operations", Third Symposium on Space Mission 
Operations and Ground Data Systems, Greenbelt, MD, 
November 15-18, 1994. 
[4] META Group, "The Future of Data Integration 
Technologies", White Paper, February 2004 
[5] NASA, International Space Station Alpha Program, 
Concept of Operation and Utilization, SSP 50011-01, 
Vol. 1, Principles, October 1994. 
[6] NASA, International Space Station Alpha Program, 
Concept of Operation and Utilization, SSP 50011-03, 
Vol. 3, Processes, November 1994. 
 [7] NASA/RSA Technical Interchange Meeting minutes, 
1995-1997 
BIOGRAPHY 
 Alexandre Popov is a Mission Planner and Operations 
Engineer on the ISS program at Canadian Space Agency. 
As a data architect and business analyst he developed and 
led development software for long duration mission 
planning on MIR and ISS programs at the Energia Rocket 
Space Corporation (Russia) [1987-1997]. He is currently 
working on “Data and Software Integration on the ISS 
program at Canadian Space Agency” project. 
 
 
