 1
SEIS: A Decision Support System for Optimizing 
Spacecraft Operations Strategies 
 
M. Pantoquilho, N. Viana, R. Ferreira - UNINOVA-CRI, Campus of New University of Lisbon,  
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal, {mp, nv, rmf}@uninova.pt 
J. Moura Pires - DI/CENTRIA, Campus of New University of Lisbon,  
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal jmp@di.fct.unl.pt 
A. Donati – ESA/ESOC – OPS-OSC, Robert-Bosch-Strasse 5, 
64293 Darmstadt, Germany, Alessandro.Donati@esa.int 
A. Baumgartner – SOLENIX GmbH, c/o ESA/ESOC – OPS-OSC, Robert-Bosch-Strasse 5, 
64293 Darmstadt, Germany, Alexander.Baumgartner@esa.int 
F. Di Marco – VEGA IT GmbH, c/o ESA/ESOC, Robert-Bosch-Strasse 5, 
64293 Darmstadt, Germany, Federico.Di.Marco@esa.int 
L. Peñin, T. Hormigo – Deimos Eng SA, Polo Tecnológico de Lisboa, Lote 1, 
1600-546 Lisboa, Portugal, luis-felipe.penin@deimos.com.pt 
 
Abstract—Keeping123 the spacecraft (S/C) healthy and 
productive is the responsibility and the main concern of the 
S/C flight control team (FCT). Space weather includes 
effects and conditions that favour the aging of a S/C and its 
instruments, e.g. degradation of sensors and solar arrays by 
charged particles and single event upsets (SEU). It is worth 
to stress out that it is hard to detect when the environmental 
conditions of a S/C are safe and when they are hazardous. 
So far, the most widely used approach of a FCT to 
counteract these effects has been to play safe. Playing safe, 
i.e. invoking counter measures early enough and keeping 
them for a long enough period, is a means to reduce the risk, 
but it is not the most efficient one. The dynamics of space 
weather could lead to situations where the instruments are 
shielded hours before the conditions become really 
hazardous. On the other hand it might happen that the FCT 
assumes safe conditions long before they actually are. 
Clearly the S/C productivity – i.e. the observation time – is 
being affected by this approach. 
A major concern is the availability and acquisition of data. 
A lot of space weather data is available from many sources 
in different formats and predictions are scarce and often not 
directly applicable to an individual S/C. It is therefore 
almost impossible for a FCT member to consider all these 
sources. Furthermore the available sources for space 
weather data provide their data offline or at best near real-
time. Therefore the S/C may be already in a hazardous 
environment when the FCT receives this information.  
A decision support system is currently being implemented 
for ESA. Entitled “Space Environment Information System 
for Mission Control Purposes (SEIS)” the system integrates 
a huge variety of space weather data from different sources 
                                                          
1 0-7803-8870-4/05/$20.00© 2005 IEEE 
2 IEEEAC paper #1147, Version 3, Updated September 17, 2004 
3 ESA © 2005 With Permission to IEEE  
as well as S/C telemetry data from running missions. All 
this data is stored it in a data-warehouse. 
Having S/C and space weather data available from one 
single source, facilitates the analysis of this data therefore 
enhancing user awareness of space weather effects and 
possible cause-effect relationships between space weather 
events and S/C anomalous conditions.  
The system provides an interface to external applications to 
include data produced by physical models for the space 
environment and its effects. Furthermore, trained artificial 
neural networks or other plug-in tools can access all the data 
and produce forecasts for certain parameters. These 
forecasts can be fed back into the data-warehouse and be 
used for monitoring, analysis and operations planning. 
The reference mission for SEIS is INTEGRAL, ESA’s 
gamma ray observatory. It also includes data from other 
ESA missions: ENVISAT and XMM. The main objective 
for INTEGRAL is to maximize the payload instruments’ 
time while operating in safe condition, resulting in an 
increase of the S/C’s productivity. 
The system is a prototype whose objective is the proof of 
concept for new emerging technologies applicable to the 
mission operations domain, increasing the quality and 
effectiveness of mission operations management. 
The paper presents the system, focusing on the application 
of the new technologies to support the FCT in their critical 
decision making process and its expected impact in the 
INTEGRAL’s operations strategy. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ..................................................... 2 
2. THE SEIS SYSTEM CONCEPT............................... 2 
 2
3. SEIS ARCHITECTURE AND TECHNOLOGY ...........3 
4. DATA PROCESSING MODULE ................................5 
5. FORECASTING MODULE........................................5 
6. DATA INTEGRATION MODULE ..............................7 
7. CLIENT TOOLS ......................................................9 
8. METADATA REPOSITORY ....................................11 
9. CONCLUSIONS......................................................11 
10. FUTURE WORK..................................................12 
11. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT .......................................12 
12. REFERENCES .....................................................12 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Space weather is the combination of conditions on the sun 
and in the solar wind, magnetosphere, ionosphere and 
thermosphere that can influence the performance, integrity 
and reliability of space-borne and ground-based 
technological systems and that can affect human life and 
health [1]. The main driver for space weather near the Earth 
is the sun, i.e. the solar wind, solar flares, coronal mass 
ejections. These phenomena affect and are affected by the 
Earth magnetic field which usually shields the Earth 
effectively from the hazardous space weather effects. 
Spacecrafts (S/C) are by their nature more susceptible to 
space weather events than ground-based systems. They are 
in an environment where the Earth magnetic field is weaker 
and therefore they are less shielded. Furthermore S/Cs 
usually carry sensitive instruments and other components 
that can easily be damaged by electromagnetic events. 
Typical cases are single event upsets (SEU) that flip a bit in 
the on-board memory, corrosion of the solar arrays, 
degradation of sensors, S/C charging. All these effects favor 
the aging of the S/C and can lead to malfunctioning of 
components, data loss, and in extreme cases complete 
unavailability of services up to mission loss. 
Currently, S/C operations at the European Space Agency 
(ESA) follow some simple risk avoidance procedures to 
counteract hazardous space weather events: switching off 
instruments’ high voltages and transition to safe operating 
modes. However, these procedures are based on worst-case 
scenarios and normally require switching off the scientific 
instruments for a long period. Furthermore, there is the 
problem that once the sensors are off, the S/C is ‘blind’, i.e. 
it can only roughly be estimated – based on experience and 
other data sources – when the conditions are safe again. 
Instruments might be shut down or shielded even if there is 
only a transient radiation peak or they might be turned on or 
opened too early, when the radiation level is still high. 
Another drawback of this approach is also that usually a 
single threshold for the radiation level decides whether the 
environment is save or hazardous. All this can lead to poor 
instrument usage (science operation time) and to 
unnecessary stress for the components.  
The availability of accurate real-time information about the 
ongoing space weather conditions along with better 
predictions of radiation levels could greatly improve these 
operations. However, such services are currently not 
available or only very sparse. Although some information 
can be found on Internet, it has to be acquired from many 
different places in many different formats. It is almost 
impossible for a FCT to collect all the relevant information 
and interpret it correctly. Another problem is also that a 
great part of this data should be adapted to the conditions 
relevant for the specific S/C. 
This paper describes a system that is currently being 
implemented for ESA, called “Space Environment 
Information System for Mission Control Purposes (SEIS)”.  
The objective of the system is to provide relevant 
information to FCTs to support the decision-making 
processes about how to react to ongoing space weather 
conditions. Furthermore the system increases awareness and 
understanding of space weather and its effects on S/C 
performance. All together it should lead to more efficient 
operations and possibly to an increase of the quality of the 
services as well as the safety of the payloads. 
SEIS has been proposed to ESA by a partnership between 
UNINOVA and DEIMOS as part of the Space Weather 
Pilot Project (SWPP). It will be installed and run at the 
European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in Darmstadt, 
Germany. INTEGRAL serves as reference mission for 
SEIS, but also other ESA missions provide data to be 
included in the data warehouse of SEIS, i.e. the SEU 
database of ENVISAT and XMM telemetry data.  
The paper focuses on the application of new technologies to 
support the FCT in their critical decision making process 
and its expected impact on INTEGRAL’s operations 
strategies. 
Next section presents the SEIS overview, describing its 
context, goals and expected benefits. The third section 
presents the system’s architecture. Afterwards, the SEIS 
system’s main modules are described from sections four to 
six, followed by the SEIS client tools. The paper ends with 
the conclusions and some ideas for future work and 
expected results. 
2. THE SEIS SYSTEM CONCEPT  
SEIS includes the collection of historical, real-time and 
forecast space weather data from various data sources 
relevant for flight operations. Additionally, the telemetry 
and orbital data of several satellites will be collected and 
integrated. Finally, the data of selected space weather 
models will be made available. The space weather raw data 
will be transformed afterwards into information and 
 3
knowledge with higher levels of abstraction, thus allowing 
the delivery of a set of space weather services designed for 
mission control purposes directly in the control room. 
For the INTEGRAL (International Gamma Ray 
Astrophysics Laboratory) [4] mission the SEIS main goal is 
to optimize the payload’s operating time (under safe 
condition) by forecasting relevant space weather conditions 
(such as radiation belt entry/exit)4 , integrating the mission’s 
historical database of SEU (Single Event Upset) and to 
provide tools to explore possible correlation between S/C 
behaviour and space weather events. This will imply an 
increase of the instrument’s life expectancy/usage with 
benefits on the effective observation time thereby increasing 
the instruments scientific return. 
For the ENVISAT [5] mission, an advanced polar-orbiting 
Earth observation satellite, the system will integrate the 
mission’s historical database of SEU exploring possible 
correlations between SEU occurrences, S/C orbital position 
and specific space weather conditions at S/C orbital 
locations, which in turn will allow the direct identification 
of cause-effect relationships between space weather events 
and SEU’s occurrences. 
For the XMM-Newton (X-ray Multi Mirror) space 
observatory mission [6], possible benefits will be the 
exploration, data analysis and correlation between  space 
weather and XMM’s telemetry data.  
The expected user benefits provided by SEIS include: 
(1) increased awareness of space weather causes and 
effects on the S/C health status; 
(2) improved operational productivity and safety; 
(3) increased science return and extended life time. 
SEIS
Forecasting Module
Alarm Engine
SEIS 
Data
Integration
Module
SEIS
External Data 
Service Providers
SEIS 
Monitoring 
Tool
SEIS 
Reporting & 
Analysis Tool
Space Weather Data
Space Weather 
Events
S/C Telemetry
Data
S/C SEU
Occurrences
S/C Orbital Position
SEIS
Data 
Processing 
Module
SEIS
Metadata Module
 
Figure 1 - SEIS general architecture. 
                                                          
4 Due to the characteristic of the INTEGRAL orbit and to the concurrent 
effect of the solar activity, the position (altitude) of Belt Entry is varying 
considerably along the year [see ESA Technical Note “INTEGRAL 
Radiation Belts passage characteristic”, F. Di Marco, VEGA-IT GmbH, 
Darmstadt 2003] 
The envisaged architecture (Figure 1) consists of an 
integrated repository (SEIS Data Integration Module) 
containing space weather data from external sources, orbital 
data and onboard telemetry from INTEGRAL and XMM-
Newton missions, complemented by forecast data.  
The original set of heterogeneous data is made available, by 
applying data extraction, transformation and loading 
techniques (SEIS Data Processing Module), as a single 
integrated source of data, to the users. The main 
services/functionalities offered to users are: 
(1) Near real-time monitoring (online) of a user defined 
subset of the collected data, in particular 
INTEGRAL’s instrument parameters through the SEIS 
Monitoring Tool (MT). In addition to monitoring the 
instruments’ status, the tool will also be able to issue 
alarms by identifying possible instrument anomalous 
conditions and even suggest recovery actions to be 
taken, in order to minimize instrument degradation. 
The knowledge needed to identify anomalous 
conditions, trigger out-of-limit (OOL) alarms and 
suggest recovery actions will be extracted from the 
INTEGRAL’s Flight Operation Plan [3]. The alarm’s 
inference is done by the supporting Alarm Engine 
service. 
(2) Offline data exploration and correlation analysis, 
through the SEIS Reporting and Analysis Tool (RAT). 
This tool allows report creation as well as analysis of 
all stored data (space weather, telemetry, orbital data, 
SEUs occurrences) using On-Line Analytical 
Processing (OLAP) querying technology. 
(3) Generation of forecast data (SEIS Forecasting 
Module) based on both well-known physical space 
weather models and Artificial Neural Networks for 
generic time series prediction (i.e. telemetry trend 
forecasting taking into account already known 
seasonal effects). 
3. SEIS ARCHITECTURE AND TECHNOLOGY 
Figure 2 depicts the SEIS system’s detailed architecture, 
which is composed of four main components: the Data 
Processing Module (the system’s supporting services for 
data extraction, transformation and loading); the 
Forecasting Module (physical space weather models and 
Artificial Neural Networks for generic time series 
prediction); the Data Integration Module which composes 
the system’s data infrastructure along with the Metadata 
Module; and the Client Tools (MT and RAT tools). Both 
infrastructure and services are server-side modules. The 
client tools are the client-side components that are used by 
users to access the integrated data.  
 4
In this section, an overview on each of the system’s 
architecture modules is presented together with the 
associated technology. 
Main Modules 
The basic SEIS infrastructure (Figure 1) include the Data 
Integration Module, where all externally retrieved data 
(space weather and S/C data) and internally generated data 
(such as triggered alarms, SEU occurrences and time series 
data forecasting) are collected and integrated and the Data 
Processing Module, which is responsible for the retrieving, 
extraction, transformation and loading of all relevant data 
(available on each of the identified External Data Service 
Providers or generated at request, by the components in the 
Forecasting Module). 
Acting as a provider of complementary data, we can find the 
Forecasting Module. This module is capable of generating 
space weather data estimations and generic time series 
forecasts for S/C telemetry data. 
The Client Tools are the principal human machine interface 
with the users. It encompasses the Monitoring Tool, the 
Reporting and Analysis Tool and the Alarm Editor, to allow 
maintainability and evolution of the alarm definitions. 
Finally, the SEIS system incorporates a centralized metadata 
repository, whose importance has grown to a point where it 
made sense to allocate its functionalities to its own module 
– the Metadata Repository Module. This module provides 
the whole SEIS modules’ infrastructure with an easy and 
maintainable manner of managing all metadata associated 
and shared by all modules (Data Processing, Forecasting, 
Data Integration and even Client Tools). 
Data 
Data integration is the key concept of SEIS. From several 
heterogeneous sources and domains data are collected, 
extracted, transformed, cleansed and stored in repositories 
able to support data mining. 
The two data domains used in the SEIS system are space 
weather and S/C. Space weather data includes parameters 
(e.g. daily storm indexes, 1-minute proton fluxes at different 
energy levels, hourly magnetic field components, solar 
wind, daily sunspot numbers, etc); and events (e.g. 
Geomagnetic Storms; Solar Flares; Coronal Mass Ejections; 
Radio Bursts at different Frequencies, etc). As such, the 
total number of parameters in the system amounts to 558 
units (including different space weather events and 
parameters that have a sampling rate between one minute 
and one day). S/C data includes INTEGRAL and XMM 
missions’ telemetry, XMM, INTEGRAL and ENVISAT 
missions’ orbital data (revolutions, spatial positions) and 
INTEGRAL and ENVISAT’s Single Event Upset’s 
databases. A total of 180 parameters are stored in the 
system, from which 164 have a sampling rate of 8 seconds. 
Space weather data stored in the system covers the period 
from 1994 until now for a subset of available parameters. 
S/C data will include the three missions’ complete dataset: 
XMM (in orbit since December 1999) [6], INTEGRAL( in 
orbit since October 2002) [4] and ENVISAT (in orbit since 
March 2002) [5]. 
This data is extracted, cleaned and transformed by the Data 
Processing Module and stored in the Data Integration 
 
 
Figure 2 - SEIS system detailed architecture. 
 5
Module. All information about the stored parameters and 
events is managed by the Metadata Repository (e.g. 
sampling rates, data source, etc). 
4. DATA PROCESSING MODULE 
It encompasses functionalities needed to move all identified 
data from source(s) (typically legacy systems) to target 
system(s) (usually databases containing high quality data). 
This technology is most commonly known as ETL[7], 
which stands for Extraction (retrieving necessary data from 
countless data streams), Transformation (before being 
loaded into the target databases, data needs to be checked 
for coherency and consistency and it has to be integrated) 
and Loading (which means, as the name implies, the final 
loading of the prepared data into the target database 
structures). For the past 20 years, this technology has been 
used mainly in the business area, where constantly growing 
volumes of data have been collected. Therefore, it is easily 
understandable, why business applications have been the 
driving force of this technology. 
The Data Processing Module (Figure 3)is made of two 
main sub-components, the Uniform Data Access Proxy 
(UDAP) and the Uniform Data Extractor and Transformer 
(UDET). The Data Processing Module interacts with 
external Data Service Providers (providers of space weather 
and S/C data) and also the Forecasting and Data 
Integration Module. 
The UDAP engine retrieves data files and sends them to the 
UDET engine. The UDET engine evaluates and selects the 
correct File Format Definition to apply. The file is then 
processed (field extraction and transformation) by the 
UDET service and finally the file outputs are sent into the 
Staging Area. The Staging Area can be thought of as the 
main data buffer of the Data Integration Module. As new 
data is retrieved and loaded via the pipeline formed by the 
UDAP and UDET into the Staging Area, its contents are 
periodically loaded both in the Online Data Storage (ODS), 
which directly supports the Monitoring Tool and Alarm 
Engine and the Data Warehouse, which is the structure 
holding the global collection of historical data and the 
structural supporter of the Reporting and Analysis Tool’s 
activities.  
Integration with data generators 
In addition to the features previously described and the 
interaction with the Data Integration Module, the Data 
Processing Module provides an interface solution with other 
SEIS data generators. Given the prototype scope, the UDAP 
component will be interfacing with the two existing 
components of the Forecasting Module (the Mission 
Modelling Module – 3M and the Artificial Neural Network 
Engine). These components are capable of generating space 
weather data estimations and S/C telemetry predictions at 
the UDAP’s request, just like an ordinary Data Service 
Provider. Figure 3 depicts the mechanisms developed in 
order to interact with the Forecasting Module components 
and Data Integration Module components. 
 
Figure 3 - Detailed Data Processing Module and interacting 
components. 
5. FORECASTING MODULE 
The Forecasting Module is made of two components: the 
Mission Modelling Module Engine (3M Engine) and the 
Artificial Neural Networks Engine (ANN Engine). Both 
modules produce data estimations or forecasts based on 
historical data inside the Data Integration Module. The 3M 
Engine estimations are based on physical and mathematical 
models while the ANN Engine uses learning neural network 
models to build its predictions. 
Mission Modelling Module Engine 
The Mission Modelling Module Engine (3M Engine, 
Figure 4) is SEIS’s element dedicated to the prediction 
of S/C positions, and the corresponding space 
environment parameters at the predicted locations of the 
S/C. For this purpose, a series of physical and 
mathematical space environment models were carefully 
selected and compiled in 3M. They aim at: 
(1) Orbit propagation: high-fidelity numerical orbit 
propagator based upon meaningful Dynamics, 
Kinematics and Environment (DKE) models;  
(2) Prediction of space environment variables: generation 
of estimated values for different space environment 
elements related to the near-Earth region – 
atmosphere, ionosphere, plasmasphere and 
 6
magnetosphere, radiation belts, solar wind and cosmic 
rays; these models have been thoroughly selected by 
space weather experts, according to quality, relevance, 
availability, and also due to priority issues related to 
the framework of SEIS.  
(3) Input/Output interface with the Data Processing 
Module, for the reception and interpretation of queries, 
as well as proper formatting of the parameters for 
adequate use within SEIS. 
 
PARTICLE MODELS 
DKE 
(Orbit 
Propagator) 
RESTITUTED 
ORBIT 
LATEST 
SPACE 
WEATHER 
DATA 
HISTORICAL 
SPACE 
WEATHER 
DATA 
GALACTIC COSMIC RAYS 
GEOMAGNETICALLY TRAPPED PARTICLES 
SOLAR ENERGETIC PARTICLES 
PLASMA MODELS 
IIONOSPHERIC PLASMA 
SOLAR WIND 
MAGNETOSPHERIC PLASMA 
EFFECTS MODELS 
RADIATION EFFECTS 
PREDICTED ORBIT 
Mission Modelling Module (3M) 
3M output 
CHARGING EFFECTS 
Human Machine Interface (HMI) 
 
Figure 4 - Mission Modelling Module (3M) architectural 
overview. 
Externally provided data, which are used by 3M to produce 
the specified space environment parameters, consist of: 
(1) Latest S/C orbit states, as determined by the reference 
orbit solution provider (in the current case the 
European Space Operations Centre (ESOC/ESA) in 
Darmstadt, Germany), is used as the initial state for the 
orbit propagator. The initial epoch for the 
determination of space environment and effects 
parameters can however be defined separately. 
(2) Space weather data, originating from several reference 
data providers (NOAA, SIDC, WDC-C2 Kyoto, etc.) 
The data from external sources is accompanied by a 
time tag. The age of the data will then determine the 
quality of the parameters provided by 3M, and can 
take one of three values per parameter: good, 
acceptable, or poor. In this way, it will always be 
possible to identify situations in which parameters are 
being provided with space weather data that is no 
longer valid, or with an orbit solution, which no longer 
corresponds to actual S/C trajectory.  
A significant number of the space environment models used 
by the 3M block comes from the SPENVIS [10] software 
suite, complemented by other models implemented and 
validated at Deimos Engenharia, with extensive research of 
existing literature. 
Orbit propagator - At a pre-defined frequency, the Data 
Processing Module will request from 3M an estimation, for 
a given S/C, of a set of space environment parameters 
(typically all), for an upcoming period of several hours, at a 
given sampling rate. The 3M block uses the latest orbital 
state estimates for the S/C under scrutiny, generating the 
trajectory for the period under request, and yielding the 
expected space environment parameters, along the 
trajectory, with the given sampling period.  
A high-fidelity orbit propagator ensures the space 
environment data will cover entire orbits with acceptable 
precision..  
Table 1 contains the list of all models implemented in the 
3M. 
Component Model 
AP-8 
AE-8-MAX / Vampola ESA-SEE-1 
Vampola 
MEAINTEG 
Vampola 
MEAMAX 
Geomagnetically Trapped Particles 
 
Vampola 
MEAPROB 
Solar Energetic Particles and Cosmic 
Rays 
 
CREME 
Ionospheric Plasma IRI-2001 
Plasmasphere Carpenter-Anderson 
Garret-DeForest 
Sibeck Outer Magnetosphere 
ECSS Analytical Model 
Solar wind Plasma ECSS Analytical Model 
High-energy Solar Electromagnetic 
Flux ECSS Reference Spectrum 
IGRF 
Geomagnetic field 
Tsyganenko 92 
Atmospheric  MSIS-E-90 
 Table 1 - 3M Estimated Components and Models 
 
The 3M acts on a request by the Data Processing Module. It 
first extracts the full structure of the request from the 
original XML format into a manageable C++ structure. It 
then re-orders and groups the individual parameter requests 
in a stack, so that each model only needs to be execute once. 
  
 7
Artificial Neural Networks Module 
The second module, which composes the Forecasting 
Module, also acts as data generator. In this specific case, the 
user is able to plug-in externally created Artificial Neural 
Network (ANN) models and use them as an ordinary Data 
Service Provider [11]. Moreover, the ANN Engine uses data 
from the Data Integration Module system provided through 
the Data Processing Module. The interfacing 
communication layer between these models and the Data 
Processing Module is achieved by using Web Services 
functionalities.  
The ANN models represent the experimental part of the 
SEIS system. It is planned to train and develop specific 
ANN, using historical data and then have them plugged in 
to the system to forecast data or to modulate the output of  a 
physical model.  
An example is the modelling of the seasonal or temporary 
variation of the radiation belts around the earth, along the 
S/C trajectory, based on recent solar activity data and recent 
S/C radiation measurements. It is expected, once the models 
are properly trained and validated, to increase the temporal 
and spatial precision prediction of when the S/C crosses the 
radiation belts. 
6. DATA INTEGRATION MODULE 
The Data Integration Module is made of five distinct 
components: (i) Staging area; (ii) Data Warehouse; (iii) 
Data Marts; (iv) Operational Data Store; and (v) Alarm 
Engine. 
Staging Area 
The first level database is the Staging Area and it acts as a 
data buffer between the transformed and normalized data 
provided by the Data Processing Module and the Data 
Integration Module. 
Data Warehouse 
The Data Warehouse (D/W) is the main data repository: it 
holds all historical and forecasted data that is at least one 
day old (i.e. it was retrieved / collected until the previous 
day). The data warehouse organises the data according to 
subjects (space weather, S/C, orbital information, etc.). 
Further more all data is integrated in one repository. The 
data is time-invariant because the historical data is kept and 
it is not volatile since data is not updated or deleted [12].  
Conceptually the D/W captures the domain knowledge and 
models it in a dimensional form. Fact and dimension tables 
compose the D/W model. The fact tables store the values of 
the measurements. The dimension tables contain textual 
descriptions of the domain (e.g. Description of a type of 
event). Each fact table is joined to a set of dimension tables, 
in a star-like structure called star schema. Each star schema 
models one concept of the problem [16, 17]. 
The core D/W schema contains 17 shared dimension tables 
and nine fact tables (i.e. nine star schemas). The dimension 
tables include time and date; S/C; S/C subsystem; S/C 
subsystem sensor; S/C revolution; ground station; ground 
base; S/C event; S/C parameter; alarm and S/C position. 
With these dimensions, it is possible to describe and 
maintain vital information about the data stored in the fact 
tables. The core fact tables are S/C real and predicted time 
series; S/C events; S/C positions; triggered alarms; space 
weather real and predicted time series and space weather 
events. The mapping between the core fact and their 
dimension tables is presented in table 2. 
 
Table 2 - Mapping between fact and dimension tables. 
 
Fact 
Tables 
Dimension Tables 
Spacecraft 
Time 
Series 
Time and Date of occurrence and generation;  
Spacecraft to which the parameter reports; 
Spacecraft parameter definition; 
Ground Station that received the data; 
Generation Model that generated the data, in case 
of a generated or predicted time series  
Spacecraft 
Events 
Ground Station that received the data; 
Generation Model that generated the data, in case 
of a generated or predicted event  
Time and Date of beginning point; ending point 
and generation;  
Spacecraft that suffered the event 
Spacecraft 
Positions 
Spacecraft position definition; 
Generation model that generated or predicted the 
data 
Spacecraft to which the positions referrs to; 
Time and Date of the position occurrence and 
generation  
Triggered 
Alarms 
Alarm definition; 
Spacecraft subsystem that suffered the alarm 
Time and Date of beginning point and ending 
point 
Space 
Weather 
Time 
Series 
Time and Date of occurrence and generation;  
Space Weather parameter definition; 
Ground Base that measured the data, if applicable; 
Spacecraft that measured the data, if applicable 
Generation Model that generated the data, in case 
of a generated or predicted time series  
Space 
Weather 
Events 
Time and Date of beginning point; ending point; 
maximum intensity point and generation;  
Space Weather event definition; 
Ground Base that measured the data, if applicable; 
Spacecraft that measured the data, if applicable 
Generation Model that generated the data, in case 
of a generated or predicted time series 
 8
The Data Warehouse (D/W) is updated daily with the last 
day of data previously inserted in the Staging Area. To 
complete this operation, the data has to be further organized 
according to the D/W schema (e.g. the association of the 
corresponding S/C and its position to each telemetry 
parameter). In order to do this it is necessary to know the 
corresponding meta-information concerning each parameter 
(for instance the value refers to a certain parameter, that is 
produced within an instrument/observation location - in that 
case it could be a S/C or a ground station, the actual 
location of spacecraft/ground station at that time). 
Data Marts 
Data Marts are multi-dimensional databases also separated 
according to a given subject. Data marts contain the same 
data as the D/W, but re-organized in a multi-dimensional 
fashion with pre-aggregated data already computed. Data 
marts of this type are often referred to as OLAP (Online 
Analytical Processing) cubes [13]. These cubes, or data 
marts, are the supporting databases for the Reporting and 
Analysis Tool. 
The Data Warehouse and the Data Marts are closely 
related. Data Marts load data from the Data Warehouse and 
pre-compute the aggregations (typically during less activity 
hours – when the system is not expected to be used) 
decreasing expected query answer time while increasing the 
performance of the OLAP client tool. The main goal is to 
have all data already pre-computed before the client tool 
requests it for the most used queries. This is of critical 
importance because a table can easily reach several millions 
of rows containing parameter values. The OLAP technology 
solves the problem of computing aggregations such as 
averages, sums or maximums on the fly with a direct impact 
on performance. Moreover, these cubes are queried through 
a proprietary Microsoft language, named MDX – 
MultiDimensional eXpressions. This query language is 
more expressive and powerful than regular transaction 
oriented SQL languages (e.g. Transact-SQL) in terms of 
multidimensional querying, making it easier to query OLAP 
data sources. The language also features an easy access to 
pre-calculated aggregate measures contained in the cubes 
for faster access. Due to the large amounts of data that will 
be retrieved in the queries, the MDX language is the best 
choice, in terms of speed, simplicity and expressive power. 
Operational Data Storage 
The Operational Data Storage or ODS, is the database that 
supports the Monitoring Tool. This database is online 
oriented, optimized to provide real-time usage. It holds 84 
hours of past data and 84 hours of future (forecasted) data, 
and simulates the behaviour of a sliding window: it is 
constantly removing all data older than 84 hours. Every 5 
minutes new data (forecasted and real) is expected to be 
arriving at the Staging Area and is moved to the 
“Operational Data Storage” as soon as it becomes available. 
The Operational Data Storage receives data from the 
Staging Area and from the Alarm Engine (explained later). 
It also receives data generated by the Monitoring Tool: the 
alarm’s confirmation and acknowledgement by the users. 
Therefore, the Operational Data Storage has to send this 
information back to the Staging Area on a daily basis, so 
that it may be stored in the Data Warehouse. 
Alarm Engine 
The Alarm Engine is a service that reads data in real-time 
stored in the Operational Data Storage and evaluates a set 
of alarm rules to identify S/C or space weather anomalous 
conditions. The Alarm Engine, which includes the implicit 
domain expert’s knowledge, runs a continuous S/C 
diagnostic, in order to infer possible spacecraft/space 
weather alarms and suggest appropriate recovery actions to 
minimize damage on the S/C instruments. The alarms to be 
evaluated are defined by the users through the use of the 
Alarm Editor tool. The rules that define an alarm will be 
explained in the client-tools section. When the Alarm 
Engine identifies an alarm, it stores it in the Operational 
Data Storage so that it becomes accessible to the 
Monitoring Tool. 
Each alarm is defined by a rule that contains both the logic 
to detect an anomalous situation, i.e. the  definition when 
the alarm should be triggered. An alarm may also contain 
associated suggested recovery actions to be performed in 
order to minimize S/C instruments’ damage. These recovery 
actions define the (human) action to be undertaken when the 
alarm is triggered. 
Spacecraft parameter
Boolean operator
Raw value Calibrated value
 
Figure 5 - Simple alarm rule example. 
Each rule is composed of one or more parameters along 
with constrains on those parameters’ values. In this context, 
a rule is the combination of parameters and their values’ 
constraints (called expressions). Expressions are related to 
each other through Boolean operators (e.g. and, or). Each of 
these expressions defines a constraint on S/C or space 
weather parameters. A parameter can be restricted by a raw 
value, a calibrated expression (e.g. ON, OFF, WAIT, 
RESET) or another parameter (see Figure 5).   
More information on the alarm rules can be found on [14]. 
 9
7. CLIENT TOOLS 
The Monitoring Tool 
The SEIS Monitoring Tool is an advanced multi-user 
visualization application that allows the proper visualization 
of all data stored in the Operational Data Storage database, 
at near real-time rate. It is an on-line-oriented tool that in 
addition to the visualization of real-time space weather and 
S/C telemetry data, also displays the resulting inference 
produced by the Alarm Engine, in the form of triggered 
alarms warnings through an intuitive graphical interface, as 
well as details about those triggered alarms.  
Figure 6 depicts the Monitoring Tool (MT) main window, 
with the main areas properly identified. 
The MT is composed of a set of user-defined panels, which 
are always available to the user, one at a time (point 1). 
Each panel can contain a set of S/C and space weather 
parameters to be plotted in several charts (point 2). Each 
chart can be customized according to the user’s preferences.  
Each panel contains data for the session specified time 
window (point 3), which can be divided in past and future 
data (in each chart the green (darker) area is the past data 
and the (yellow) lighter area contains future data. 
Figure 6 - Monitoring Tool Main Window. 
In point 4a are displayed the values for the nowcast 
(current) moment (lighter yellow column) and the sliding 
marker (darker blue column). The sliding marker is the dark 
vertical line identified in 4b, and allows the user to visualize 
a specific time moment by moving it freely. Point 5 displays 
the INTEGRAL S/C position and revolution number for the 
nowcast and sliding marker time positions. 
Each panel also has zooming capabilities (point 6) by using 
the available “zoom in” and “zoom out” buttons or by 
clicking and dragging the mouse over the charts.  
The log window is accessible from every panel and shows 
all occurred user-actions, application-activities and alarms 
triggered (point 7). The log window is equipped with 
filtering capabilities that can be defined individually for 
each panel. 
Finally, there is an alarm area composed by two flashing 
buttons (one for space weather and other for S/C alarms) 
that indicate the existence of triggered alarms. By clicking 
on the “detailed alarm” button, a new window will open, 
where the user can visualize the specific triggered alarms, 
the triggering rule and the suggested recovery actions, when 
applicable. 
Alarm Editor 
The purpose of the Alarm Editor is to help the user to create 
and edit alarm rules. It can then be used to validate and 
deploy these rules into the system. This tool has two main 
areas: an alarm rule editing area, self explanatory, and an 
alarm validation area that allows the user to load a set of 
parameter values and simulate the alarm triggering process.  
The rules defined or edited within this tool are then 
deployed into the Alarm Engine in the data integration 
module.  
The Reporting and Analysis Tool (RAT) 
The Reporting and Analysis Tool is a tool for offline 
analysis of data. All the data present in the SEIS Data 
Warehouse are available in RAT for previewing and 
analysis purposes. The tool is composed of three 
components: Data Catalogue; Report Designer and Report 
Browser.  
The purpose of the RAT tool is to create and manage 
reports. Reports allow the visualization of a very large set of 
data (either in number of parameters/components or in 
number of values per parameter: time series length). The 
reports can be edited and printed at any time, and all data 
available within a report can be copied into a comma 
separated value (CSV) format file, a word document or 
transformed into a picture (e.g. the chart). 
Reports are the work base for every data analysis, study or 
correlation. There are very specific reports (such as the 
world map report) and ad-hoc created reports. 
RAT – Data Catalogue 
The Data Catalogue component was designed to provide 
access to all the available data, with special concern about 
multiple data source navigation. Each parameter has meta-
information associated with it, and the Data Catalogue uses 
that information to organize the parameters in a tree, and to 
provide search capabilities. Once a parameter is selected, 
the application retrieves a sample of the data from the 
database, and displays it in a chart with interactive 
 10
capabilities. These interactive capabilities include: moving 
the time window back and forth, zooming in and out, or 
retrieving interpolated values from the series. This way the 
user can have a first glimpse of the data. Additionally the 
application also displays data quality and statistics 
information about the sample retrieved. 
 
Figure 7 - Data catalogue sample tab exemple. 
 
RAT – Report Designer 
The Report Designer allows the user to build his own 
reports. In the reports the user will be able to add several 
elements, like textboxes, charts or multi-charts. For the 
static elements (like textboxes) the user just has to specify 
their properties, for chart elements the user will have to 
select the desired parameter(s) to display, along with a time 
window definition. The report designer also features a 
preview mode, for the user to see what the report will look 
like, with all the charts filled with data. This preview mode 
is limited and doesn’t allow further interactions with the 
data. 
Figure 8 to Figure 12 display examples of some available 
charts. 
 
 
Figure 8 - Standard scatter with two scales and three series. 
 
Figure 9- Standard scatter with one time series and OOL 
thresholds marks. 
 
 
Figure 10- 2D Correlation chart example with real data, 
correlating x-ray flux short and long. 
 
 
Figure 11: Events chart with simultaneous events 
 
 
Figure 12 - Multichart example, including a scatter, an event 
chart, a gradient chart and a categorical chart. 
RAT – Report Browser 
The Report Browser allows the user to interact with 
previously created reports or with pre-defined reports. This 
interaction is similar to the interaction allowed in the data 
catalogue (zoom in and out, move the time window or 
 11
obtain interpolations). Report data exportation is possible: 
the user can print the results of a report, save the report as a 
JPEG image, save the data (values) of a chart to a text file, 
or copy portions of the report to include it in word 
documents. 
The pre-defined reports include: 
(1) World Map Report – report including a plot of the 
world map with the orbits of one of the three 
spacecrafts (INTEGRAL, ENVISAT and XMM) with 
the highlight of Single Event Upsets and alarms 
occurrences, along with altitude information and other 
space weather events occurrences. 
(2) Single Event Upset (SEU) Report – report for single 
event upsets in the reference INTEGRAL mission.  
 
Figure 13 - World map with an INTEGRAL revolution 
(Rev#184), with an annotation. 
8. METADATA REPOSITORY 
Metadata are data about data and the SEIS system takes 
advantage of this methodology: a central metadata 
repository holds information about every part of the system. 
The SEIS Metadata Repository is another key element in 
the system’s structure and consistency (see Figure 2). 
Every database, client tool and service is registered within 
this repository and is able to read its own configuration 
from it. The metadata repository is the source of the whole 
system‘s configuration. It is possible to look at the metadata 
repository as the seed from which the system is born, and 
the roots where it gets all the necessary information to start 
running. 
The Metadata Repository contains: 
(1) Domain Concepts: the definition of each parameter 
and event that is stored in the system, including the 
identification of its data source, the sampling rate; the 
definition of each S/C and their ground stations; the 
definition of each ground base used in the system, and 
it location; 
(2) Databases Schemas: the definition of each database in 
the system 
(3) Data Integration Module Scheduling Processes: how 
and when each database should be updated;  
(4) Mapping between the Domain Concepts and the 
Database Schemas: so that the databases can be 
populated based only on the information stored here; 
(5) Tool’s Configuration: the configuration of each client 
tool, such as the user preferences and the default 
values and configuration.   
(6) Services Configuration: besides the services 
configurations such as the last read data, the last 
running date, and all other vital information to their 
proper functioning, we can also find Data Processing 
Modules definitions, Data Service Providers 
definitions, Provided File information and File Format 
definitions (containing both the necessary fields to 
extract and the sequence of transformation sequences 
to apply to each one).  
The metadata repository allows addition of new data service 
providers as well as new files and parameters or even new 
tools. All system’s management can be performed through 
the metadata management, and since this is shared by 
several applications, it is rather easy to coordinate several 
applications. 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has discussed and presented the SEIS prototype 
tool features focused on the interaction between space 
weather and space mission control processes. The three 
main objectives are increased awareness of space weather 
causes and effects on the S\C health status; improved 
operational productivity; i.e. science return and safety, e.g. 
extended mission lifetime. 
The SEIS system concept has been introduced, followed by 
the architecture and the selected technology. From users’ 
side an introduction to what is possible to do with SEIS has 
been provided. 
S/C onboard radiation and health monitoring complemented 
by available external space radiation data and consolidated 
radiation models represent the key data suitcase collected by 
SEIS.  Specialized modules will provide graphical display 
of data, correlation and trend analysis and short term 
evolution forecasting. The system is open to interface 
additional modules in the future.  
The environment is designed to support multiple mission, 
starting with INTEGRAL, ENVISAT and XMM as initial 
missions. The tool will be made available at the dedicated 
 12
control areas of these three missions. Flight control 
engineers will be the prime users for assessing the impact of 
space weather on the S/C health status. 
Expected Benefits 
The SEIS prototyping approach seems to pave the way for 
an operational tool able to contribute to narrow the gap in 
time and in knowledge between radiation events and safe 
productive S/C operations. It is a multi-mission 
environment, modular and expandable in capability, able to 
retain a rich set of space radiation and effects data, 
information and knowledge useful for today’s mission 
operations and for tomorrow’s S/C design and 
implementation. 
In fact the S/C component manufacturer and the space 
segment engineers are willing to receive SEIS stored 
radiation data and effect to further analyze and investigate 
specific anomalies and to shorten the learning time for 
components performance improvement in harsh 
environment. 
The SEIS implementation phase will be followed by an 
extensive operational validation phase required to fine-tune 
the capabilities and the performance of the prototype. 
10. FUTURE WORK 
The initial idea was to start with a historical repository of 
space weather data and a tool able to provide information 
and knowledge to flight control engineers, not necessarily 
experts in space weather. The initial requirement from the 
operations engineers was to be assisted them in evaluating 
when to activate protection procedures on critical and 
radiation sensitive sensors, such as the CCDs (Charge-
Coupled Devices) used in space telescopes. It was 
considered necessary to build an operational prototype, 
something that can then be deployed and validated on the 
field. In Spring 2005 the operational validation phase will 
start and will run for approximately one year. During this 
period users, space weather experts and developers will 
interact to fine tune SEIS features, refine the forecasting 
model(s) and assess its performance. Also, it will be 
possible to evaluate the 3M Engine estimations and the 
ANN forecasts quality. 
Other missions, beyond the current reference ones are 
already manifesting their interest in the features of SEIS. 
Therefore it is expected to extend the use of SEIS to other 
ongoing space missions.  
On the technical side, there are several improvements that 
could be done to increase the system’s usability.  
Make use of enhanced display techniques, such as Virtual 
Reality, to visualize data directly on a S/C model. It would 
greatly improve, for instance the awareness of the radiation 
environment around the S/C. 
 Furthermore, Data Mining techniques could be introduced 
to assist the users in the finding and analyzing cause-effect 
relationships between space weather conditions and S/C 
events. 
The alarms currently triggered by the Alarm Engine are 
based on simple out-of-limit rules using satellite telemetry 
and space weather parameters. However, no inference 
mechanism is truly implemented. The implementation of an 
inference mechanism, for instance based on fuzzy logic 
rules, would bring extra strength and flexibility to the alarm 
rules. 
 The SEIS system is designed to allow easy integrations of 
new clients, and can therefore be extended according to 
future identified needs. 
11. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank all the SEIS team members, 
but especially Joaquim José Neto; Ivan Dorotovic and 
Fabrizio Pirondini for their dedicated work and invaluable 
effort to the successful development of the SEIS project.  
12. REFERENCES 
[1] B. Schmieder, B. Vincent, W. Baumjoham, T. 
Ono, S. Basu, and L. Lean, "Climate and Weather of the 
Sun Earth System: CAWSES, SCOSTEP'S Program for 
2003-2008," presented at SOLSPA: The Second Solar 
Cycle and Space Weather Euroconference -  ESA SP-477, 
2002. 
[2] "Space Weather Applications Pilot Project: Space 
Environments and Effects Analysis Section," vol. 2004: 
European Space Agency, 2000. 
[3] Michael Schmidt and F. D. Marco, "INTEGRAL 
Flight Operation Plan," ESA/ESOC, Darmstadt 2003. 
[4] "Integral," vol. 2004: The European Space Agency 
Science & Technology, 2002. 
[5] "Envisat," vol. 2004: The European Space Agency 
Earth and Observations, 2003. 
[6] "XMM-Newton," vol. 2004: The European Space 
Agency Science & Technology, 2000. 
[7] P. Vassiliadis, A. Simitsis, and S. Skiadopoulos., 
"On the Logical Modeling of ETL Processes," presented at 
CAiSE, Toronto, Canada, 2002. 
[8] W3C, "The Web Services Activity Statement," 
2002. 
[9] W3C, "SOAP - SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1: 
Messaging Framework," 2003. 
 13
[10] Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy, Space 
Applications Services, and P. S. Institute, "SPENVIS - 
Space Environment Information System," vol. 2004, 1998. 
[11] S. M. Weiss and N. Indurkhya, Predictive Data 
Mining: A Practical Guide. San Francisco, California: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1998. 
[12] R. Kimball and M. Ross, The Data Warehouse 
Toolkit: The Complete Guide To Dimensional Modeling, 
2nd Edition ed: Wiley, 2002. 
[13] E. Thomsen, "OLAP Solutions: Building 
Multidimensional Information Systems," Second ed: Wiley, 
2002. 
[14] J. Moura-Pires, M. Pantoquilho, and N. Viana, 
"Real-Time Decision Support System for Space Missions 
Control," presented at IKE'04 - The 2004 International 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Engineering, 
Las Vegas, USA, 2004 
 
 
BIOGRAPHY 
Nuno Carlos Viana is currently exercising the function of 
Project Manager within the CA3 Research Group in 
UNINOVA, Portugal. After graduation in Computer 
Sciences Engineering in 2001 at FCT/UNL, he was invited 
to join the CA3 (Sofcomputing and Autonomous Agents) 
Research Group in UNINOVA. Since 2001, he has been 
actively involved on the development of R&D projects for 
ESA (aiming to demonstrate the application of artificial 
intelligence techniques and decision support systems to 
ESA mission control operations), firstly as a Research 
Enginner and afterwards as Project Manager (since early 
2003). Simultaneously, he has been pursuing his Masters' 
degreee in Applied Artificial Inteligence. 
Luis F. Peñin is currently Technical Manager of the Space 
Engineering Division at DEIMOS Engenharia. He started 
his professional career in the aerospace industry in 1993. 
Later on he joined the Automatic Control Department of the 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, participating in several 
industrial projects in the area of robot control. Meanwhile 
he worked to earn a Doctoral degree in Control and 
Robotics. In 1998 he joined the National Aerospace 
Laboratory of Japan as a researcher, carrying-out several 
real-time flight teleoperation experiments with ETS-7 
satellite space robot arm from NASDA's Tsukuba Space 
Center (TKSC). At the end of 1999 he joined Spanish 
aerospace company GMV, where he participated as senior 
project engineering in several proposals and projects for 
ESA in the area of GNC and space robots teleoperation. In 
2001 he founded EIMOS where he has worked as senior 
project engineer and project manager for more than 10 
different projects for ESA in the area of GNC, simulation 
and control. He has published two books and more than 40 
papers in the robotics and space field.  
Marta Pantoquilho finished her Computer Science Degree 
(5 year degree) with distinction in 2003 at the Faculty of 
Sciences and Technology of the New University of Lisbon, 
 and is now finishing her Masters' degree in Computer 
Science with specialization on Information Systems' 
Technologies.  She is currently Quality Manager and 
Research Engineer at the CA3 Research Group in 
UNINOVA, Portugal, where since 2003 she has been 
working on R&D projects in the area of Decision Support 
Systems for the European Space Agency (ESA). She has 
already published more than 10 papers since 2003 on the 
field of System Analysis and Information Systems' 
Technologies. Starting April 2005 she will be joining ESA 
trainees' team at the European Space Operations Centre 
(ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany, to continue her work on 
Decision Support Systems.  
Federico Di Marco is working as Spacecraft Engineer for 
the INTEGRAL Mission Operations Centre based at ESA's 
European Space Operations Centre (ESOC), Darmstadt 
Germany. He has a Degree in Physics with Majors in 
Astrophysics and has been in working for 2 years in the 
facilities of AleniaSpazio-Roma for his final thesis and 5 
years in ESA as Spacecraft Engineer. For the INTEGRAL 
mission  he participated to System Validation Tests 
campaign, Simulation Campaign and Launch campaign 
culminated with the launch of the satellite on  October 2002 
and has been responsible, within the INTEGRAL Flight 
Control Team, of the Payloads, Experiment Checkout 
Equipments and AOCS. At present he is the Spacecraft 
System Engineer, responsible specifically for the AOCS and 
payloads sub-systems and is collaborating with the ESA's 
Control Technologies Unit in the definition of a decision 
support system to provide Flight Control Teams with Space 
Weather information. 
Alessandro Donati is Mission Control Technologies 
manager in the Special Projects Division at ESA’s European 
Space Operations Centre (ESOC), Darmstadt Germany. He 
has been in working for ESA for 13 years. He has a Masters 
Degree in Electronic Engineering, and has been responsible 
for a number of different positions within the Operational 
Department, including Ground Segment Manager for the 
Automated Transfer Vehicle ground segment definition 
phase and Operations Engineer for the Cluster II mission. 
At present he is managing a team responsible for the 
identification of improvements of current and future mission 
control related approaches and for the elaboration of 
associated technology advances. 
 
