Ground Data System Risk Mitigation Techniques 
For Faster, Better, Cheaper Missions1 
John Catena 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD 2077 1 
john. catenai&sfc.nasa. PO\ 
301-286-9572 
Rick Saylor 
Honeywell Technical Solutions Inc. 
Greenbelt, h4D 20771 
301-286- 1354 
r i c k . s a v l o r ~ ? l ~ ~ ~ n t ~ ~ ~ e l l - t s i . c ~ ~ n ~  
Abstract-With the advent of faster, better and cheaper 
missions, NASA Projects acknowledged that a higher level 
of risk was inherent and acceptable with this approach. It 
was incumbent however upon each component of the 
Project, whether spacecraft, payload, launch vehicle or 
ground data system, to ensure that the mission would 
nevertheless be an unqualified success. 
The Small Explorer (SMEX) program’s ground data system 
(GDS) team developed risk mitigation techniques to achieve 
these goals starting in 1989. These approaches have 
developed through the SMEX series of missions and are 
practiced today under the Triana program. These techniques 
are: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Mission Team Organization - empowerment of a close- 
knit ground data system team comprising system 
engineering, software engineering, testing, and flight 
operations personnel, 
Common Spacecraft Test & Operational Control 
System - utilization of the pre-launch spacecraft 
integration system as the post-launch ground data 
system on-orbit command and control system, 
Utilization of operations personnel in pre-launch 
testing - making the flight operations team an 
integrated member of the ,spacecraft testing activities at 
the beginning of the spacecraft fabrication phase, 
Consolidated Test Team - combining system, mission 
readiness and operations testing to optimize test 
opportunities with the ground system and spacecraft, 
and 
Reuse of Spacecraft, Systems, Standards, and People - 
obtaining greater efficiencies through reuse of common 
spacecraft components, flight and ground-based 
subsystems, standardized interfaces, and project team 
personnel. 
The SMEX ground system development approach for faster, 
Ralph Casasanta 
Computer Sciences Corporation 
Lanham, MD 20706 
rcasasan@csc.com 
301-794-2076 
Craig Weikel 
Computer Sciences Corporation 
Lanham, MD 20706 
cweiliel@csc.com 
301-794-2078 
better, cheaper missions has been very successful. This 
paper will discuss these risk management techniques in the 
areas of ground data system design, implementation, test and 
operational readiness. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THESMEXERA 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
6. BIOGRAPHIES 
3. RISK MITIGATION TECHNIQUES 
5. REFERENCES 
1.  INTR~DUCTION 
The normal practice for developing a GDS for a mission 
operated at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in the 
1980’s utilized a development team and a flight operations 
team, both of which were organizationally independent of 
each other. In addition, they were independent of the Project 
team responsible for building and launching the satellite. 
All three groups interacted and coordinated common 
activities, but this interaction required close coordination, 
detailed documentation, fi-equent meetings and extensive 
testing. 
The spacecraft architecture and design of hardware and 
software components varied from mission to mission with 
little commonality for the interfaces to the operational GDS. 
Multi-mission institutional systems consisting of hundreds of 
thousands of lines of code were modified to accommodate 
the next mission. These modifications were expensive to 
implement and test. Retesting of existing operational 
missions was another burden on this approach. However, the 
state and cost of computer technology at this time made this 
the only viable approach. 
___ 
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright 
1-513 
Prior to the advent of the faster, cheaper, better approach to 
NASA missions, the schedules for GDS implementation 
were nominally five years or more. In 1989 NASA identified 
a new Explorer-class program at GSFC that changed, the 
way future missions and the associated GDS would be 
constructed, scheduled and budgeted. Now GDS 
development schedules were only three years in duration. 
The GDS had to drastically modify its approach to 
implementation and testing to support launch and on-orbit 
operations. The following discussion topics cover how we 
responded to these new challenges. 
Orbit 
Altitude 
Passesf 
2.  THE SMEX ERA 
550x675 350x4200 600x650 600x600 470x540 m m  
In the Small Explorers Announcement of Opportunity, the 
call went out for science proposals that would provide for a 
series of missions that would be launched at a rate of about 
one spacecraft per year. These frequent flight opportunities 
meant that a spacecraft would be launched within three years 
from the date of NASA selection. Higher risk to any given 
mission, in exchange for these more frequent flight 
opportunities, was deemed acceptable. This risk level was 
reflected in the science data delivery specification. l h e  data 
capture specification was set at 90% for these new rnissions 
whereas 95% or greater was the standard specification for 
missions prior to SMEX. 
The first missions selected for this new program were the 
Solar Anomalous and Magnetospheric Particle Ebplorer 
(SAMPEX), the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite 
(SWAS), and the Fast Auroral Snapshot Explorer (FAST). 
The original launch dates for these missions were SAMPEX 
in mid-1992, SWAS in mid-1993, and FAST in late 11993[l]. 
In 1995, the next two missions were identified: the 
Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) and the 
Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE). TRACE was 
scheduled for launch in 1998 and WlRE in 1999. Figure 1 
depicts the original implementation schedule and operational 
life of each of these missions. 
WlRE 
TRACE 
SOM- - ---ikOM. 
10195 10198 0699 
CI 
SOM- 
10194 1047 10198 
SWAS I 0 0 0 
EOM- 
06/96 
SOM. Lamch. 
04/89 06/93 
0 0 
bunch- EOM- 
06/92 06/94 
1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2mO 
Y)M Saa of rmmm GDS wllr 
W M  Endofopraton.lIm%samLfe 
Meeting the challenge of concurrent, compact mission 
schedules required innovations in GDS development and 
operational preparedness. The risk mitigation approaches 
were added in a phased approach. These approaches evolved 
over time as the GDS team gained experience: and took 
advantage of changes internally and externally. 
The S E X  Project, coupled with advances in computer 
workstation technology, provided GSFC with a new 
opportunity to build ground systems faster, while being 
more reliable and less expensive. Given the charter of 
frequent flight opportunities and capped costs, there was no 
choice. Although higher risks were deemed acceptable, 
mission success remained paramount and delays in 
completing the GDS were not permitted to impact the 
spacecraft launch schedule. 
Two important advantages to SMEX GDS development 
activities occurred outside the control of the GDS 
organization team. These were the reuse of the spacecraft 
architecture and the proximity of the spacecraft vendor to 
the GDS team. 
Similar sj>acecraji architectures 
The first five spacecraft were designed1 and constructed by 
the same GSFC organization and followed similar 
implementation standards. The telemetry and command 
protocols used onboard the satellites adopted the 
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) 
standard. As a result interfaces were very similar between 
each GD13, more so than with previous missions. However, 
the science objectives and instrument payloads varied 
greatly. Table 1 summaries the characteristics of these 
spacecraft 
Payload 
It%++ Science Mbytes Gbytes Ivlbytes Mbytes Mbytes 
Control zenith 
U P  ointing 
Location of spacecraji and GDS develqvment activities 
Typically GSFC projects used a private contractor to build 
the spacecraft offsite and then deliver it to GSFC for several Figure 1. Original SMEX Mission Set 1 & 2 Schedules 
1-514 
months of integration testing. Upon completion of 
integration testing, the spacecraft was shipped to the launch 
site. Under the SMEX program, the spacecraft was 
constructed on the GSFC campus making technical 
interaction between the two groups an almost daily 
occurrence over a two to three year period. 
3. RISK MITIGATION TECHNIQUES 
In addition to the spacecraft architecture and location 
aspects of the S E X  Project, there were several GDS-based 
initiatives that improved the chances to meet the SMEX 
goals of cost and schedule while not compromising mission 
success. 
These initiatives or risk mitigation techniques were: 1). 
empowerment of a close-knit ground data system team 
comprising system engineering, software engineering, 
testing, and flight operations personnel, 2). utilization of the 
pre-launch spacecraft integration and test (I&T) system as 
the post-launch ground data system on-orbit command and 
control system, 3). utilization of flight operations personnel 
in pre-launch spacecraft testing activities, 4). combined 
system, mission readiness, and operations testing to optimize 
test opportunities with the ground system and spacecraft, 
and 5).  reuse of people, software, standards, and on-orbit 
spacecraft throughout the SMEX and Triana mission series. 
Any one of these techniques or a subset of them can be 
practiced for a given GDS program. They are independent 
of each other as depicted in Figure 2. However at the core of 
these techniques are the operations personnel. They must be 
involved in each of these techniques to make it successful. 
Miss ion Team 
0 rgnniration 
Reuse  of Spacecraft. 
Test  B Operational 
Control System 0 peration s 
Personnel 
C onsolidared 
Figure 2. Operations Personnel and Risk Mitigation 
This section will discuss these initiatives in terms of their 
ability to mitigate risks in the GDS in an environment of 
faster, better and cheaper missions. 
I .  Mission Team Organization 
The SMEX GDS mission team, comprised of both 
contractors and civil servants, was responsible for the 
~ 
1-515 
implementation and on-orbit operation of the GDS. The 
team was led by the Ground System Project Manager 
(GSPM). The GSPM was responsible for both the 
development of the GDS and its operation for the fnst 30 
days of the on-orbit mission phase. Under the GSPM, the 
Implementation Manager (IM) was responsible for system 
engineering, software development and test efforts. Figure 3 
presents the SMEX mission team organization. 
Pro’ect z 
I 
- - - - - -  - ,  
Data Services 
Figure 3. SMEX Mission Team Organization 
The team developed GDS requirements as a unit, so the 
implementation was as efficient and cost effective as 
possible. Members of the team were empowered to represent 
his or her discipline, regardless of “badge”. They were each 
accountable for their deliveries, action items, and test 
schedule. They were encouraged to take ownership of the 
entire mission, with each part contributing to the success of 
the end-to-end system. The creed was “it is our mission. ” 
This mission team was also its’ own configuration control 
board. Each potential change to the implementation of a 
particular set of requirements would have to pass a rigorous 
audit by the other members of the team, since each element 
change may impact another element within the data system. 
The IM would make the final decision with team input. 
When identifying the many ways to implement a 
requirement, the mission team would discuss the risk factors 
of each option. Through trade studies or previous experience 
with that particular option, a plan would take shape. Then, 
this plan would be discussed among all involved on both the 
space and ground segments of the project, and the plan 
would be agreed to or altered accordingly. On occasion, 
there would be only one way to implement a requirement. 
Then, rigorous testing would be the mitigating factor for risk 
analysis. 
The team included ad-hoc members representing the science 
team, the spacecraft element, or the tracking services, who 
would participate on an infrequent basis depending on where 
the project was in the development cycle. 
Other splinter working groups were formed as needed (i.e. 
RF working group, mission readiness testing group) to focus 
on particular issues or problems that affected a portion of 
the implementation team. These splinter groups would be 
assigned a chair, issue and track actions, and report back to 
the mission team where those actions would also be: tracked 
until closed. Additionally, the GSPM would organize a 
Project wide retreat, where representatives frorn every 
element within the ground data system, spacecraft and 
instrument team would gather for 3-4 days. Dming this 
retreat, there would be presentations or tutorials to each 
other, informal requirement reviews, splinter working 
groups and the resolution of issues between elements. These 
workshops/retreats served as tremendous team building 
tools, while at the same time achieving significant results in 
closing issues sometimes 6 months earlier than normal. 
Mission team element lead engineers contributed 
significantly to the production of materials for presentation 
at major reviews, and while they may not actually stand and 
present, their input was sanctioned by the managers 
responsible for that particular discipline. By getting 
everyone on the team involved and assuming ownership and 
responsibility for the success of the entire system, you have 
synergy. It’s not just the job of a single person, or the 
manager to apply risk management - it’s everyone’s 
responsibility. 
At the conclusion of the launch phase of each mission, the 
mission team would re-convene and discuss lessons learned. 
What went right? What could have been done better? In a 
short, 3-year development cycle, these lessons learned can 
be immediately applied to the next mission in the queue, 
although most likely, it’s already underway. 
2. Common Spacecraft Test & Operational Control ,System 
The Integrated Test and Operations System (ITOS:) is a set 
of equipment that is used initially to interface with the 
spacecraft from the box level, all the way through to the 
observatory level. During this pre-launch phase, the ITOS 
will add capabilities that the control center will utilize for 
command and control of the spacecraft when it is transferred 
to the Flight Operations Team (FOT) on orbit. Using a 
common ground system for both I&T and operatioris allows 
for an operations system to be launch capable much earlier 
than on previous missions [2]. The ITOS will have 10 times 
more hours of test time with the spacecraft under this 
approach than with operations-unique ground data systems. 
This increases the level of confidence in reliable on-orbit 
operations and reduces the risk of encountering untested 
operating conditions. Also, combining the two systems 
bridges the gap between the space and ground segments on a 
typical mission. This is a tremendous team building 
technique. 
By using a similar ground system during spacecraft I&T and 
mission operations, problems are detected earlier. Earlier 
detection allows cleaner releases for the ground data system 
team. Another benefit for using the same ground system is 
that the development team is aware of mission requirements. 
The development team agrees to mission requirements and 
can apply this knowledge to program patches and 
enhancements. 
There hias always been a race to have all spacecraft 
procedures including contingencies tested prior to launch. 
When a SMEX mission was using the operations-unique 
control system, most procedures were tested in the last 
month prior to launch, requiring large amounts of time had 
to be taken away from spacecraft I&T testing to ensure that 
all procedures were verified against the actual spacecraft. 
Risk was reduced when SMEX decidled to use a common 
system for spacecraft I&T and operations because operation 
procedures would have more test time available. Most of 
the procedures were developed for I&T and reused in 
operations, and it reduced the need to dedicate spacecraft 
I&T time for procedure testing for the operations team. The 
decision to use a common ground system enabled the 
operations team to play a larger role in the spacecraft I&T 
test and development areas. 
3. Utilizution of Operations Team in Pre-Launch Testing 
In addition to leveraging the spacecraft I&T system, for on- 
orbit operations, the people responsible for operating the 
spacecraft on-orbit became key partners in the test and 
checkout of the spacecraft and payloads. It enabled the 
operations team to gain greater access to the spacecraft. 
This access is beneficial for performing testing and 
validating operations concepts. As iindicated in figure 4, 
greater access to the spacecraft transforms into knowledge 
and experience for the operations team reducing risk 
throughost the mission life. 
Access 
Reduced 
Figure 4. Spacecraft Access Benefit 
Spacecraft access translated into greater spacecraft 
knowledge for the operations team. By performing testing 
during spacecraft I&T, the operations team gained a better 
understanding of the spacecraft systems and instruments for 
the mission. Over time, the project looked at the test 
conductors as another set of system engineers monitoring 
the spacecraft development and testing. This gave the 
1-516 
Project system engineers a higher confidence level during 
spacecraft I&T and throughout the mission. A better 
trained and more knowledgable operations team reduced 
mission risk significantly during the operational phase of 
the mission. By participating in the spacecraft development 
and testing, the operations team had the added knowledge of 
previous spacecraft anomalies found during I&T. , 
Specifically, the relationship between the test conductor 
team and the spacecraft development team allowed the FOT 
to: 
0 Create and maintain an anomaly database throughout 
I&T that would serve as reference for operations 
0 Gain better access to the spacecraft subsystems 
engineers by being part of the everyday team 
0 Stress test the spacecraft to learn its capabilities and 
limitations 
0 Carry the l&T experience over into the operational 
phase 
- better response time to anomalies 
- better preparation for solving problems 
- safer and more expeditious recoveries 
- testing the spacecraft as it will be operated on orbit 
- improved flight software functions through testing 
- reduced complexity through continuous testing and 
modification of procedures 
- working closely with developers in revising design 
requirements, and testing limits of the design 
0 More realistic test scenarios 
The operations team had better insight into which telemetry 
points to trend and monitor and this built a better 
relationship between the operations team and spacecraft 
engineers. The operations team had better access to the 
spacecraft engineers for the operational phase of the mission 
due to the working relationship developed during spacecraft 
I&T. 
For example, on the Triana mission, the command and data 
handling (C&DH) software group changed the stored 
command processor design from previous SMEX missions. 
The operations team played a key role in reviewing design 
requirements and testing. This not only helped the software 
developers but gave the operations team valuable insight 
into the functionality of the software. By including the 
operations team in development, overall operational risk 
was reduced. 
Additionally, operational risk was reduced because 
operational concepts, procedures and timelines were tested 
earlier, before major simulations and tests. This led to the 
sound engineering principle “test it as you expect to fly it, 
fly it as you tested it.” 
4. Consolidated Test Team 
The ground system testing approach for the first three 
SMEX missions followed the more traditional method used 
for most if not all GSFC ground systems in the 1980s. The 
development team delivered software to an independent 
system test team. This group was primarily responsible for 
requirements testing. Software anomalies or failures were 
documented using a problem reporting system specific to the 
system test group. Upon completion of system testing, the 
software element was delivered to a second independent test 
team that was responsible for acceptance testing. The 
primary responsibility of this group was to determine the 
ground system element’s ability to support the operations 
environment. Another problem reporting system was used to 
track software anomalies detected in this phase. Upon 
completion of acceptance testing, the software was delivered 
to the operations environment. At this stage, the mission 
readiness manager and his team executed interface tests with 
all the ground system elements including the spacecraft, 
ground stations and the science team’s home facilities. 
Again, a separate problem reporting system was used to 
track anomalies. In addition, each one of these groups had a 
separate test plan and procedures document with different 
test goals. The result of this testing approach was a thorough 
testing of the ground system but with a cost and schedule 
impact that was at odds with the faster, better, cheaper 
theme of SMEX missions. 
With the selection of the second set of SMEX missions and 
launch delays for two of the original missions, a new process 
was needed to mitigate the risk of tighter schedules and 
overlapping mission activities. The new approach took 
advantage of the selection of ITOS as the operational 
command and control system and the larger amount of reuse 
enjoyed by the SMEX ground systems. 
The new approach [3] adopted for the TRACE and WlRE 
missions consisted of the following 
unify the three test groups into one consolidated test 
team led by the mission readiness manager 
create a single test plan and procedures document which 
addressed the objectives of each of the three test groups 
make the most efficient use of tests by merging test 
objectives and eliminating redundancy 
consolidate the test reporting mechanism to one system 
used by all test members 
reduce the overall test group size but augment the team 
with support fiom operations personnel 
The results of the consolidated test approach for the TRACE 
mission when compared to the previous SMEX missions 
were significant. A 4-to-1 reduction in the test schedule was 
achieved while reducing the test team size by 50%. 
The ability of the consolidated test team to respond quickly 
and efficiently to ground system software patches and 
critical fures became crucial in the later, hectic part of the 
SMEX Project at GSFC. The test team’s rapid response to 
1-517 
conflicting demands of the S E X  missions was a key factor 
in the successful support of three separate launches. 
System 
Trending 
Verification 
5. Reuse of Spacecrafi, Systems & People 
Because each SMEX mission had a development cycle of 
approximately three-years fiom mission selection to launch, 
both the space-based and ground-based systems had to 
perform requirements development, system design, 
implementation, test and operations certification within this 
envelope. The quick access and rapid deployment resulted 
in modifications to the existing paradigms for both space- 
and ground-based hardware fabrication and :sohare 
development. The major emphasis was in the following 
areas: 
Common spacecraft architecture including similar or 
identical sensors, actuators and hardware components 
Reuse of flight- and ground-based software 
Better, more efficient use of personnel 
Sohare/Hardware SoftwareIHardware 
ITOS/Sun and PC ITOWSun 
Data Trending and 
Analysis SystemPC Analysis SystemPC 
Attitude 
Determination Determination 
components components 
Data Trending and 
Attitude 
Common spacecraft architecture 
A major change to the spacecraft architecture was a common 
spacecraft bus used on the first SMEX missions anld for the 
Triana mission. The Triana hardware architecture has a 
heritage from the earlier S E X  satellites and specifically 
the SMEX-Lite. This approach reduces spacecraft design 
and test engineering, development team size, flight hardware 
costs, and the cost of flight operations. This common bus 
approach also maintains mission reliability and improves 
performance over previous SMEX missions. The SMEX- 
Lite has "plug-and-play" architecture that allows 
components to be added or deleted &om the syslem with 
virtually no redesign and without disturbing other 
subsystems. Functions are segregated into "slices" that are 
independent at the subsystem level. The "plug-and-play" 
concept was extended to the electronics, sensors, actuators, 
software, solar mays, the mechanical system, and the 
ground support I&T system. 
Reuse of flipht-based and ground-based subsystems 
The Triana flight software enjoys a signrfcant degree of 
heritage from previous SMEX missions. Its architecture 
utilizes modular design techniques that maximize software 
reuse. This approach provides flexibility for tailoring the 
system to unique mission requirements and improves the 
overall reliability of the flight code. 
By using this standard set of hardware and software systems, 
the spacecraft development, fabrication, and certification 
time has been reduced to fit with the three-year lifecycle of 
mission selection to launch. Some upgrades were made to 
both the spacecraft hardware and software simply based on 
upgrading a component that was out-of-date. 
An exceptionally important change for TRACE from 
previous SMEX missions was the merging of the I&T 
system that was used for previous SJbEX satellites with the 
independlently developed mission operations system. In 
addition to the reduced software development costs, the 
new, combined ITOS system allowed display pages and 
procedures prepared by the FOT during the I&T phase to 
also be used during the operational phase, resulting in great 
time and cost efficiencies for the FOT. The next SMEiX 
mission, WIRE, used the same system for the I&T and the 
operatioha1 phases. Also during this same time, the SWAS 
mission, which had its launch delayed until 1999, 
reengineered its GDS to use the same system. These three 
missions were launched and supponted using the same 
command and control system (ITOS) within eleven months 
of each other. As shown in Table 2, the SMEX software 
and hardware components of the GDS have been carried 
over into the Triana GDS. The one modification was the 
result of a spacecraft change related to how on-board 
commands are stored. Previously, the SMEX missions 
supported command buffers, which were used to store an 
absolute or relative time sequenced command or series of 
commands. With the advent of SMEX-Lite and the 
migration to the Triana mission, the on-board buffers were 
replaced with command tasks that are managed by the on- 
board command and data handling (CcSZDH) subsystem. In 
this instance, the GDS minimized the nisk by using the exact 
same command translator that is being developed by the 
spacecraft development team. The GDS did not develop its 
own separate &stem to perform the identical function. 
Table 2!. Comparison of SMEX and Triana GDS Elements 
Data I TRACENIRE I 'rriana 1 
I 1 System/PC I SystemPC I 
Real-time Real-time Attitude Real-time Attitude I ~~~~1~ I DFermination 1 :::!tion 1 
Determination S stemPC 
Mana ement S stem/Sun Translator/Sun 
Level-0 Data Data Processing 
Processin S stem/SGI and Sun 
Mission Planning Command 
Other GDS modifications for Triana are to support the 
updated telemetry and command mnemonics, as well as the 
file management concepts to suppont VxWorks (on-board 
and ground processed file management). 
Additionally, the GDS is reusing to the extent possible any 
hardware systems that were used by the previous SMEX 
missions. When practical, the Triana program will purchase 
newer hardware components to upgrade to the latest 
1 -C1 Q 
hardware and operating systems or to purchase a faster, 
more powerful version of a similar hardware platform. 
missions to reduce or eliminate duplication of effort. This 
same approach is currently in place on Triana. 
The SMEX missions and Triana are able to use the same 
suite of hardware to support a launch. By using this same 
set of hardware, the missions have eliminated risks 
associated with moving to completely new platforms. Since 
this hardware suite has supported previous launches, the 
GDS and operations team know that these components have 
passed the stress tests associated with supporting a launch; 
there are no unknowns by using the existing suite. 
Reuse of personnel from proiect, operations and mission 
teams 
Initially, the SMEX Project started with a large-scale army 
of subsystem developers, independent of each other, only 
meeting during reviews to consolidate interfaces ' and 
specific work issues. This was the approach used during the 
SAMPEX mission. 
The SMEX Project then migrated to a combined System 
Implementation Team (SIT) approach that coordinated GDS 
development but was still independent and lagged behind 
the project spacecraft integration. The SWAS and FAST 
missions used this combined SIT approach. This approach 
helped to minimize the problems encountered during earlier 
GSFC programs, but did not completely solve the problems 
related to mission development and interfacing with the 
project and science teams. 
Eventually, the SMEX Project, for the TRACE and WIRE 
missions, evolved into an Integrated Product Development 
Team (IPDT) that coordinated the development, project, and 
test groups. This IPDT took the form of the mission team 
(MT) and provided a sub-group related to mission readiness 
testing (MRT). The mission team also provided support to 
the project for meetings and reviews. The TRACE mission 
was first to use an IPDT [2]. The concept of an IPDT was 
not a new idea. However, the formation of the TRACE 
IPDT stressed joint development and partnering between 
previously independent development groups, breaking 
through traditional organizational barriers. A very 
significant portion of the cost to the previous mission was 
spent on communication via thick, formal documents. The 
TRACE IPDT minimized these costs by removing the 
formal barriers that required the generation of the 
documentation and concentrating on personal interaction 
and the use of the Internet as a repository for information 
sharing. Additionally, the flight operations team had ready 
access to all documentation regardless of where a particular 
operational workstation or laptop was located. By 
combining the workforce into the IPDT, any potential cost 
or schedule problems were mitigated because the standard 
organizational barriers were broken. By overcoming 
organizational barriers, the IPDT was able to define and 
own the process that allowed the TRACE and WIRE 
As with the last two Sh4EX missions, the Triana mission 
works to minimize the differences between project personnel 
and GDS development and operations personnel. GDS and 
operations teams have supported the project reviews and 
weekly status briefings; operations personnel have also 
provided pre-launch spacecraft integration testing. The GDS 
and operations team used this information exchange to leam 
the nominal spacecraft operation concepts. By supporting 
the Project during reviews and weekly discussions, the GDS 
and operations teams have reduced development time and 
costs to meet the 3-year mission selection to launch criteria 
implicit in the SMEX and Triana charters. 
While a major risk mitigation technique is to reuse the 
mission personnel and GDS HW and SW components, this 
is not to say that people do not move on to other programs 
or career opportunities. Nor does it mean that software 
systems used in supporting the first SMEX mission, 
SAMPEX, are being prepared for use on Triana. On the 
contrary, no software used for the SAMPEX launch in 1992 
will be used for Triana. In fact, SAMPEX has undergone a 
"technological upgrade" benefiting from the improvements 
made during the course of the SMEX program and was 
retrofitted while on-orbit and collecting valuable science 
data. Likewise, a core group of engineers remain on Triana 
that were associated with S N E X  but a significant number 
of personnel have moved onto other projects. 
Bringing new team members "up to speed" on the next 
mission has been smooth and very successful because all 
documentation and review materials can be found on-line. 
This allows the new personnel to readily review the mission 
requirements, concepts, and processes. 
Because the SMEX spacecraft were of similar design, once 
on-orbit, spacecraft were available for limited use in testing 
automation concepts and training future operations staff. In 
fact, the TRACE and WIRE missions paved the way for the 
current autonomous operations concepts and allowed the 
formation of a standard 8x5 operations group. While the 
Triana spacecraft will be constantly in view of a ground 
station and supply a 24-hour live feed to the Triana control 
center; the Triana operations team will only support normal 
operations during the standard day shift. However, during 
the launch and checkout phase, the control center will be 
staffed to provide 24x7 support for commanding and 
monitoring of the spacecraft instrument and subsystems. 
In addition to the on-orbit spacecraft providing the basis for 
autonomous operation concepts, the operations personnel 
can be trained on these missions because of the 
similarlidentical systems that will be used on the next 
generation mission. The experience and confidence gained is 
a significant risk mitigation technique for the operations 
team of the follow-on mission. 
1-51 9 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Risk 
Analysis 
Area 
The ability to identify a set of metrics to measure risk 
mitigation success is difficult and can be subjective. 
Determining how much each of the five techniques 
discussed in this paper contributed to the overall success of 
the SMEX GDS development and operation activities is 
even more difficult. However three areas were analyzed in 
the SMEX GDS development efforts to arrive at some 
measure of success. 
GDS Mission GDS GDS 
Design Operations TDRs Software 
Review Review Reuse 
The first area investigated the number of issues identified 
during the GDS design review and the mission operations 
review. These issues were called requests for action (WAS). 
The second area was the number of software anomalies 
detected during major interface tests, identified as test 
discrepancy reports (TDRs). The third area was the level of 
software reuse for each GDS fi-om the previous mission. 
The first two areas, RFA and TDR counts, give some 
indication of problem detection. A reduction in the: number 
of RFAs is an indicator of successful risk mitigation during 
the system design process and pre-launch mission olperations 
preparation process. A reduction in TDRs is an indlicator of 
a more successful GDS implementation. The reuse levels 
help assess the impact that software reuse may have in 
contributing to overall risk mitigation success. The reuse 
levels were divided between low, medium and high. A low 
reuse value was estimated to be less than 35% of the GDS 
was reused from the previous mission, medium reuse was 
between 35 and 70%, and high reuse was more than 70%. 
Each of the five SMEX missions was analyzed with the 
SWAS mission being treated as two distinct missions. The 
first instance represents the initial SWAS GDS 
implementation and the second instance the redesigned 
system, with ITOS as the control center element. The results 
are presented in Table 3, with the chronological order of the 
GDS implementations running fi-om top to bottom. 
WAS 
WIRE 
SWAS 
Notes: (1)-TRACE SDR RFA counts unavailable. 
18 
(2)-Redesigned SWAS GDS did not hold a formal design or mission 
operations review. 
Table 3, the design issues, operations preparation issues, and 
software anomalies remained low with the introduction of a 
new SMEX GDS architecture for the TRACE mission. 
Although the TRACE software reuse level was low, the 
other four risk mitigation techniques were now fully in use. 
The lower RFA and TDR numbers demonstrate the success 
of these techniques in the following missions as well. 
Although the first SMEX was launched on schedule in July 
1992, the remaining spacecraft experienced significant 
delays diue to launch vehicle problems. FAST was finally 
launched in August 1996. Because of these delays and the 
change to an ITOS-based architecture for mission set 2, it 
was decided in the fall of 1997 to re-engineer the SWAS 
GDS with the TRACE" approach. As a result the 
SMEX GDS mission team was supporting three missions 
simultanleously in different stages of development. It was a 
challenging task but team members recognized the benefits 
of operating missions with the ITOS architecture. Figure 5 
illustrates the revised schedules and subsequent launches of 
these three satellites. When compered to the original 
schedules depicted in figure 1, one can see that 1997 and 
1998 haid far more intense development and operational 
readiness activities than previously env isioned. 
: GDS. Development & Test 
0: Operational Readiness Tests  
0: Launch & Early Orbit Operations 
Figure 5. Actual TRACE, SWAS & 'W Schedules 
Subsequently, the TRACE, SWAS and WIRE spacecraft 
were all launched within an 11-month interval. TRACE in 
April 1998, SWAS in December 1998 and WIRE in March 
1999. The GDS and operations team performed extremely 
well for all the launches and on-orbit operations. Although 
WIRE experienced a severe on-board anomaly, scientific 
studies were still performed using its sensitive star tracker. 
Today, 8 years after the first SptEX launch, all five 
spacecraft are operating and returning scientific and 
engineering data. The SMEX GDS systems are achieving a 
cumulaiive science data return of nearly 99%. In OUI 
experience, this is the best measure of mission success. 
Although the level of reuse improved over time and was an 
important contributor to GDS success, it was not the 
dominant factor in the Sh4EX GDS program. As indicated in 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 Paula Cleggett-Haleim, “NASA Selects Small Explorer 
Missions”, NASA Headquarters Release 89-43, April 4, 1989. 
[2] Scott Green, Dan Mandl, Keith Walyus, “Lights-Out 
Operations for the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer 
(TRACE) using Operational and Architectural Approaches,” 
SpaceOps98 Conference, July, 1998. 
[3] Joan Frank and Caroline Shulman, TRACE Innovations 
Continuous Improvement of the Testing Paradigm,, CNMOS 
Presentation, February 1 1, 1998. 
BIOGRAPHIES 
John Catena is the Ground System Project Manager 
(GSPM) of the Triana mission at NASA GSFC since 1998. 
Previously he was the GSPM for the $rst j h e  SMEX 
missions starting in 1989 and completing that assignment in 
1999. 
Rakh  Casasanta has been involved in ground system 
engineering for the SMEX missions since 1994. Over the 
course of his 25-year career with Computer Science 
Corporation, he has been involved in sofivare development, 
test and systems engineering projects for NASA and the 
FAA. 
Rick Saylor has been a member of the SMEX fright 
operations team at GSFC since 1994. A 6-year employee of 
Honeywell Technical Solutions, Inc., he has been involved 
in SMEX spacecraft integration, test and launch operations 
for the FAST and TRACE missions. He currently leads the 
fright operations contingent responsible for both of these 
activities on the Triana Project. 
Craig Weikel is the lead ground systems engineer for the 
Triana mission. He has been a member of the GDS 
engineering team since the FAST mission. Previously he 
was a member of the software engineering team for 
SAMPEX. He has performed sofhvare development, test and 
system engineering duties for five earlier missions at GSFC 
in his 27-years as a Computer Science Corporation 
employee. 
- . ,  . . . . I  . . 
I . ,  
! 
i 8’ , ,. . 
I ,  
1-571 
