A High Stability ka-band Radiometer for Tropospheric 
Water Vapor Measurements12 
Alan B. Tanner 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA 9 1 109 
alan.b.tanner@jpl.nasa.gov 
818-354-7477 
Abstract- The design of two new high stability microwave 
water vapor radiometers is presented along with a 
performance evaluation. The radiometers operate next to a 
spacecraft tracking station at NASA's Goldstone facility in 
California where they will be used to calibrate tropospheric 
path delay fluctuations during an upcoming gravity wave 
search experiment (GWE) involving the Cassini spacecraft. 
Observing ftequencies of the radiometers are 22.2 GHz, 
23.8 GHz, and 31.4GHz7 and the antenna beamwidth is 1 
degree. The instruments are room temperature Dicke 
radiometers with additive noise injection for gain 
calibration. Design highlights include: (1) a practical 
temperature control system capable of stabilizing the entire 
receiver to a few millikelvin from day to night; (2) 
redundant noise diode injection circuits with 30 parts per 
million RF power stability; and (3) a voice coil actuated 
waveguide vane attenuator which is used as a high 
performance Dicke switch. Performance of the radiometers 
is evaluated from inter-comparisons of the two radiometers 
and from continuous tip-curve calibrations spanning nearly 
one year. Structure function analysis of the inter- 
comparison data indicates that the brightness temperature 
stability of these radiometers is better than 0.01 Kelvin on 
1,000 to 10,000 second time scales. Analysis of tip-curve 
calibrations indicate RMS errors of approximately 0.05 K 
on 30-day time scales, and 0.15K on one year time scales. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
3. RADIOMETER DESIGN 
4. CALIBRATION 
5. PERFORMANCE VALUATION 
6. CONCLUSION 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Water vapor adds a variable delay to radio signals passing 
through the earth's troposphere that can limit the phase 
stability and coherence time for VLBI or for experiments 
that involve precise spacecraft tracking. One technique to 
correct these errors involves measuring the water vapor 
along a line of sight with a water vapor radiometer 
(WVR)[l]. WVR's measure the thermal radio emissions of 
water vapor near a resonance at 22 GHz, and the radio path 
delay is inferred ftom these data using models and estimates 
of the atmospheric temperature and pressure. There are a 
variety of errors associated with this technique, including 
model errors and uncertainty in the vertical distribution of 
temperature and water vapor [2], but past experiments have 
been largely limited by the accuracy and stability of the 
WVR itself [3]. 
An upcoming series of gravitational wave search 
experiments (GWE) involving the Cassini spacecraft will 
require the most sensitive measure of the water vapor path 
delay to date. Starting in December of 2001, and during the 
spacecraft's cruise to Saturn, the Cassini GWE will be 
conducted fiom a specially equipped ground station at 
NASA's Goldstone Deep Space Communication Complex 
(GDSCC) in California. The principle GWE measurements 
will be of very small perturbations- potentially less than - 
1"- in the spacecraft tracking data on time scales of 1,000 
to 10,000 seconds. Of the various errors associated with this 
experiment- including those of the time standards, 
mechanical stability of the ground station and spacecraft, 
etc.- it is the tropospheric path delay corrections which will 
likely determine the detection threshold for the GWE [4]. 
When translated into radiometric specifications, Cassini 
GWE goals call for a WVR that is stable to better than 
0.01K in brightness temperature on 1,000 to 10,000 second 
time scales. This represents about a ten-fold improvement 
over the demonstrated performance of any previous WVR, 
and has motivated the development of the radiometers 
described in this paper. 
This paper presents the design and performance evaluation 
of two WVR's which were developed for the Cassini GWE. 
An overview of the completed systems- dubbed the 
'advanced' water vapor radiometers ( A m ' s ) -  is 
presented in Section 2. These instruments are based on 
laboratory tests and prototype work which were previously 
reported [5]. The laboratory work produced a number of 
innovations which will be reviewed in section 3. Section 4 
~ ~ ~~ 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
Updated November 27,2000 
4-1849 
will briefly describe the internal calibration algorithm, and 
Section 5 will present a performance evaluation of the 
radiometers based on side by side comparisons and long 
term calibration data spanning nearly one year. 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The two AWVR units, designated by serial numbers A-1 and 
A-2, are located approximately 40 meters to the south-east 
and south-west, respectively, of the much larger tracking 
antenna, designated DSS-25, where the Cassini GWE will 
be conducted. During a spacecraft track’both AWVR’s will 
be pointed in the same direction as the DSS-25 antenna. 
During off-hours the AWVR’s perform continuous sweeps 
in elevation as part of a ‘tip-curve’ procedure that is the 
basis for the system calibration. Two identical radiometers 
have been built to ensure reliability and to provide a cross- 
check of the system performance. 
pedestal, and the offset parabolic reflector. The overall 
height of the system is about 3 meters, and the reflector size 
is about 1.6 by 1.9 meters. The radiometer ‘box’ contains 
the antenna feedhorn (hidden behind the circular radome on 
the face of the enclosure), RF electronics, data system, and 
temperature control systems. The pedestal includes the 
azimuth positioner at the base of the structure and the 
elevation positioner which rotates the reflector on a focal 
axis that is inclined by 35 degrees from horizontal. This 35 
degree inclination is complementary to a 55 degree offset 
between the focal axis and the main beam of the antenna. 
Figure 1 shows the antenna as it points the main beam to 
zenith. Rotation of the elevation positioner to other angles 
results in a conical sweep of the antenna beam about the 
focal axis, and requires a coordinate transformation to 
convert between positioner angles and the ‘true’ azimuth and 
elevation, as referenced to the local horizon. In practice 
these conversions are calculated by the controlling computer 
and are bransparent Yo the user. 
Figure 1 shows one of the AWVR’s. The AWVR consists 
of the radiometer ‘box’ (in the upper left), the supporting 
A short list of specifications for the AWVR are summarized 
in Table 1. The fiequency selections of Table 1 are base on 
4-1850 
work by [2] to minimize the uncertainty in the path delay 
inversion algorithm. The antenna beamwidth is designed to 
minimize the mismatch with the 34 meter diameter tracking 
antenna at a range of 2 km, which is approximately the scale 
height of the tropospheric water vapor distribution (note that 
a 1 degree beam projects a 34 meter spot diameter at 2 km 
range, which roughly matches the near-field pattern of the 
DSS-25 tracking antenna) [6],  [7]. The pointing 
requirements of Table 1 were derived from the sensitivity of 
the measurement to air mass- which increases rapidly (as the 
secant of elevation angle) as the antenna beam approaches 
the horizon. 
One specification missing in Table 1 is the beam efficiency. 
This often quoted figure of merit for a radiometer antenna is 
difficult to apply in this case since it does not distinguish 
between near and far sidelobes. Without any such 
distinction one would have to specify an unfeasible beam 
efficiency of well over 99.9% to ensure that AWVR 
brightness temperature measurement would not be corrupted 
by more than the 0.01 K stability requirement. A distinction 
between near and far sidelobes is important in this case 
because near-sidelobes, which may degrade the beam 
efficiency, do not necessarily corrupt the WVR given a 
nearly homogeneous sky brightness temperature. Far- 
sidelobes are a greater concern since they are subject to 
much larger temperature swings. The approach taken with 
the AWVR was to design the antenna as a clear aperture 
antenna so that far-sidelobe effects could be reasonably 
predicted by estimates of the main reflector spillover. The 
AWVR feedhorn design provides a very low edge 
illumination of less than -25dB. The feedhorn is also 
designed with a gaussian aperture taper to further reduce 
sidelobes beyond the reflector edge. Preliminary 
simulations predicted that not more than 0.3% of the antenna 
feed power would spill over the edge of the main reflector; 
that the contribution from backlobes would not exceed 0.5K 
in the total brightness temperature; and that fluctuations in 
this power on the 1,000 second time scale of interest to the 
Cassini GWE would not exceed the 0.01K requirement. 
Subsequent tests of the completed antennas and radiometers 
have verified that there is no evidence of sidelobe 
contamination a detectable threshold of 0.01K. These tests 
involved side-by-side observations at zenith as one of the 
pedestals was rotated in azimuth in the presence of large 
obstructions above and below the horizon. 
Table 1. Short list of AWVR specifications 
Frequencies(GH2) : 22.2, 23.8, 31.4 
Bandwidth (MHz): 600 
1,000-10,000 seconds NEDT (K) : 0.01 
calibration uncertainty (K): 0.5 
antenna beamwidth (deg): 1.0 
pointing uncertainty(deg): 0.05 
3. RADIOMETER DESIGN 
Temperature Control 
The AWVR ‘box’ of Figure 1 incorporates a number of 
design features that relate to the stability of the system. First 
and foremost is the temperature control. Figure 2 gives a 
cross section view of the AWVR interior to illustrate the 
design. The AWVR uses two thermoelectric cooler (TEC) 
circuits and a double insulated enclosure to achieve very 
tight temperature control of the RF components. The ‘main’ 
TEC is attached to the base plate of the weather-tight 
enclosure, and serves as the heat. exchanger to the outside 
air. This TEC can heat or cool the instrument under the 
control of a computer. Fans are used to circulate air from 
the main TEC throughout the main enclosure and around the 
interior RF enclosure, as illustrated with arrows in Figure 2. 
The enclosure incorporates air ducts to guide the air over 
the top of the interior RF enclosure before returning to the 
main TEC. The computer, which is embedded in the 
“electronics” of Figure 2, reads temperatures from sixteen 
thermistors distributed throughout the radiometer. A 
weighted average of these temperatures is applied to a 
software control loop to maintain the average temperature 
surrounding the interior RF enclosure. The target 
temperature for this ‘main’ control loop is 35C. Diurnally 
changing gradients among the thermistors surrounding the 
RF enclosure are typically +/- 0.4C. Also, because of the 
turbulent air flow within the main cavity, random 
fluctuations of +/- 0.1C are common. These errors are 
dampened by the insulation of the interior RF enclosure. 
Within the RF cavity, the design objective is to minimize all 
heat sources and heat sinks so that RF components can 
passively settle to a single reference temperature of 35 C. 
No fans are used inside of the RF cavity because these only 
add heat and turbulence. All active RF components, which 
includes amplifiers and noise diodes, are isolated on a plate 
that is cooled by a smaller secondary TEC to the same 35C. 
Local gradients among the active components are about 
O.lC, but these gradients are constant with time. Insulation 
is packed around these components to prevent radiant and 
convective heat flow into the RF cavity. By this 
arrangement, temperatures within the RF cavity are 
controlled and stabilized to +/- 0.004 C. 
Humidity Control 
Along with temperature control, humidity control within the 
radiometer is also needed to maintain stability of the RF 
circuits. This sensitivity was observed in laboratory tests 
which showed that the forward coupling of a waveguide 
directional coupler could be changed signifcantly with a 
moderate change in humidity. These errors were tied to 
changes in the dielectric of the air within the waveguide 
which affected the standing waves along the coupled arm of 
the waveguide. To control the humidity of the AWVR the 
enclosure is sealed and a nitrogen purge is applied for at 
least one day to remove any moisture. It is important to 
purge the radiometer because moisture will otherwise tend 
to migrate into the insulation near the exterior walls of the 
radiometer at night, and then back into the RF cavity when 
the walls heat up in the daytime. In the field, and if no 
4-1851 
nitrogen purge is available, air can be vented to the outside 
via a silica desiccator. Venting is needed to allow for 
barometric changes. 
Radome 
The radome of the AWVR provides a moisture and thermal 
barrier to the antenna feedhorn, as shown in Figures 1 and 2. 
Expanded polystyrene (EPS) is used for the thermal 
insulatiori of the radome in two layers; one on the RF box of 
Figure 2, and one on the exterior enclosure. To reduce RF 
reflections all surfaces of the foam are treated with a pattern 
of v-groove cuts (not visible in the figures). The exterior 
moisture barrier consists of a thin sheet of Teflon. As 
shown in cross-section in Figure 2, this Teflon sheet is also 
modified with an impressed cone shape. This cone shape is 
needed to disperse reflected power away from the feedhom 
aperture. 
Dicke switch 
Figure 2 also shows the basic layout of the AWVR’s 
waveguide circuits following the horn antenna. The output 
of the hom connects to WR-34 waveguide to the right of the 
figure (drawn as a heavy black line) which then feeds a 
Dicke switch below. The Dicke switch in this case is a 
unique mechanical voice coil actuated vane attenuator, 
which is also shown in cross section in the figure. This 
switch provides the reference black body temperature to the 
radiometer by periodically inserting a vane attenuator into a 
broad-wall slotted waveguide. The voice coil actuator 
moves the vane up and down approximately 0.7cm at a rate 
of about 3 Hz with a settling time of about 10 ms. The voice 
coil itself is at the base of the assembly outside of the RF 
cavity’(for cooling) and is connected to the vane by an 
insulating fiberglass and foam tube. This tube is held by 
loudspeaker ‘spiders’ that guide the moving assembly in a 
straight line without any sliding bearings or contacting parts. 
The reliability of this switch is excellent: after over two 
years of continuous operation, or about 200 million switch 
cycles, there has been no evidence of degradation in either 
of the iwo AWVR’s. 
The RF characteristics of the vane attenuator were the prime 
motivation to developing the actuator. This device works 
over the entire waveguide band, and greatly simplified the 
radiometer design by allowing all three channels of the 
AWVR to be combined into a single front-end. The 
insertion loss in the ‘on’ state (i.e. when the vane is pulled 
out of the slot) is less than 0.3dB; the loss in the ‘off state 
(vane fiilly inserted) is more than 45 dB; and in either state 
of the switch the return loss is well in excess of 30dB. Such 
performance can not be matched by any known electronic 
switch to date. The loss of this device in the ‘on’ state is 
also very reliable and stable since, in this state, it essentially 
is a straight piece of waveguide. 
Figure 2 shows a set of three cross-guide couplers following 
the Dicke switch. Each of the couplers connects via a 
coaxial cable to a corresponding noise diode on the TEC 
plate below. The noise diodes are stabilized in temperature 
and are carefully corttrolled in terms of bias current and duty 
cycle to provide a repeatable and stable additive noise 
reference to the radiometer. These noise diodes are 
switched on and off via their bias currents under the control 
of the coimputer, and the responses are used to monitor and 
stabilize the gain of the receiver. The effective noise 
temperatures of the noise diodes, as referenced to an 
equivalent source at the antenna, is nominally 300 - 500 K 
in the two AWVR’s. The stability with which the output of 
the noise diodes can be compared to power at the antenna 
input is a critical determinant of the radiometer stability. 
The fact that there are three noise diodes is another key to 
the AWVR performance. 
One of the most difficult problems concerning the use of 
coupled noise diodes is the multitude of small reflections 
and associated standing waves that are inevitable in the 
interconnecting transmission lines of the radiometer front- 
end. The laboratory work preceding the AWVR 
development revealed just how problematic standing waves 
are, and how difficult it is to compare the power coupled at 
one point in a transmission line with the power coupled 
elsewhere along the same line. The problem is that a small 
change in a reflection anywhere between the radome, the 
receiver. and the noise diode can coherently interfere with 
the coupler to cause a large change in the effective noise 
diode temperature. Such problems are well known in the 
microwave industry, but they are too often overlooked in 
radiometer designs. A simple innovation of the AWVR in 
this regard is the use of redundanit noise diodes. By 
injecting several noise diodes at different points along the 
transmission line the system can at least measure- and to a 
degree mitigate- variations in the noise diode coupling. This 
feature is invaluable as a diagnostic tool as it provides a 
continuous and relevant measure of the system performance. 
Relative changes in the noise diode outputs are 
continuously monitored in the data system. On many 
occasioiis these changes have been used to quickly identify 
and repair some very subtle problems in the AWVR. For 
example, internal humidity changes, movement of the 
radome, and a variety of coaxial cable problems have all 
been identified with this technique. The fact that the noise 
diodes are injected after the Dicke switch also helps by 
providing such comparisons in either state of the Dicke 
switch. 
Receiver 
Noise diodes 
4-1852 
The output of the couplers in Figure 2 is connected to a approximately 3dB from 22GHz to 32GHz. Following the 
ferrite isolator, which in turn passes the signal through a LNA, the remainder of the receiver (not shown in the figure) 
waveguide-to-coaxial adapter, and then to the low noise is a 3-channel single-sideband direct-detect system: a 
amplifier (LNA) on the RF TEC plate below. The isolator frequency triplexer divides the RF signal into the three 
prevents the relatively poor mismatch and the cold noise observing bands, which are again amplified, and then passed 
temperature of the LNA fkom affecting the calibration to three zero-bias Shottky detectors. All of these devices are 
circuits above. The LNA has a noise figure of commercial coaxial components, and all are attached to the 
J 
I Heat Sink I Base Plate 
/----!- Outside Air: T=l5C. +/- 40C 
Figure 2- AWVR cross-section 
4-1853 
same TEC plate at the base of the RF enclosure. The RF 
power level reaching each of the detectors is approximately - 
17dBm. OP-27 video amplifiers then boost the detected 
signal to about 2 volts, which is then passed to 
digitizerhtegrators in the electronics assembly below the 
RF enclosure. The digitizerhtegrators consist of voltage- 
to-frequency converters followed by digital counters, as is 
common :in radiometer design. 
Timing 
The operation of the Dicke switch and each of the noise 
’ diodes follows the timing diagram of Figure 3. A simulated 
video waveform is also illustrated in Figure 3. The timing 
of the measurement modes is determined by speed 
limitations of the mechanical Dicke switch, and a desire to 
operate the noise diodes at a constant duty cycle and with 
very short pulses in order to minimize thermal cycling of the 
devices. The sequence of measurements is controlled by an 
interrupt service routine in the computer. Digital hardware 
generates interrupts based on a 10 MHz crystal every 3.2768 
milliseconds, and the interrupt service routine then reads the 
digitizer/integrators and programs the next calibration mode 
on each measurement cycle. The digitized data is then 
buffered by the interrupt routine, and then read by a data 
acquisition program which sorts and averages the data by 
fi-equency and calibration mode. In the end, the data system 
records 24 values representing 3 channels (22.2, 23.8, and 
31.4 GHz) in 2 modes of the Dicke switch (antenna or 
reference), and 4 noise diode modes (noise diodes A, B, or 
C, and no-noise-diode). 
q 4 .  CALIBRATION 
The calibration of the AWVR involves two steps: (1) a 
system calibration to determine the noise diode 
temperatures, and then (2) application of these noise diodes 
temperatures to the routine radiometer observations. The 
system calibration ( I )  occurs on a once-per-month basis, and 
involves :a tip-curve procedure as discussed below. In step 
(2) the noise diodes are used to transfer the system 
calibration to the routine observations according to 
where T B  is brightness temperature, To is the physical 
temperature of the Dicke switch reference load, CO is the 
measured “counts” in response to this load (the word 
“counts” here is a reference to the counter of the digitizer, 
and is synonymous with “integrated detector voltage”), C, is 
the ‘‘sky‘’ counts as measured during the antenna mode of 
the Dicke switch, CmD is a sum of the counts-deflected for 
all the modes of the noise diodes, as defied below, and Tm 
is a sum of the corresponding noise ‘diode temperatures. 
There are three noise diodes which are injected in the two 
modes OF the Dicke switch for a total of six noise diode 
measurernents. The noise diode terms of (1) expand to: 
Timing Diagram 
A O O B Q O Q ~ B Q l B O O O  
Norsedzodes: B U o o U B n B o 0 0 I U U I 
c l B o P Q o o B n o o n l n  
Drcke switch: reference antenna 
J 3.28 ms measurementeyde 0.413 second Dicke cycle 
Vrdeo waveform: 
net effective duty cycles: 
1/3 antenna 
1/3 reference load 
1/3 noise diode 
Figure 3- Timing diagram 
4-1854 
TND TsNDA + TsNDB TsNDC + ToNDA + ToNDB + ToNDC 
(3) 
where the 's' and '0' subscripts denote sky and reference 
modes, respectively, the "A", "Bl', and "C" subscripts refer 
to each of three noise diodes, and CO and C, are the same 
reference and sky counts from Equation 1. 
In equation 1, To is readily measured with a thermistor 
placed next to the absorbing vane of the Dicke switch, and is 
very close to 308.14 K (=35 C). This leaves only Tm in 
Equation 1 to be calibrated by the tip-curve procedure. A 
good description of this procedure can be found in [l]. 
Briefly, this procedure involves observing the sky at various 
elevations and then extrapolating the measured curve of 
observed counts versus calculated air mass (= secant of 
elevation assuming a horizontally uniform atmosphere) to 
zero air mass. At zero air mass the extrapolated counts 
correspond to the well known microwave cosmic 
background temperature of 2.7K, and the needed cold target 
reference is established. To a first order this extrapolation is 
liner, but in practice a more accurate extrapolation involves 
an iterative solution to account for the non-linear relation 
between brightness temperature and atmospheric opacity. 
The accuracy of the procedure is limited largely by the 
degree to which the atmosphere is horizontally uniform. 
These uncertainties scale with the humidity of the 
atmosphere, so the quality of the tip-curve tends to be best 
, on dry days. Typically, the expected error of brightness 
temperatures calibrated from a single scan of the antenna 
from 20 degrees of elevation to zenith is about 1 K. Over 
the course of a day the averaging of multiple tip curves can 
reduce the error to about 0.1K. To build up the best 
possible calibration data base fore the AWVR's, the tip- 
curve procedure is performed continuously any time that the 
radiometers are not required for other observations. 
5.  PERFORMANCE VALUATION 
The following performance evaluation is broken into three 
parts: (1) "delta-T" ,to compare the short term noise of the 
AWVR with theoretical limits; (2) "stability estimates" to 
establish the performance on time scales of about 10,000 
seconds to 2-days using Structure Function and Allen 
Standard Deviation analysis; and (3) "tip-curve" results 
which track the noise diode calibration history for nearly a 
year of operations at Goldstone. 
Delta-T (thermal noise) 
The theoretical noise limit, or 'delta-T', of the AWVR can be 
computed from Equation 1 given the duty cycles of Figure 3. 
The formulation of the delta-T equation is straightforward, 
but quite lengthy, and leads to the following formula: 
I+ 18( Fl2 (T, + T, + T- )' 
" . Y  
(4) 
where B is the detection bandwidth of the AWVR (about 
600 MHz),  T is integration time, T, is the receiver noise 
temperature (about 500K), x refers to the Dicke switch 
mode, y refers to a specific noise diode, and the remaining 
terms are from Equation 1 and 3. 
To measure the thermal noise of the two AWVR's the 
radiometers were operated side-by side while observing the 
zenith sky. The difference between the brightness 
temperatures of the two radiometers at each frequency was 
then used to estimate the combined delta-T according to: 
where D is the brightness temperature difference as a 
function of time, t, and integration time, T, and <> is the 
expectation operator. Note that Es equals the standard 
deviation of D when D is zero-mean white noise. 
Figures 4 summarize the combined delta-T of the A-1 and 
A-2 radiometers as computed from measurements with 
Equation 5 (solid lines) and from the root-sum-square (RSS) 
of the theoretical estimates of Equation 4 for the two 
radiometers (dashed lines). Figure 4 is a log-log plot of 
noise versus integration time, starting at a minimum 
integration set by the Dicke switch cycle time of 0.413 
seconds. As can be seen in this figure, the radiometer noise 
agrees very well with the theory out to an integration time of 
1,000 seconds, at which point instability of the two 
radiometers prevents any further noise reduction. The 
minima near 1,000 seconds of the three channels is 
approximately 0.005 to 0.008K. Since Figure 4 represents 
the difference of two nearly identical radiometers, these 
numbers can be divided by SQRT(2) to estimate that the 
noise of individual radiometers is approximately 0.0035 to 
0.0056K. At 1,000 second time scales the Cassini 
requirements have been translated to a 1 0 s  radiometric 
stability requirement. From Figure 4, the AWVR's will 
evidently meet this requirement comfortably. 
4-1855 
A1 -A2  deltu-T vs. integration t ime 
1 . 0 0 0 ~  ' " " " "  ' " " " ' 1  ' " " ' 1 ' 1  ' " " " ' I  ' " " ' " 1  " 
31Gtiz 
24Gtiz 
22GIiz 
10-1 1 00 10' 102 I 03 I o4 105 
integration time [seconds;) 
Figure 4- Theoretical (dashed) and measured (solid) delta-T from side-by-side comparisons of the two AWVRs 
Stability Estimates f iom Side-by-Side Data 
The measured delta-T's presented above were calculated 
integration time of the box-car averages. This calculation is 
useful for determining where the instrument stability 
exceeds thermal noise, but it is not necessarily the best 
measure of instrument stability at longer time scales since 
integration times exceeding 1,000 seconds are of little 
practical interest. Better measures of the instrument stability 
on long time scales are provide by either structure function 
analysis or by the Allen Standard Deviation of the A1 - A2 
brightness temperature difference. As a sample case for the 
following, analysis, Figures 5 and 6 give the brightness 
temperahre and brightness temperature differences, 
respectively, from sky measurements spanning 5 days. A 
box-car integration time of 124 seconds applies. In Figure 5 
the overlay of brightness temperatures of the two 
radiometers match too well to discriminate between the A1 
and A2 results, but in Figure 6 there is an obvious drift in 
the 31 GHz channel that will have some bearing on the 
following, error analysis. 
fi-om the difference of consecutive samples separated by the 
Figures 7 and 8 give two different estimates of the AWVR 
"excess" errors- meaning errors in excess of the inherent 
thermal noise- versus time scale. Figure 7 was computed as 
the square root of the structure function after subtracting the 
thermal noise according to 
Es(T)= d((D(t)-D(f+T))2)-((Dtt)--D(t+rO))2) (6)  
where D is the A1 - A2 brightness temperature difference 
fiom Figure 6,  t is time, T is the time difference for the 
horizontal scale of Figure 7, and T~ is the integration time. 
T~ is set sufficiently small so that the right-most term of 
Equation 6 is an estimate of the thermal noise only. In 
Figures 3 through 8 ro is 124 seconds where, as evident in 
Figure 4, the noise is consistent with the theoretical thermal 
limit. Subtracting thermal noise in this manner isolates 
errors caused by slower instrumental instabilities which are 
largely independent of integration tinie for to <: - 1000 
seconds. Figure 7 is thus applicable to all integration times 
of interest. As can be seen in Figure Y the 22 and 24 GHz 
channels both exhibit an excellent stability of less than 0.03 
K excess structure error. The minitria near 86,000 and 
172,000 seconds- or 1 and 2 days- in the 22 and 24 GHz 
channels also indicate that much of the error is diurnal. The 
large drift in the 31Ghz channel, in the other hand, 
obviously contributes a great deal to the excess structure 
error of Figure 7. 
The original requirements for Cassini CiWE are expressed as 
an Allen Standard Deviation (ASD)i of the path delay 
correction. ASD is insensitive to linear drift, so the 31 GHz 
drift of Figure 6 should be less of a concern for the GWE 
than indicated by the structure function. To evaluate ASD 
4-1856 
errors on the same scale with Figure 7, Figure 8 gives a 
modified version of the Allen Standard Deviation (ASD) in 
which the units are Kelvin- instead of the conventional 
secondshecond ASD defurition- and the thermal noise has 
again been subtracted according to 
-((D(t) - 2D(t + c) + D(t + 2.r))?) 
- -( (D(t) - 2D(t + co) + D(t + 25,))?) 
among the different noise diode data of that channel. This 
drift has since stopped. 
EA(c) = 
Note that there is no division by T in Equation 7, as would 
be conventional in the ASD calculation. 
Figure 8 exhibits a clear diurnal component in all three 
channels. The 31 GHZ channel of Figure 8 again exhibits 
the worst stability of the three AWVR channels, but the 
minima of about 20 or 30 mK at 1 and 2 days time lag are 
remarkably small and consistent. 
The 3 lGHz performance is generally poorer than the 22 and 
24 GHz channels due to known increases in the reflection 
coefficients of the radome and in nearly all RF components 
of the radiometer's fi-ont-end. Poor directivity in the 
directional couplers used for the noise injection at 31 GHZ 
are also problematic. The particular data set of Figure 5 was 
collected shortly after a modification to one of the A-1 
AI  & A2(qr~en) brightness temperatures 
l o o 0  
0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
doys since 02,08/23~2000(files:A8230113.OA2 t o  A82801 13.DA2) 
Figure 5- Brightness temperature overlay of the A1 radiometer'(b1ack) and A2 (green). Only the 31 GHZ channels of 
A1 and A2 differ enough to discriminate between the two instruments. 
radiometer's noise diodes and a coaxial cable, and the drift 
in the 31GHz channel can be linked to a comparable drift 
4-1857 
AI -A2  Tb difference 31 GHz,  grr?en=22.2 ,  r e d = 2 3 . 8  
1 .o 
- 1 .o 
31 GHz 
I . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . , . . .  I . . . , . . . . .  I . . . . . . .  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
doys since 0Z,08/23/2000(fiIes1A8230113.OA2 t o  A82801 13.DA2) 
Figure 6: Difference of A1 and A2 brightness temperatures fiom Figure 5. Integration time = 124 seconds. 
4-1858 
A I - A 2  Tb excess noise 
I " " I " " I " " 1  0.25 
Figure 7- Excess noise of A1-A2 brightness temperatures difference of Figure 6 computed as 
SQRT(structure function - thermal noise). 
Figure 8- Excess noise of A1-A2 brightness temperatures difference fiom Figure 6 computed as a pseudo-Allen 
Standard Deviation by Equation 7. 
4-1859 
A WVR stubility estimates from tip-cuwe data 
The long term stability of each of the AWVR‘s can be 
independently estimated from tip-curve calibration data 
collected over the past year at Goldstone. Figures 9 and 10 
summarize errors estimated by subtracting brightness 
temperatures based on a one-time calibration from those 
which have been recalibrated from daily tip-curves. As 
noted above, the primary result of a tip curve calibration is 
an estimate of the effective noise diode temperature, so 
Figures 9 and 10 essentially track the histories of the noise 
diodes with respect to a one-year average. Only high quality 
tip curve results which span an entire day are plotted here; 
out of a possible 300 days, only about 90 days were 
selected. Most days were rejected due to poor weather or 
outages caused by other experiments or maintenance. As 
can be seen, both AWVR’s have drifted very little over 
nearly one year. Only minor long term errors in the 3 1 GHz 
channels are evident. Otherwise, much of the short-term 
scatter- especially in the 22 GHz channels- can be attributed 
to inhoniogenaities in the atmosphere which limit the 
accuracy of the tip-curve result. Table 2 summarizes the 
standard deviation of Figures 9 and 10. Also given in Table 
2 are startdard deviations calculated from the ‘best’ month in 
which particularly dry and stable weather yielded very high 
quality tip-curve calibrations. 
The last three rows in Table 2, and Figures 11 and 12, 
provide estimates of the average calibration errors versus 
time of day. These were calculated by binning the tip curve 
data in &hour segments sorted by time of day, and then 
comparing the results with the all-day average. These 
calculations were repeated for various sub-sets of the tip 
curves (spanning different seasons) and the results were 
consistent with the averages of Figures 11 and 12. Thus, 
Figures 11 and 12 are fairly accurate estimates of persistent 
diurnal errors of the AWVRs. The standard deviation of 
the difference of A1 and A2 diurnal errors, as presented in 
the last row of Table 2, are also in good agreement with the 
errors that were estimated by the ASD of Figure 8 using the 
side-by-slde AWVR comparisons. 
Known electrical losses in the AWVR antenna and radome 
may account for much of the diurnal errors of Figures 11 
and 12. Radiometric tests of flat refliector samples were 
made prior to antenna fabrication which indicated that 
reflector losses would contribute 0.5 to 0.9K to the antenna 
noise temperature. Add to this the estimated reflector 
spillover of 0.5 K, and the total antenna noise contribution 
from elements outside of the WVR’s thermal enclosure will 
likely exceed 1.0 - 1.5K. These values scale to 
approximately 0.03K to 0.05 K of peak-to-peak antenna 
noise temperature change given an average day-to-night 
ambient temperature change of 10K out of an average 300K. 
Such nciise temperature changes apparently agree with 
Figures 11 and 12. 
Table 2. Brightness temperature errors calculated from day-to-day tip-curve results of Figures 9 and 11. 
RMS TB errors f r o m  daily tip-curve vs. no.ise diode calibrations (K)  : 
31GHz 22GHz 24GHz - year (RMS of Figures 9 and 10): 
A l l  94 days between 7/20/1999 and 6/5/2000: 0.204 0.162 0.151 
A2, 89 days between 7/20/1999 and 6/6/2000: 0.4311 0.185 0.?93 
- best month: 
All 22 days from 12/22/1999 to 1/20/2000: 0.086 0.057 0.041 
A2, 29 days from 12/10/1999 to 1/15/2000: 0.027 0.064 0.045 
- diurnal errors from Figures 11 and 12: 
A1 vs time of day: 0.031 0.037 0.027 
A2 vs time of day: 0.057 . 0.039 0.031 
difference of Al-AZ vs. time of day: 0.072 0.035 0.022 
4-1860 
A- 1 daily overaqe t ip-curve errors c 
U 
Y 
0 + 
> 
a, v 
- % 2  
P 
3 i '  
c 
8 
0 .- ...., 
.E 0 
'U 
-0 
- 5
P 
-' 
c 
01 
a, - $ -2 .- 
L 
100 2 00 300 4 00 
31.4 
doys since OO:OO:OO, 07/20/1999 
17:40:33. Of/20/1999 to 13:15:29. 06/05/2000 
Figure 9- TB difference of A-1 as calibrated with a single average of all tip curve results, and calibrations based on 
daily tip curve results. Positive error means that the long-term calibrated AWVR overestimated the brightness 
temperature on a given day. 
a, m 
2 
0 '  
> 
E 
9 
c 
._ s 
w 
.P 0 
'U 
-0 
2 
? x - 1  
3 
c 
5 
c 
v, @
8 
L $ -2 .- 
A-2  daily overaqe tip-curve errors 
~ " " ~ " " ~ " " ~ " " " " ~ " " ' ~  
t 
2 >  
+4$ 
t . . . .  I . . . .  I , . . .  I . . . .  I , . , ,  I . . , .  1 
L 
= o  50 100 150 200 250 300 
days since oO:OO:o~, 07/20/1g99 
18:10:32. 07/20/1999 to  13:15:33. 06/06/2000 
Figure 10- Same as Figure 7 for the A-2 radiometer 
4-1861 
31.4 
A-1 tip curve errors vs timlo of day 
I I , I I I I I I 
0.20 ' 
I 0.10 
- iE -0.10 
0 5 10 15 20 
locol time of doy (PST hour) 
94 dov overoae 
Figure 11- Average brightness temperature error versus time of day for A1 based on tip curve 
mvalvcic 
A-2 tip curve errors vs tirne of day 
0.20 F 
0.10 I 
ol t -0.10 
t 
-0.aot . . . . I . . . . I . . . d 
0 5 10 15 20 
locol time of doy (PST hour) 
89 dov averoae 
Figure 12- Average brightness temperature error versus time of day for A2. 
4-1862 
6. CONCLUSION 
The AWVR’s will meet the stability requirements of the 
Cassini GWE experiment. On time scales of 1,000 to 
10,000 seconds the above data demonstrates that the 0.01K 
stability goal has been met, with some channels approaching 
0.003K. For a radiometer in which the observed brightness 
temperature is some 300 K colder than the internal (Dicke) 
reference temperature, a 0.003K stability figure implies a 
gain stability of 10 parts per million. Such precision would 
be considered good if the measurement were distance, 
weight, or voltage- but for a microwave power measurement 
such precision is outstanding. Beyond the Cassini 
requirements- and well past 10,000 second time scales- the 
AWVR’s also exhibit an excellent level of stability of about 
0.02K for day-to-day errors, and approximately 0.03 - 0.08 
K permonth. 
This report has focused on the stability of the radiometers, 
but not the absolute uncertainty. In Table 1 the quoted 
calibration uncertainty was given as 0.5K. Yet no data has 
been provided here to support this estimate. 0.5K is, at 
present, a best estimated based on comparisons with other 
WVR‘s and on a number of factors which are beyond the 
scope of this paper. These factors include detector non- 
linearities, antenna losses that vary with elevation angle, and 
a host of potential errors associated with the tip curve 
procedure (e.g. earth curvature, refraction, ftnte antenna 
beamwidth, etc. [l]). A more careful error analysis is 
warranted for future work. 
Acknowledgements. The work described was performed at 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. The author wishes to 
acknowledge Lance Riley for managing the AWVR 
development, Susan Welsh for coordinating development of 
the mechanical structures and positioners, Ray Swindlehurst 
for numerous contributions including fabrication of the, 
voice-coil switch, Bill Jinbriale for the feedhorn design, and 
George Resch who’s advocacy within the science 
community made this work possible. 
REFERENCES 
[ 13 M.A.Janssen, Atmospheric remote sensing by microwave 
radiometry. New York: Wiley & sons, 1993. 
[2] S.J. Keihm and K.A. Marsh, “New model-based Bayesian 
inversion algorithm for the retrieval of wet troposphere path 
delay from radiometric measurements,” Radio Sci., vol. 33. no. 
2, pp411-419, March-April 1998. 
observations on a 21-km baseline”, Radio Sci., vo1.31, pp. 129- 
146, 1996. 
[4] M. Tinto and J. W. Armstrong, “Spacecraft Doppler 
tracking as a narrow-band detector of gravitational radiation,” 
Physical Review D., vo1.58, pp. 042002-1 -8, July 1998. 
[5 ]  A. B. Tanner, “Development of a high stability water vapor 
radiometer,” Radio Sci., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 449-462, Mar.-Apr. 
1998. 
[6] R.P Linfield and J.Z. Wilcox, “Radio metric error due to 
mismatch and offset between a DSN antenna beam and the 
beam of a tropospheric calibration instrument,” TDA Progree 
Report, 42-114, pp.1-9, 1993. 
[7] R. P. Linfield, “Effect of aperture averaging upon 
tropospheric phase fluctuations seen with a radio antenna,” 
Radio Science, vol. 33,. no. 5, pp. 1353-1359, Sept.-Oct. 1998. 
Alan Tanner is a microwave 
systems engineer at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratoiy. His work 
at JPL has focused on the design 
and calibration of radiometers and 
radar scatterometers for remote 
sensing. He received his B.S. 
degree in 1984>om the University 
of Massachusetts at Amherst, and 
his Ph.D. degree in 1989 @om the 
University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst. 
. 
[3] R.P. Linfield et al., “A test of water vapor radiometer based 
troposphere calibration using very long baseline interferometry 
4-1863 
