Communication System Architecture 
for Planetary Exploration 
Richard Alena, Bruce Gilbaugh, Brian Glass 
NASA Ames Research Center 
Moffett Field, CA 94035- 1000 
~ralena.beilb~uugl~,b~lass) @mail.ar.c.nasa.gov 
Stephen P. Braham 
PolyLAB,TIME Centre 
Simon Fraser University at Harbour Centre 
5 15 West Hastings St. 
Vancouver, BC, Canada 
wap@polvlab. sfii.ca 
650-604-0262 
604-268-7981 
Abstract-Future human missions to Mars will require 
effective communications supporting exploration activities 
and scientific field data collection. Constraints on cost, size, 
weight and power consumption for all communications 
equipment make optimization of these systems very 
important. These information. and communication systems 
connect people and systems together into coherent teams 
performing the difficult and hazardous tasks inherent in 
planetary exploration. The communication network 
supporting vehicle telemetry data, mission operations, and 
scientific collaboration must have excellent reliability and 
flexibility. 
We propose hybrid communication architectures consisting 
of space-based links, a surface-based deployable mid-range 
communications network and a cluster of short-range links 
to solve the problems of connectivity and bandwidth, while 
meeting the other constraints of weight and power. A 
network of orbiting satellites could cover much of the planet 
surface, but this space-based capability may not be optimal 
for cost or performance. Specifically, a minimal space-based 
capability can be augmented using mobile cellular repeaters 
deployable by robots and human EVA. This method results 
in an increase in the number of radio nodes, but the 
distances separating them is decreased. This results in a 
significant increase in bandwidth and decrease in radio 
power and therefore node size, complexity and power 
consumption. The paper will discuss the results of field- 
testing such hybrid radio systems for the support of 
scientific surveys. System analysis of design tradeoffs will 
yield insight into optimal solutions that will be compared to 
other approaches providing a method of effectively 
evaluating new candidate architectures. 
Copyright 2001 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. No 
copyright is asserted in the United States under Title 17, U.S. Code. The 
U.S. Govemment has royalty-& license to exercise al l  rights under the 
copyright claimed herein for government purposes. All other rights are 
reserved by the copyright owner. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Introduction 
2. Background ' 
3. Hybrid Communications Architecture 
4. Wireless Network Performance Measurements 
Link Availability 
Bandwidth and Network Throughput 
Latency 
5. Repeater Design Tradeoffs 
6. MEX Communications System Example 
7. MEX Field Test Results 
8. Conclusions 
- -- 3-1 075 
I. INTRODUCTION 2. BACKGROUND 
Reliable communication systems are essential for providing 
safety and operational capability for human planetary 
exploration missions. The reliability and cost factors of a 
communication system are functions of the architecture. In 
fact, the architecture of a system determines quite 21 range of 
properties for that system, such as redundancy, number of 
elements, connectivity and cost. This paper will explore 
hybrid architectures consisting of space-based elements and 
deployable ground-based elements. The proposed 
architectures will be evaluated for basic properties to help 
guide future technology development decisions. 
The NASA Reference Mission to Mars will be used as a 
template for determining mission operational requirements 
relevant to the communication systems.' The Reference 
Mission baselines a small team of humans living on the 
planet surface in a habitat module as their exploraiion base, 
using resources provided by pre-deployed energy, oxygen 
and fuel production facilities. These human explorm would 
be assisted in their exploration traverses by a variety of 
robots. They would use small vehicles to perform short 
traverses and larger pressurized vehicles for longer traverses 
being away from the habitat for days at a time. They would 
use a variety of instruments both hand-held and vehicle- 
mounted for operating support systems and gathering 
scientific data. 
Communications technology is essential for the exploration 
of other planets. However, communications between 
instruments, robots, and eventually astronauts on the surface 
of a distant planet presents specific constraints that must be 
addressed by novel technical solutions. For instance, Mars 
presents varied terrain with substantial relief (craters, 
canyons, volcanoes, etc.), has no stable ionosphere to 
reliably support ground-based long-range wireless 
communications. The planet presents a hostile environment 
that requires high-speed video, audio and data 
communication to ensure safe robotic and human mission 
operations with the highest possible science neturn. In 
addition, the wide variation in expected communication 
performance, both for surface operations, and between Mars 
and Earth, leads to significant design issues. The facilities 
for this mission would consist of long-range space 
communications with one or more satellites in orbit around 
the remote planet augmented by ground-deployed facilities 
for local communication. An analysis of the performance 
benefits of various combinations of these elements would be 
very useful for developing exploration scenarios more fully. 
NASA Ames Research Center is developing concepts and 
technology demonstrations for planetary surface 
exploration. The Mobile Exploration System (MEX) project 
in the Computational Sciences Division, led by Rick Alena, 
is integrating a variety of digital multimedia wpabilities for 
supporting remote field science surveys and mission 
operations. These media include digital voice 
communications and recognition, pen-based display and 
human interaction, digital video, high-resolution digital 
images and scientific instruments. New efforts include space 
suit technology and robotic rover interactions. These 
elements are all linked using high-bandwidth wireless local 
area network (LAN) technology capahle of covlering several 
kilometers. 
The MEX project works collaboratively with two other 
groups for exploration technology field tests. Simon Fraser 
University (SFU), and Canada's Communications Research 
Centre (CRC) are examining the development needs for 
communication technologies that wil enable fitture support 
of ex loration missions to other planets, in particular to 
Mars. Advanced communications technology has already 
been experimentally deployed succesiifully during the 1999 
and 2000 field seasons of the NASA Haughton-Mars Project 
(HMP), a Mars analog field research program focused on 
the Haughton impact crater site. The crater is located on 
Devon Island, Nunavut, in the Canadian High Arctic. 
During the 2000 field season of the HMP, the 
implementation of satellite links to the Internet and 
deployment of three different regional networks 
strengthened the ongoing collaboration between NASA and 
Canadian research institutions and industry. The Telematics 
Research Laboratory at Simon Fraser University (SFU) 
worked with the SFU PolyLAB Advanced Collaborative 
Networking Laboratory to provide and manage space-based 
communications, a regional radj o-based networking 
solution, and infrastructure integration. The MEX team 
deployed two other regional radio systems, linking all- 
terrain vehicles (ATV) to base camp. 
P 
The NASA Haughton-Mars Project (IMP) is a NASA-led 
field research program (Principal Investigator Pascal Lee), 
dedicated to the study of the Haughton Crater and 
s~rroundings.~ The twenty-kilometer diameter crater was 
formed in an impact approximately twenty-three million 
years ago. The region is a cold, polar desert, and thus 
presents a wide variety of geological features and biological 
attributes that may shed new insights into the nature and 
evolution of Mars. The scientific study of the Haughton site 
provides a unique opportunity to also study the strategy, 
technologies, and human factors relevant to planning the 
future exploration of Mars by robots and humans. 
3-1076 _--- . 
The HMP addresses issues of field instrumentation, 
transportation, communications, and team-based scientific 
research in a relatively hostile and isolated environment. 
This includes the operation of robotic elements in the field 
and their synergy with human exploration, especially with 
regards to communications. From the standpoint of 
communications, the topography at Haughton can be 
characterized as presenting an intricate network of hills and 
valleys, including vast tracks of inter-valley rocky plateau 
surfaces and deep canyon systems. The region experiences 
periods of extreme cold (- -50°C in winter; - 0°C in 
summer), and transportation of hardware systems across the 
region by all-terrain vehicles and autonomous robots inflicts 
high impact and vibration loads on electronic equipment. 
Furthermore, logistical support available at the site is 
limited, and the science and exploration research teams in 
the field are faced with the challenge of having to setup, 
configure, monitor, and maintain complex systems to ensure 
that high-quality science information is collected while 
coping with field survival and safety concerns. This activity 
has yielded important insights into communication system 
architecture." 
The MEX is used to develop operational scenarios and tools 
for collaborative mobile computing. The field exploration 
environment poses significant constraints on the interaction 
of humans with data system components. The humans are 
hampered by their clothing which protects them against the 
cold windy environment restricting their movement and 
vision; they must use their hands to drive the vehicles, run 
instruments and take notes. Data system design needs to 
accommodate these differences while providing the 
situational awareness and science support required for safe 
productive exploration. 
The MEX project is an outgrowth of previous work on 
wireless networking and collaborative software tools for 
Space S t a t i ~ n . ~ , ~  The MEX uses vehicle-mounted and hand- 
held video cameras to provide viewpoints to remote 
observers and collaborators. Streaming digital video from 
these cameras provides continuous high-bandwidth data that 
allows stress testing of the wireless network links, providing 
a high-level measure of link performance. Additional MEX 
functions include digital still cameras for detailed records of 
samples and sites and mapping capability based on Global 
Positioning System (GPS) to provide a real-time track of 
movement and position. A variety of communication modes 
between the field party and base camp are provided 
including voice channels and e-mail. Collaborative s o h a r e  
allows creating pen drawings on shared white boards for 
diagrams. 
3. HYBRID COMMUNICATIONS ARCHITECTURE 
We advocate a hybrid architecture consisting of a small 
number of satellites around the planet to provide adequate 
relay capability to the planetary work sites from earth and 
mobile deployable ground-based repeaters to provide high- 
bandwidth low-latency communications between base and 
remote field parties. Each mobile repeater provides 
communications to a cluster of instruments and computers 
located within its cell, as well as providing backbone 
communication between repeaters. This architecture 
provides optimal performance while minimizing costs of 
deploying the communication infrastructure. 
On one end of the spectrum of architectural choices, purely 
space-based communication systems can be used. Each 
planetary node would have a satellite ground station for 
communications. The satellites could be synchronous with 
respect to locations on the planet surface or could form a 
varying constellation in low orbit.7 This is equivalent to 
geo-synchronous (GEO) or low-earth orbit (LEO) methods 
used today. Iridium and other ventures have deployed LEO 
constellations for phone contacts anywhere in the world. 
However, the dominance of cellular phone systems suggests 
that perhaps ground-based repeater systems could be more 
cost effective for local links. 
The basic problem with space-based communications is that 
the distances involved require ground transceivers to be 
more powerful, with larger antennas to provide the gain 
required. These communication distances can be anywhere 
fiom 100 miles (LEO) to 24,000 miles (GEO) for earth. For 
a given receiver sensitivity, Effective Radiated Power (ERE') 
scales as the square of distance. Therefore ground-based 
systems have an advantage of requiring about lo3 - 10' 
times less power (30-8OdB) per link than space-based 
systems. These advantages also apply to using smaller 
antennas that do not need precise pointing, or even omni 
directional antennas resulting in small compact transceivers. 
Batteries and power sources scale similarly. However, more 
repeaters are required for adequate coverage. Anyone with a 
miniature cell phone can attest to these advantages. 
This hybrid architecture maximizes bandwidth for local data 
communications while minimizing distance between 
planetary elements, which results in minimum size weight 
and power consumption for the communication 
components. Latency would be very low, allowing real-time 
monitoring and remote control over the links, with very 
high-bandwidth accommodating multiple video and data 
channels on each link. Additionally, the repeaters in the 
system can be used for other purposes such as differential 
position determination and environmental sensors. 
3-1077 
The use of mobile repeaters, either mounted on ATVs 
ridden by humans or mounted on robots that can be sent to 
optimal locations is a key concept for a deployable wireless 
regional network providing high-bandwidth connections to 
remote areas. Mobile repeaters allow dynamic changes to 
network topology supporting a much greater operational 
area and can accommodate the constraints of rugged terrain. 
They can be deployed to cover a given survey site and then 
re-deployed to cover another , site minimizing the total 
number of repeaters needed. Each repeater can host a local 
cluster of wireless instruments and computers providing 
significant operational flexibility and capability. 
There may be more than one such deployable cluster. Field 
parties more than 10 km away from base would require the 
use of a pressurized vehicle anyway, and this vehicle would 
carry a ground station for the satellite link, becoming a 
temporary base. Mobile repeaters deployed from the 
pressurized vehicle would provide communication with 
exploration parties going out for a day. In this manner, 
multiple clusters could support complex exploration 
missions with the space-based links providing the backbone 
between the clusters. 
4. WIRELESS NETWORK PERFORMANCE 
MEASUREMENTS 
Performance can be characterized by several Quality of 
Service (QoS) parameters: 
0 Link Availability 
0 Bandwidth and Network Throughput 
Latency 
Link Availability 
The single most important QoS parameter may be link 
availability or connectivity. Link availability is simply the 
probability that the link is able to pass data at any given 
time. Connectivity is a complex function of radio frequency 
and design, terrain and electromagnetic propagation 
characteristics. On earth, radio frequency is very important 
since low fiequencies bounce off the ionosphere and 
therefore are not limited to line-of-sight. However, many 
planets do not have ionospheres. 
Digital radio communication systems are required because 
of the high data rate needed for communications with 
scientists in the field ranging fi-om audio and video to 
science data and control messages. These systems operate at 
ultra-high frequencies (UHF) to maintain correspondingly 
high bandwidth, and thus are generally blocked by hills and 
canyons, producing serious signal fade. Furthermore, these 
hills reflect radio waves, causing interference between 
signals travelling along multiple paths. Fade at high- 
fi-equencies requires the deployment of . radio repeater 
systems throughout the area, in partioular on various high 
points with good line of sight to science research sites. 
These repeater systems must be monitored and maintained 
in the field, which poses important logistical constraints of 
relevance to future exploration missions. The number of 
repeaters needed is dependent upon the terrain. 
There are properties associated with the physical layer 
(radio transceivers) of wireless networks such as range, 
coverage and modulation rate. The range is the distance the 
radio link can transmit data, the coverage is the direction 
and area in which reception can o~:cur, and finally the 
modulation rate is the raw data bandwidth carried by the 
radio signal. Modulation rate and dat,a rate are related, but 
may not be the same due to encoding schemes. 
All communication links vary in performance versus time. 
The received signal strength (RSS1)l of a link can vary 
widely. In space communications, particularly Arctic 
communications, scattering and refiraction of the radio 
signals as they pass through the ionosphere and troposphere 
respectively, can produce constantly changing RSSI. The 
regional network links suffer similar phenomenon due to 
changing antenna configurations on the mobile elements. 
Interference between radio elements can cause performance 
degradation. 
Bandwidth and Network Throughput 
Bandwidth determines the amount and form of data that 
may be delivered or returned for an exploration field site. A 
low-bandwidth link generally requires less power, and may 
be suitable for telemetry requiremenits. A high-bandwidth 
link, however, will be required when live video and large 
amounts of imaging data must be reiturned from the field 
site. Effective Radiative Power (ERP) requirements for links 
are roughly proportional to bandwidth, both over space- 
based and land-based communications links. 
A high-level measure of effective bandwidth is network 
throughput expressed in packets per second, bits per second 
or bytes per second. A network monitor will provide such 
measurements directly and can be placed at various points in 
a system to help pinpoint bottlenecks. Throughput is a 
complex interaction of physical (radio) layer performance, 
network protocols and application layer. Monte Carlo 
methods can be used to simuliate and determine 
performance, but MEX uses direct network monitoring. 
Interference between different radio systems is a signifcant 
design issue that limits the choice of frequencies and 
placement of equipment. The primary carrier frequencies of 
each link segment can interfere with each other directly. 
This is worst when the beam of one system impinges upon 
the antenna of another system that uses similar frequency 
bands. Generally, the more sensitive receivers are most 
3-1078 _. - . 
affected. Correct planning and placement of antennas is the 
primary solution. Use of different frequency bands for 
different links can also be effective. Interference can result 
in low throughput or poor link availability. 
Latency 
The latency or time lag present in a communications link 
determines how it may be used in human and robotic 
missions and is generally proportional to the distance 
between the elements. In surface to orbit communications, 
of the kind that may be used to extend communications 
across a large region on Mars, latency is on the order of 
milliseconds and is due mostly to buffering of data in 
repeaters. Humans on a planetary exploration mission will 
be in close collaborative communication with their local 
base, and an intrinsic part of the communication loop. 
Interplanetary communications require significantly 
different solutions. With propagation delays reaching up to 
forty minutes for an Earth-Mars link, long delays are 
introduced for direct interaction. These long delays will 
require different methods of interaction not dependent upon 
real-time response and will have a significant effect on the 
way missions will be run. 
' 
5 .  REPEATER DESIGN TRADEOFFS 
Complex design tradeoffs are involved for the development 
of communications system for exploration. Understanding 
the variables and their interaction allows making intelligent 
choices. Designing robust communication systems that meet 
the constraints of space operation requires analyzing the real 
requirements of such systems and using effective 
architectures that result in structures that have properties 
appropriate for the intended application. 
The HMP fieldwork allowed understanding these 
relationships because the site is large, about 20 km in 
diameter, and the terrain is rough, with high hills and 
valleys covering virtually the entire area. There is no single 
point that is so high as to provide an optimal primary 
repeater site. The science survey sites are widely scattered 
in a variety of directions from base camp. The 
environmental conditions are challenging for both humans 
and machines. These constraints help simulate the 
conditions anticipated for planetary exploration. 
The rough terrain requires the use of many repeaters to clear 
the many hills between base camp and the survey site. The 
primary repeater site is chosen to provide a good link to 
base and a high point within line-of-sight of many of the 
proposed survey sites and/or mobile repeater sites. Proper 
advanced planning and analysis of field operations is 
required for these reasons. In fact, computer terrain mapping 
programs can be used to determine optimal repeater sites by 
calculating line-of-sight restrictions. Since directional 
antennas are used, rotators are required to point them 
properly. 
There are two basic types of repeaters: in-band repeating 
and multi-band repeating. The in-band type incorporates just 
one radio transceiver and a single antenna, often omni 
directional. It takes a packet from the source, buffers it 
internally, and then repeats it after receiving it. Since the 
single transceiver cannot simultaneously ' transmit and 
receive, it imposes a 50% duty cycle on the throughput. 
Therefore each repeater hop can result in a 50% reduction in 
raw bandwidth! Pipelining can reduce this for multiple 
hops, but the performance impact is still significant. 
The multi-band type uses two radio transceivers working on 
slightly different frequency bands and feeding two separate 
antennas. These repeaters can simultaneously receive a 
packet and re-transmit it on the other channel. This should 
theoretically result in more bandwidth when multiple hops 
are involved. Multi-band repeaters use two antennas, which 
can be pointed in different directions, solving interference 
problems while providing gain for additional range. 
In-band repeaters have the advantage of simplicity, while 
multi-band repeaters have the performance advantage. We 
advocate a simple in-band low-bandwidth omni-directional 
telemetry system in conjunction with a multi-band high- 
bandwidth directional system to take advantage of both 
approaches. A single in-band radio is combined with two 
multi-band radios to produce this hybrid. The resulting 
system features redundancy to accommodate component 
failure since telemetry can be carried on the high-rate link 
should the low-rate link fail. This dual-mode model has 
been used for spacecraft communication systems for many 
years. 
The following diagram shows a representative repeater 
design with these characteristics. It combines a low- 
bandwidth omni directional radio with two high-bandwidth 
radios feeding two directional antennas acting as a multi- 
band repeater. The directional antennas use rotators for 
pointing. The high-bandwidth repeater is used for LAN 
connections while the low-bandwidth system is used for 
control and voice communications. A processor is included 
allowing crossover of data to the high-bandwidth system as 
a substitute for the low-bandwidth system. This processor 
could also determine time delays in communication pulses 
allowing determination of position differentials. In the event 
of high-bandwidth system failure, there is still basic control, 
telemetry and voice communications through the low- 
bandwidth system. This approach is single-fault tolerant, 
providing basic communication capability and monitoring 
for safety. 
3-1079 
6.  MEX COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM EXAMPLE I Omni 
Figure 1. Repeater Confguration 
Cost is a function of the combined requirements for power, 
size, volume, weight, component selection and niunber of 
elements. The basic requirements for the design of 
deployable communication systems requires understanding 
the extent of the area to be covered, the terrain involved and 
the constraints on repeater placement. For example, one can 
trade off radio power and antenna complexity against the 
number of repeaters required. The repeater package 
described above can be made very compact and reliable, 
even using today’s technology. For a ground-based system 
covering distances of 3-20 Km, the radio power lis on the 
order of a watt apiece, and the total repeater power 
consumption could be well under 5 watts l.ota1 for 
bandwidth in the mega-bits per second. 
There are other tradeoffs for repeater design worth 
mentioning briefly. Bandwidth scales directly with effective 
radiated power (Em). Line-of sight range scales directly 
with ERP squared. ERP can be increased by using high-gain 
directional antennas, but at the expense of coverage. The 
bandwidth, range and coverage requirements come: directly 
from the anticipated mission scenarios. Therefore defining 
constraints on the range and direction of 1)lanetary 
exploration traverses due to life support, vehicle and safety 
concerns is the first step. 
Another major tradeoff involves the frequencies used for 
communication. Component and antenna size scales 
inversely with frequency, becoming much smaller as the 
frequency increases. Increasing frequency generally reduces 
required ERP for a given bandwidth, determined by noise 
floor, saving power. However, component cost and 
complexity increase with frequency so there is usually an 
optimal frequency band that is supported with robust, low- 
cost components. Currently, 2.4 GHz components offer 
good performance at low-cost. Next gtmeration 
Instrumentation Scientific and Medical band components 
will operate at 5.8 GHz offering certain advantages. 
The MEX project uses rapid prototyping techniques to allow 
early evaluation of technology in an analog field 
environment simulating, planetary exploration. The MEX 
provides a framework for integrating a wide variety of 
devices and tools into a coherent hitranet of distributed 
elements. Some of the elements are earth-bound, others are 
space-based resources and others are planet-based. We can 
analyze the computing and communication needs from a 
mission requirements perspective and propose iirchitectures 
that deliver this performance at the lowest cost. 
The following diagram shows the &EX communications 
architecture including the space and regional lirlks provided 
by SFU and CRC. This architecture provides Internet 
connectivity down to the hand-held graphics tablets that the 
explorer uses to record field data. The HMP 
communications idrastructure provided a single unified 
TCPm subnet for all computers located at base camp and 
for all the MEX elements. This allowed all elements to talk 
to each other directly using TCPm protocols. The router 
was at the satellite ground station, which projected the 
subnet through the satellite link ait 384 Kbps. Other 
configurations are possible, for larger networks a router at 
base camp would allow multiple subnets to be established in 
the field supporting more elements and providing some 
partitioning between users. . 
Experience with the Haughton site allowed the MEX project 
to determine certain numbers for the design of the 
communication systems. The total range needed to be about 
10 km, the longest single day traverse distance and the 
radius of the crater area. The distance to repealer sites was 
about 3 km maximum due to the temain. Therefore two 
repeaters would be needed to cover the 10-km maximum 
range. We wished to provide about 200-400 kbps of 
sustainable bandwidth. More bandwidth was desirable, but 
those radio systems cost more and drew much more power. 
Therefore, radio selection was based on cost, size, power 
consumption, and licensing issues to provide the basic 
performance outlined above. 
3-1080 
Figure 2. MEX Communications Architecture 
We can calculate the number of repeater sites required 
and their approximate placement using Haughton crater as 
an example. Selection of base is made on a variety of 
criterion such as proximity to sites of scientific interest, 
exposure, resources and accessibility. It is not made on 
the basis of suitability for communications. However, to 
ensure contact with the space link, the primary space- 
based ground station was located on a high hill and 
connected to the local base using a wireless link. Note 
that this hybrid has an immediate benefit of providing 
flexibility for the base location, by decoupling the base 
selection fkom the communications constraints. The only 
constraint is that there be a clear line-of-sight between 
base and the satellite communications site to minimize the 
number of repeaters and maximize the reliability of this 
critical primary link. The satellite communications site 
should be within an easy traverse of base to simplifL 
logistics. 
The satellite dish for HMP2000 was placed on a high hill 
near base camp to provide a clear view of the Anik-El 
satellite near the horizon represented as link L1 in Figure 
2. A WiLAN link was used to provide a link of 4 Mbps 
between the satellite dish and the base camp lab tent.' The 
base camp WiLAN link (L2) provided Intemet access for 
about 20 people working on laptop computers for science 
and mission simulations using lOBaseT Ethernet with 
multiple network hubs. The Internet connection also 
provided voice links to the mainland telephone system 
using Intemet phone applications. The base camp lab tent 
was the equivalent of the local base for MEX operations 
during HMP2000. 
MEX used both 900 MHz and 2.4 GHz Instrumentation 
Scientific and Measurement (ISM) band packet radio 
systems. The 900 M H i  Freewave system provided up to 
115 Kbps over a serial connection and used omni 
directional  antenna^.^ The 2.4 GHz Proxim system 
provided 1.6 Mbps raw data rate using fkequency hopping 
and a lOBaseT wired network interface." The 900 MHz 
system provided somewhat greater range and connectivity 
than the 2.4 GHz system, but at the expense of bandwidth. 
We performed various tests of range, bandwidth and 
connectivity using these radio systems to communicate 
between base camp and an ATV during HMP 99 and 
HMP2000. These links have working ranges of several 
kilometers dependant upon antenna configuration. The 2.4 
GHz systems need to use directional antennas to provide 
the gain required for this distance. 
The MEX links used a central repeater located on a high 
hill about one kilometer fkom base camp. This location 
had excellent line-of-sight to most areas intended for 
communications testing and scientific surveys. In fact, 
choice of this primary repeater site is critical to link 
coverage and performance. The link between base and the 
primary futed-site repeater is L3. The primary repeater 
site provides the height needed to reach other potential 
repeater sites. The mobile repeater is parked at one of 
these sites and relays the signal to the next mobile 
repeater site, which finally relays the signal down to the 
surv-ey site, which may be in a valley represented by L4 
and L5. This results in three hops for routing data 
between base camp and the survey site. Given the number 
of hops, the characteristics of the repeaters are critical for 
providing good end-to-end performance. 
The MEX ATV had a repeater set up on it with antennas 
mounted on an elevated platform at the rear of the vehicle 
as shown in the following picture. This repeater could be 
used for linking various hand-held cameras and 
instruments to the regional network. Additionally, this 
ATV-mounted repeater could act as a mobile repeater for 
extending the range of the regional network, especially to 
areas that are out of sight of the primary repeater. 
The first mobile repeater connected to the primary fixed- 
site repeater. It had to be within 3km of the primary site. 
This covered an area of 28 sq km around the primary 
repeater. The use of sector directional antennas with a 110 
degree horizontal radiation pattern allowed the antenna to 
cover a large area of the anticipated survey zone This 
resulted in nearly continuous contact, except when behind 
an obstruction. Each ATV could carry another repeater, so 
the second ATV would be placed on a hill about 3 km 
fkom the first ATV, resulting in 9 km from base camp and 
covering an area of 254 sq km. Each repeater draws 4 
watts with a radio power of 150 mW. Antenna gain is 
about 6 dEi on each end resulting in an ERP of 1.2 W for 
3-1081 
each link. So we had three repeaters and two stations 
(base and remote) for a total power consumption of only 
16 watts. 
Figure 3. MEX ATV Configuration 
Each ATV provided communications for a cluster of 
instruments and computing devices located in proximity. 
The instruments were primarily cameras mounted on the 
vehicle or portable. These devices allowed the explorer to 
use hand-held compact instruments to survey the site, 
with the data passed to the network automatically. For 
MEX, the ATV had three different vehicle video cameras, 
a wireless hand-held video camera, a digital still camera 
and a GPS receiver that tracked location and movement. 
Additional instruments could be spectrometers and 
magnetometers. 
The ATV computing devices consisted of a server 
mounted on the rear of the vehicle and a hand-held 
graphics tablet mounted to the handlebars acting as the 
primary display and user interface device. [t ran 
collaborative s o h a r e  with the ATV and base servers as 
part of experiments developing mission scenarios. The 
graphics tablet could be removed and used to draw 
diagrams and take notes when the explorer left the 
vehicle. We envision a large range of devices supporting 
collaborative operations - the subject of future work. 
Let's look at the end to end data path between the Internet 
and a hand-held graphics tablet used by the explorer in the 
field. The Internet data travels through the satellite link 
(Ll), then through the WiLAN link (L2) to base camp. 
From there the regional link (L3) is used through the 
primary repeater to the ATV repeater (U) where it 
forwards the data to the second ATV repeater (L5) and 
finally to the hand-held display (L6). Therefore, the path 
is satellite link to base camp link to primary repeater 
through two ATV repeaters to the display. There may be 
one or more additional mobile repeaters in this chain 
dependant upon terrain. This analysis shows the need for 
pipelining packet flow through the large number of 
repeater hops to maintain overall system bandwidth. 
7. MEx FIELD TEST IQSULTS, 
The MEX field-tested the radio links (determining 
connectivity and using network throughput as the primary 
measure. The effects of different antenna configurations 
and interference between radio systems could also be 
determined. Some interesting results were obtained, most 
in line with expectations." 
The satellite link provided 384 Kbps of data bandwidth. 
Using downloads from the Internet as test files, this 
bandwidth was realized on a susiainable basis. These 
downloads used links L1 and L2. The only reliability 
issues were caused by moisture gelting into the satellite 
dish waveguide and interference to L2 from the other 2.4 
Ghz systems, which resulted in packet loss. Continuous 
monitoring of the L2 link provided detailed data on the 
rate of packet loss and adjustments to antenna placement 
and turning off the other radio syslems when they were 
not in use mitigated the problem. 
The L,3, L4, L5 and L6 links were all Proxim 2.4 GHz 
links with identical performance, but with different 
antenna selections optimized for intended usage. The 
links performed reliably and well provided care was taken 
in pointing the antennas. Sometimes when the ATV was 
near base and in the line of sight between the repeater and 
base, it would lock onto the base camp link and not use 
the repeater. Such roaming is actually a feature of cellular 
systems, but create uncertainties for detailed 
measurements. Each of these links was monitored for 
RSSI as well as network throughput. With good sight 
lines, about 20 KB per second was realized on a 
sustainable basis. This corresponds to about 160 Kbps 
end-tal-end through all the links. Sinice only one ATV was 
outfitted during HMP 2000, L5 did not exist in the field 
configuration. 
The 160 Kbps compares favorably vvith the 240 Kbps that 
such a multi-repeater link provides under optimal 
conditions. The link was robust when line-of-sight was 
maintained, but would degrade to about 16 Kbps before 
the connection was lost. The only neal problems noted in 
field-testing were that careful pointing of the antennas 
was required and that the radio gear needed to be kept 
very dry. There were also variations in RSSI that were not 
understood. We will improve the environmental 
protection and antenna pointing systems. Adequate 
performance of the video links and other collaborative 
applications was noted when the links operated at the full 
bandwidth. These applications olperated badly under 
degraded link conditions suffering very low frame rates 
and long latencies due to high packet loss. The batteries 
and solar power systems used were adequate for the task. 
The 900 MHz systems exhilbited much higher 
connectivity during field tests condiicted during HMP 99. 
3-1082 -~ 
Although limited to line-of-sight, their higher power and 
lower bandwidth improved reception in marginal 
conditions. Connections were lost only when deep in 
canyons and draws. Marginal connections at 20 Kbps 
were maintained even when slightly out of sight of the 
repeaters. Omni directional multi-element antennas with 
6dB of gain were used for this system. We obtained 
connections at 8 km from base using direct line of sight. 
Even lower frequencies would allow better reception due 
to diffraction, .but tests with VHF and CB voice 
communication systems found that the advantages were 
not observable. This was due to the use of much shorter 
than optimal antennas for these lower fi-equency hand- 
held radios, a common practice. Theoretically, a VHF 
data radio could provide tens of kilobits per second with a 
few watts of power and get around hills, but field tests 
have indicated that much more reliable communication is 
attained using repeaters. Therefore, we do not believe that 
adequate data communications performance will be 
delivered by low frequency carrier systems, and the 
resulting components would be large in any case. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
The hybrid architecture proposed delivered excellent 
capability in the field, incorporating the best of both 
space-based and ground-based links. The space link was 
required for the long haul, but once a good link was 
established with base, the ground-based links provided 
very flexible and reliable performance. Management of 
the ground-based resources is a significant logistical 
challenge. 
Mobile repeaters have advantages of providing extremely 
low-latency high-bandwidth performance using very little 
power in a compact package. Satellite alternatives would 
be much more expensive, requiring many satellites for 
adequate coverage and larger receivers on the surface for 
comparable performance. An optimal mix of satellite and 
ground-based elements could maximize performance and 
minimize cost. A detailed quantitative analysis of such a 
hybrid would be useful, but is beyond the scope of the 
present effort. 
The mobile repeaters can be mounted on robots or 
vehicles or can be deployed in small packages for fvred 
sites. Therefore, the incremental cost of the repeaters may 
not be prohibitive, since the major resources would be in 
place. There are other advantages such as differential 
positioning, supply caching and environmental sensing 
that also favor deployable communication elements. 
Future development of MEX is anticipated for subsequent 
field deployment during scientific surveys and mission 
simulation activities. Full integration with science and 
operations teams will allow the collaborative capabilities 
of MEX technology to be demonstrated. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the NASA-Ames 
Haughton-Mars Project for the opportunity to participate 
and for the support provided by Dr. Pascal Lee (principal 
investigator) and Dr. Kelly Snook (project manager) who 
together led the expedition for HMP 2000. 
9. REFERENCES 
[l] NASA Mars Reference Mission, NASA 1999 
[2] PlanetNet Project Site, URL 
http ://polykdb. sfu.ca/spacesvs tems/danetnc t/. 
[3] Stephen Braham, Peter Anderson, Pascal Lee, Richard 
Alena, Brian Glass, “Canada and Analogue Sites for Mars 
Exdoration,” Proceedings of the Second Canadian Space 
Exploration Workshop, 1999. 
[4] Stephen P. Braham, Richard Alena, Bruce Gilbaugh, 
Brian Glass (2001) Space Networking and Protocols for 
Planetary Exploration and Analog Planetary Sites, JEEE 
Aerospace Conference 
[5] R Alena (1996), Wireless Network Experiment - Risk 
Mitigation Experiment 1306, report on STS-74/76-Mir20 
experiment for the Phase One International Space Station 
Program. 
[6] R Alena, E. Yaprak, S. Lamouri (1999), Modeling A 
Wireless Network For IntemationaI Space Station, IEEE 
Aerospace Conference. 
[7] Interplanetary Internet Site, URL. 
http:Nwww.ipnsig.orrz/. 
[8] http://www.wilan.com 
[9] http://www.freewave.com 
[ 101 Proxim Corporation. RangeLAN2 Technical 
Reference Guide. 2000. Proxim, Inc. USA, 
http ://uww.proxim. coin 
[l 11 Bruce L. Gilbaugb, Brian Glass, Richard Alena 
(2001) Mobile Network Field Testing at HMP-2000, JEEE 
Aerospace Conference 
3-1083 
10. BIOGRAPHIES 
Richard Alena is a Computer Engineer and the Group 
Lead for the Intelligent Mobile Technologies (Mr) Lab 
and the Mobile Exploration System testbed at NASA 
Ames Research Center. The IMT team integrates mobile 
hardware and software components into unique systems 
supporting human performance for flight and payload 
operations aboard spacecraft. He was principal 
investigator for the Wireless Network Experiment flown 
aboard Shuttle and Mir, technology later adopted by the 
Intemational Space Station Program. Rick spent three 
summers in the Canadian Arctic developing mobile 
technologies for human planetary exploration. Ha has a 
MSEE&CS from University of California, Berkeley. 
Stephen Braham is an Adjunct Professor of 
Communication, and the Director of the PolyLAB 
Advanced Collaborative Networking Laboratory at Simon 
Fraser University. Steve was instrumental in setting up 
the space-based and medium-range communications 
network for the 1999 and 2000 field seasons of the 
Haughton-Mars Project. He also participated in space- 
based and wireless networked communication of 
physiological data obtained fiom climbers on Mt. 
McKinley, AK, in May 2000, with a team from the 
Environmental and Aerospace Physiology laboratory at 
SFU. Steve is an experienced theoretical astrophysicist, 
and has become a specialist in the needs of advanced 
scientific communication and exploration. Steve is also a 
co-founder and current President of the North American 
OpenMath Initiative (NAOMI). NAOMI is a 
collaboration between North American universities and 
industry to build a standard for communicating complex 
scientific data that includes crucial mathematical 
information. 
Bruce Gilbaugh is a member of the Intelligent Mobile 
Technologies (IMT) Group working on the Mobile 
Exploration System (MEX) project at N,4SA Ames 
Research Center. He designed the regional wireless 
network radio confrguration and the hardware mounting 
and power implementation on the All-Terrain-Vehicle for 
MEX testing during Haughton-Mars Projeci 2000. He 
holds an AS in RF Communications Systems and 
Computer Networks, a BS in Information System 
Management from the University of' San Francisco and is 
currently working on an MS in Telecommunications 
Management at Golden Gate University. 
Brian Glass has been on the slaff of NASA-Ames 
Research Center since 1987. He has led projects in 
automated reasoning (for Space Station and SET1 health 
management), surface air traffic control (the Surface 
Movement Advisor, for which he shares a patent), and 
research groups in intelligent, adaptive control systems. 
In addition to his education and interests in engineering 
and computer science, he acquired im additional graduate 
degree in geophysics in 1992 focwjed on morphological 
models of scarp-like landforms. Brian is currently 
responsible for information and automation technologies 
in the Human Exploration Ofice and works closely with 
the Center for Mars Exploration. Over the past two 
summers, Brian has conducted field experiments at 
terrestrial analog sites in the Arctic to test human-centered 
computing concepts for future Mars geological 
exploration. 
3-1084 
