Mobile Network Field Testing at HMP-2000 
Bruce L. Gilbaugh*, Brian Glass?, Richard AlenaS 
NASA-Ames Research Center 
Moffett Field, CA 94035 
bgilbaugh@mail.arc.nasa.gov 
650-604-428 1 
Abstract-Future human planetary exploration field teams 
will need daily communications with their base and with 
mission control. A remote field wireless digital network 
will be a requirement for safe and productive human 
exploration. Proper selection of radio-frequency hardware 
and antennas will be vital to its success in remote, hostile 
environments. This paper reviews the communications 
techniques explored in the Mobile Exploration 2000 field 
season at the Haughton-Mars Project, which was located at a 
remote impact crater field science site in the Canadian 
Arctic. Results from 2.4GHz spread-spectrum signal- 
strength and data throughput tests, conducted during remote 
field deployments, show a marked variability with given 
hardware and antenna choices, with directional antenna 
performance less than expected from theory. Changing the 
antenna schemes for repeater-to-base and repeater-to-rover 
increased the rover’s effective communication range to base 
camp to over 3km. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. EQUIPMENT BACKGROUND 
3. SPREAD SPECTRUMTECHNOLOGY 
4. ANTENNA BASICS 
5. THE REPEATER-TO-BASE CAMP ANTENNA 
6. THE REPEATER-TO-ROVER ANTENNA 
7. THE ROVER ANTENNAS 
8. CONCLUSION 
1. INTRODUCIION 
While NASA has achieved the goal of reaching the Moon, 
more distant planet exploration will require not only new 
technologies but new ways of thinking and communicating. 
Three basic elements are required for rehearsal of manned 
explorations to other planets. Members of a future manned 
planetary exploration group need to practice daily activity 
planning and reporting sessions for routine transmission 
* Communications Engineer 
? Senior Staff Scientist 
$ Computer Engineer 
Standard IEEE Copyright “0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE, U.S. 
Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
along with emergency communications scenarios to Mission 
Control. Scientists must provide an environment that 
closely resembles the surface of the planet to be visited as 
well as knowledge of the effects of local gravity, etc. Lastly, 
a place where the only things you have are what you bring 
with you. Having done just that this field season at the 
Haughton-Mars Project in the Wilderness of Nunavut, 
Canada, this paper will review the communications 
infrastructure and techniques explored. Six years ago work 
based at NASA’s Ames Research Center proved that a 
wireless network was functionally practical in space by 
placing three laptop computer systems, a wireless access 
point, and two client PCMCIA transceiver cards aboard the 
Mir space station and successfully exchanging data between 
the three onboard computer systems using the wireless 
interfaces. Based upon the high degree of success of the Mir 
experiment, the implementation of a wireless network for 
keeping astronauts on manned planetary explorations in 
touch with their home base and ultimately with Mission 
Control using the proven wireless technology base was 
born. The Mobile Exploration Project (MEX) at Ames 
Research Center is designed to evaluate wireless 
technologies and explore their potential integration through 
simulations for the requirements of data, voice over IP, 
videoconference collaboration, and scientific data software 
applications. Ames’ mobile architecture testbed is designed 
to integrate different components into a unified system and 
is currently under construction. For the past two years the 
MEX Project has been evaluating the use of FHSS 
(Frequency Hopping Spread-Spectrum) and DSSS (Direct 
Sequence Spread-Spectrum) network products to extend the 
wired capability of the Base Camp network computing LAN 
into the field. [ 1,2] 
2. EQUIPMENT BACKGROUND 
Typically this technology has been typically limited to a 
maximum range of 1000 feet in an outdoor setting with an 
unobstructed Line of Site (LOS). The basic specification for 
the radio transmitters providing this range was 1/10 Watt 
RF output into a dipole antenna. The maximum range 
attained for field seasons 1998 and 1999 was limited to just 
one quarter of a mile or 1,320 feet. This included the use of 
a repeater for extended range as well which should have 
provided a range of at least 1,600 feet or just over one third 
of a mile. Analysis of the equipment used to create the 
wireless network lead to one primary area that was 
determined to be incorrectly specified for such an 
application. High gain omni-directional antennas were 
3-1085 
deployed at the Base Camp, repeater, and roving terminal in 
an attempt to increase the effective operating range of the 
units. While the use of omni-directional antennas would 
eliminate any requirement for optimal pointing and 
positioning of antennas, the pattern of emission from the 
high gain antennas was not correctly understood. The 
requirement for the Haughton-Mars project and MEX in 
general is to evaluate the greatest possible distance 
attainable while maintaining reliable network connectivity 
and data throughput. 
3. SPREAD SPECTRUM TECHNOLOGY 
Spread Spectrum utilizes greater bandwidth and Signal-to- 
Noise ratios to create the same effective power but provide 
greater fidelity. As with any power equation, total power is 
the combination of two elements, in this case bandwidth 
and signal power. Two signals can have the same total 
equivalent power with either a large signal concentrated in a 
small bandwidth or a small signal spread over a large 
bandwidth. From a system standpoint throughput 
performance is increased and is referred to as “Process Gain” 
meaning that the fidelity of the received signal is greatly 
improved by sacrificing bandwidth. The advantage can be 
calculated using Claude Shannon’s equation: [Equation 13 
C=W log2 (l+S/N) 
Where, C= Channel capacity in bits, 
Where: W = Bandwidth in Hertz, 
S = Signal Power, and 
N = Noise Power 
Equation 1 - Shannon’s Equation 
Thus the Spread Spectrum signal is “hidden” in the 
electromagnetic noise floor and only receivers that know 
where to look can actually “lock on” to the signals located 
within. Within the frequency range that brackets a lm-ticular 
Spread Spectrum scheme lays the method of breaking up the 
information for transmission. Direct Sequence and 
Frequency Hopping techniques are the most commonly used 
with Frequency Hopping far outnumbering Direct Sequence. 
Figure 1 shows the typical DSSS (Direct Sequence Spread 
Spectrum) basic scheme. 
Figure 1 - DSSS Frequency Scheme 
In this scheme the 2.4 to 2.483 GHz is the Spectrum Range 
and there are three channels equally distributed within the 
spectrum range. A prescribed sequencing of “hops” from 
channel-to-channel is used to synchronize transmissions 
between the receiver and the transmitter thus detecting the 
packets of information. Typical throughput for the DSSS 
scheme is in the neighborhood of 10’ Mbps, far exceeding 
the throughput for a FHSS scheme at 1.6 Mbps..[7] 
In the FHSS scheme depicted in Figure 2, as many as 15 
channels may be employed within the same Spectrum 
Range that contains only 3 channels i:n the DSS’S system. 
Figure 2 - FHSS Frequency Scheme 
As in the DSSS scheme, the Frequency or Spectrum Range 
is 2.4 to’ 2.483 GHz however several noticeable differences 
readily emerge. This methodology Inas the transmissions 
actually hopping from one frequency to another. It is surely 
more difficult to control the 15 channels and the throughput 
is reduced. Generally in the past, the FHSS has been more 
widely used especially to provide network security that will 
be shown later. 
The main reason FHSS is dominant iin the PCS industry is 
the ability to “Cut Through” the interference or noise found 
in the P J  spectrum. The FCC Part 15, Title 47, Section 
15.247 in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) that 
governs these devices clearly states that they must accept 
any interference from outside SOUI-ces without causing 
interference themselves. To simplify lets examine a system 
that uses two frequencies in both DSSS and FHSS 
modulation techniques. The DSSS format is typically lower 
in spectral density and uses prescribed or sequenced portions 
of the spectral range. Figure 3 shows the makeup of the 
DSSS two channel system creatlzd using two non- 
overlapping channels. 
DSSS 
f 
€ 
e 
z 
e 
n 
_____ ~ 
Figure 3 - DSSS Frequency Makeup 
On the other hand the FHSS System hops around the 
spectrum range (indicated by the vertical displacement) thus 
3-1086 
creating a higher spectral density but for shorter periods of 
time as shown in Figure 4. 
FHSS 
Figure 4 - FHSS Frequency Makeup 
The following comparison gives a better view of the relative 
bandwidth consumed by both of the DSSS and FHSS 
technique channels. Looking at the same two channel 
systems in terms of Frequency Makeup, interference has less 
of an effect on the FHSS scheme. Remember they must 
accept the interference created by common appliances and 
other RF devices. Figure 5 shows the two systems being 
impacted by an interference signal. This interference signal 
is impacting two of the DSSS channels simultaneously 
while the FHSS channels “hop“ around the interference 
signal. 
b Is 
Figure 5 -Interference vs. Channel Space 
It is easy to see how the FHSS system is able to outperform 
the DSSS system. First the FHSS system is able to hop 
around the interference whereas the DSSS is unable to 
change its characteristics. This will result in the total loss of 
connectivity for the DSSS receiver because neither channel 
can pass any traffic. The FHSS traffic will surely be slowed 
but will not be disconnected. Thus the FHSS methodology 
has an inherent immunity to jamming and interference that 
is not typically found in the DSSS method. 
Since the majority of the wireless products are primarily 
meant to be used by those with mobile computing power, 
i.e. laptop computers, there is also a concern about the effect 
of the unit drawing power from the laptop’s battery thus 
limiting the total “On-Air Time”. The devices are 
transmitters as well as receivers and when they transmit a 
significant draw is made compared to the receiver side of the 
equation. Generally speaking, DS SS transmitters require 
very linear power amplifiers to maintain signal integrity and 
consistency. Unfortunately linear power amplifiers draw 
significantly more power when compared to the nonlinear 
power amplifiers that can be utilized by the FHSS designs. 
The result is less power draw on the laptop’s battery and in 
turn a longer period of time available to the laptop device. 
Typical transmitter output power of devices in this category 
is a mere 100 mW or about 150 mA resulting in a cost to 
battery life of only 5% in most cases. 
Although the remainder of this paper deals primarily with 
the use of antennas with FHSS technology, the concepts can 
be applied to both technologies of RF (Radio Frequency) 
Emission based hardware equally. 
4. ANTENNABASICS 
The standard vertically polarized dipole antenna has a 
radiation pattern that resembles the shape of a donut 
indicated by the solid lines forming the radiation lobes in 
Figure 6. 
Figure 6 - EMF transfer 
When two antennas are tuned to interact at the same 
frequency, electromagnetic energy leaves the transmitting 
antenna and proceeds in the direction of the receiving 
antenna. The energy leaving the antenna grows both 
horizontally and vertically creating an area of interaction that 
excites the receiving antenna that is also tuned at a the same 
resonant frequency, thus allowing the transfer of the 
intended information present in the RF signal to the 
receiving station. When the radiation pattern of the 
vertically polarized antenna is viewed as presented in Figure 
7 from a 45-degree angle, the pattern looks like the inner 
tube of a tire radiating or expanding in all directions equally 
from the antenna. 
Fig. 7 - EMF Radiation Field 
. -  3-1 n87 
In order to increase the gain of an omni-directional antenna, 
the radiation pattern of the antenna is altered or modified to 
provide the required additional range. From the top view the 
only change is in the horizontal. size of the pattern. Compare 
Figure 7, the emission pattern of a dipole antenna to that in 
Figure 8, the emission of an omni-directional antenna with 
12 dB of gain. 
- 
Figure 8 - Altered Horizontal EMF Pattern 
Remember that for every 3 dB of gain provided by the 
antenna design, the Effective Radiated Power (Em) is 
doubled. Thus the emission of a 1/10" Watt RF signal into 
such an antenna effectively increases the ERP to .1 x 2 x 2 
x 2 x 2 or 1.6 watts. As with any physics problem, "you 
don't get something for nothing". What changes in emission 
pattern are made to gain such an advantage then? Figure 8 
shows how the pattern differs in the horizontal plane for the 
12 dB omni-directional antenna. Notice that the radiation 
pattern has changed dramatically in the vertical direction. 
The top and bottom of the lobes have been squeezed 
together so that the new radiation pattern has a larger overall 
diameter in the horizontal plane but provides a veiy limited 
vertical radiation angle. The ability to transfer energy is 
increased between antennas by this redesign so long as they 
reside in similar vertical planes in relation to each other. If 
at least one element is located in another vertical plane or is 
vertically agile, this newly created pattern is less than 
satisfactory for the intended purpose. Since the radiation 
patterns are cut off at top and bottom any significant change 
in elevation will limit if not completely prohibit 'direct RF 
connectivity between units as shown in Figure 9. 
l- 
Camp was located below an area referred to as Haynes 
Ridge. 'The distance between Base Clamp and an optimal 
site for the repeater was a 1/2 mile LOS hop. The first 
challenge to be faced would be to provide a solid single hop 
link between the Base Camp antenna array and the input of 
the repeater module on Comm. Hill. Due to the elevation 
difference between Base Camp and Comm. Hill, using 
omni-directional antennas would neil her be as effective as 
directional antennas nor allow the experimentation of the 
effect horizontal polarization. To accomplish this link an 18 
dB parabolic antenna was chosen foir use on the repeater 
input and mounted on a lightweight tripod shown in Figure 
10. 
Figure 10 - repeater parabolic antenna 
A 6 dB corner reflector antenna was installed for the Base 
Camp Access Point along with additional voice 
communications antennas also attached to a lightweight 
tripod. These antennas could be aimed toward each other in 
both vertical and horizontal planes in order to provide an 
optimal signal path since the two locations are stationary 
with respect to one another. 
The use of parabolic and comer reflector antennas provided a 
means of positioning the RF emission pattern from each of 
the locations directing the energy to a :specific non-moving 
Figure 9 - Vertical Elevation Incompatibility 
5 .  REPFATER-TGBASECAMPA"NAS 
The approach taken at this point was a re-examination of the 
' requirements in terms of location, the number of fixed, and 
the number of mobile elements along the viability to utilize 
both the vertical and horizontal planes in conjunction with 
the total number of RF hop elements involved in the 
network infrastructure design. This year the HlMp Base 
Fig. 11 - Base Camp Corner :Reflector 
target and provided increased gain for an increased ERP on 
both transmit and receive directions. 
At one point in time an experiment was performed replacing 
the 6 dR corner reflector antenna on the Base Camp access 
point with the standard "rubber duck" dipole style antenna. 
With the use of this 1/2 wavelength ( .5 A) antenna at the 
base camp site providing no ERP gain, the access point site 
3-1088 
was able to connect to the 18 dB parabolic antenna at the 
repeater site 112 mile away and maintain a link quality of 5. 
Software onboard the repeater device provided link strength 
quality on a scale of one to five with one being poor and 
five being the best possible. Two additional indicators are 
available for Received Signal Strength Indicator (or RSSI) 
and Packets per Second (or PPS). With the repeater 
installation complete on the Haynes Ridge site power was 
applied to the unit and link strength to Base Camp 
measured. The result was a solid link quality of five and 
available downloadable through-put of the wireless link to a 
server located at Base Camp was measured at 30 packets per 
second or 2.1 Kbps with an RSSI value of 159 while 
downloading a large digital picture file using the Netscape 
browser application. The successful test of this connection 
proved that a high quality link of more than 1/2 mile is 
possible on a single hop. Indeed this link could easily reach 
up to 3 miles and maintain a link quality between 3 and 4 
as rated by the internal testing package. 
reflector atop the ATV 
6 .  THEREPFKI"T~ROVFRA"NA 
Fimre 13 ATV pod 
Connectivity requirements within the mobile environment 
requires a provision for changing location in the vertical and 
horizontal planes and acknowledges that these changes may 
occur simultaneously. In this case, the first candidate for 
repeater output is most likely the omni directional antenna. 
The first consideration is that the emissions from the omni- 
directional antenna can overshadow or "swamp" the front 
end of the input receiver unit thus reducing or canceling the 
input link connection unless the antennas are at least 60 feet 
apart. A second design concern is that if it provides any 
significant gain, defined for this paper as being 9 dB or 
more, the emission pattern renders it unsuitable for large 
amounts of vertical change. Because 
these problems are found in the 
cellular telephone CDPD arena that 
also uses Spread-Spectrum emissions, 
antenna designers have created the 
sectoral antenna. (See Figure 12) The 
emission pattern of the sectoral 
antenna allows for selection of 
horizontal coverage up to 1 10 degrees 
between -3 dB points and up to 180 
degrees between -6 dB points. Back 
scatter, the amount of signal 
presented behind to the rear of the 
antenna is held to a minimum to 
reduce or prevent adjacent antenna 
interference. So two out of three areas 
of concern are addressed by this 
antenna design. With only 10 degrees 
' 
Sectoral 
Antenna 
of vertical radiation pattern between the -3 dB points and a 
large physical presence, this antenna can be discounted as 
acceptable for the mobile mounted antenna. Provided it is 
mounted high enough and with a clear LOS in relation to 
its surrounding terrain, positioning the antenna at an angle 
so as to provide coverage to the highest opposite point, this 
antenna can provide a suitable vertical coverage pattern for 
the fixed portion of the mobile link. While the -3 dB points 
are at plus and minus 10 degrees, the -6 dB points extend to 
plus and minus 20 degrees. Combined with the mounting 
angle this antenna provides a constant gain of up to 15 dB 
over the major portion (between all -3 dB point limits) of 
its radiation pattern. 
7. THEROVERANTENNAS 
Finally comes the selection of the antenna to be mounted on 
the All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV) or Rover that will 
communicate with the sectoral antenna on the repeater as it 
roams the test area. Since the repeater antenna is directional 
in nature the use of fixed directional antenna on the roving 
element is not practical. Unless a unit for self-pointing of 
the directional antenna is used, an omni-directional antenna 
is the first choice. This will provide 360-degree access to 
the repeater antenna regardless of the rover's direction of 
travel in relation to the antenna. As mentioned earlier, the 
gain of the antenna and the radiation pattern are inversely 
related in terms of vertical emission. Since the rover will be 
moving over a large range of vertical height an antenna must 
be identified that provides a maximum amount of gain 
while keeping a radiation 
pattern rich with vertical 
elements. A number of 5 dB 
omni-directional antennas 
are available for use that 
provide good vertical 
coverage with the caveat that 
the roving device will never 
be higher than the repeater. 
Barely visible is the one 
mounted next to a comer 
-. I 3-1089 
camera onboard the rover was sending live color video assembled from the data gathered during link testing 
images through a streaming JPEG server, also onboard the sessions. Rover location was obtained from onboard GPS 
rover, back to Mission Control at Johnson Space Flight readings. The Link Strength and FLSSI data shown is 
Center in Houston, Texas, via the combination of wired and calculated by internal software within the Proxim devices. 
wireless computer LANs and satellite networks. Throughput was a measurement provided during downloads 
Test data shown in the following three chart sequences were or jpeg video streaming input via Netscape 4.7 data bar. 
Wireless Network Link Data for HMPMEX 2000 
Base Camp Baseline Data 
Altitude Repeater Test Link Throughput 
Lat Long (feet) Distance (mi) Link Strength RSSl (Kbyteslsec) 
75 25.985 89 51.792 0 0 
75 25.771 89 50.241 0.51 BB 5 198 36.8 
Traverse Data Taken 7/20/00 
Altitude Repeater Test Link 'Throughput 
ID Lat . Long (feet) Distance (mi) Link Strength RSSl (Kbyteskec) 
COM 75 25.77 89 50.17 735 0.1 BSA 5 195 19.5 
14 7526.86 
17 7527.15 
18 7526.98 
19 7527.01 
20 7527.11 
21 7526.88 
22 7526.98 
75 26.55 
89 52.04 
89 51.41 
89 53.06 
89 54.02 
89 56.12 
89 54.84 
89 52.76 
89 51.62 
68 1 1.37 
803 1.63 
734 1.63 
763 1.81 
786 2.31 
862 1.87 
786 1.58 
1 
Traverse Data Taken 7/22/00 
Altitude Repeater 
ID Lat Long (feet) Distance (mi) 
31 7525.28 8948.87 524 0.67 
32 7525.17 8948.65 501 0.81 
33 7524.88 8949.27 488 1.06 
34 7525.11 8947.87 511 1 .oo 
35 7525.27 8948.06 475 0.83 
36 7525.42 8948.18 504 0.69 
37 7525.57 8948.21 553 0.60 
None 7525.70 8948.42 580 0.50 
38 7525.82 8948.43 632 0.50 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
Test 
Link 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
BSA 
Link 
St re n g t h 
0 
135 
127 
142 
125 
0 
125 
128 
137 
RSSl 
0 
136 
124 
128 
127 
125 
124 
127 
0 
12 
3 
2 
0 
0.5 
3.5 
2.5 
19.5 
'Throughput 
- (Kbyteskec) 
0 
0.5 
1.5 
3 
3 
3 
4 
1.5 
0 
3-1090 
8. CONCLUSION 
The wireless network environment viable for manned 
planetary exploration use provided the correct antenna 
selections are available for deployment. The MEX project 
field season 2000 has validated not only the process for the 
selection of antennas for the simulation test bed being built 
at Ames but how critical proper selection of antennas really 
is. Changing the antenna scheme increased the rover's 
communication distance to Base Camp from 114 of a mile 
to over 3 miles. 
The data rate to combine voice, data, and real-time video 
serving on the backbone of the wireless LAN will have to 
be greater than 2.0 Mbps to allow for synchronization 
overhead and still provide enough bandwidth for the 
combined information sources and to deal with multipath 
and environmental condition interference. During the testing 
of the MEX system, problems were experienced with the 
interaction of the DSSS wireless link to the ground station. 
It was determined that the FHSS system could easily 
interfere with the DSSS system primarily because of the 
DSSS system's highly sensitive receiver. One experiment 
that was cut short by inclement weather was to run the 
FHSS system Repeater-to-Base Camp link on a horizontal 
polarization while the DSSS system was required to operate 
in a vertically polarized mode due to the available antennas. 
Continued testing at Ames' Testbed for Intelligent Mobile 
' Technologies (IMT) and Mobile Exploration Projects 
(MEX) will provide the opportunity for future testing of 
system components, integration concepts, and interference 
problems more completely prior to remote field test 
scenarios. 
REFERENCES 
ACKNOWLEDGMFNS 
The authors would like to thank the NASA-Ames 
Haughton-Mars Project for permitting us to participate in 
their field season activities; for the support provided by Dr. 
Pascal Lee and Dr. Kelly Snook who lead the expedition for 
HMP 2000, and we would like to thank Dr. Stephen 
Braham of Simon Fraser University of Vancouver, BC, 
Canada for his consultations and direct support of the 
satellite and base camp links used for MEX testing. 
[ 13 Alena, Richard. E. Yaprak, S. Lamouri. Modelinp A 
Wireless Network For International Space Station, 1999. 
IEEE Aerospace Conference. 
[2] Alena, Richard. Wireless Network Experiment - Risk 
Mitigation Experiment 1306. 1996. report on STS-74176- 
Mir20 experiment for the Phase One International Space 
Station Program. 
[3] Dreher, Richard. The Comprehensive Guide to Wireless 
Technologies 1999. APDG Publishing Fuquay-Varina, NC 
[4] Held, Gilbert. Intemetworking LANs and WANs 1998. 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
[5] Horak, Ray. Communications Systems & Networks 
1999. M&T Books. Foster City, CA 
[6] Kuo, Effelsberg, Aceves, et. al. Multimedia 
Communications Protocols and Applications. 1998. 
Prentice-Hall 
[7] Proxim Corporation. RangeLAN2 Technical Reference 
Guide. 2000. Proxim, Inc. USA 
[ 81 Roberts, Randy. Virginia Polytechnic Institute's Spread 
Spectrum Introduction. 1999. Spread Spectrum Scene - 
Online magazine @, www.sss.org 
[9] Configuring and Using Extension Points in wireless 
LANs. Proxim White Paper. 1998. Online @, 
http : //www. proxim. com 
[ 101 Comparing FH and DS Wireless LAN Technologies. 
Proxim Presentation. 1998. Online @, 
http://www.proxim.com 
[ 1 11 Digital Communications: Spread Spectrum - It's not 
just for breakfast anymore! Steve Bible, N7HPR. 1999. 
Online @ http://www.tapr.org/ss 
3-1091 
Bruce Gilbaugh is a member 
of the Intelligent Mobile 
Technology (IMT) Lab and the 
Mobile Exploration (2Lm 
hardware design and 
implementation group at 
NASA-Ames Research Center. 
He designed the mechanical 
hardware mounting and ATV 
implementation schemes fo r  MEX 2000 testing during the 
HMP. Bruce holds an AS degree in RF Communications 
Systems and Computer Networks, a BS in Injbrmation 
System Management from the University of San Francisco 
and is currently working on an MS in Telecommunications 
Management at Golden Gate University. 
Dr. Brian J.  Glass has been on 
the stafS of NASA-Ames 
Research Center since 1987. He 
has led projects in automated 
reasoning for  Space Station 
and SETI health management), 
surface air trafJic control (the 
Surface Movement Advisor, for  
which he shares a patent), and 
research groups in intelligent, 
adaptive control systems. In addition to his education and 
interests in engineering and computer science, he acquired 
an additional graduate degree in geophysics in 1992 
focused on morphological models of scarp-like landforms. 
Brian is currently responsible for information and 
automation technologies in the Human Exploration Office 
and works closely with the Center fo r  Mars Exploration. 
Over the past two summers, Brian has conducted $eld 
experiments at terrestrial analog sites in the Arctic to test 
human-centered computing concepts for future Mars 
geological exploration. 
RichardAIena is a Computer 
Engineer and the Group Lead 
for the Intelligent Mobile 
Technology (IMT) Lab and the 
Mobile Exploration System 
(MEX) testbed being created at 
NASA Ames Research Center. 
The IMT team integrates mobile 
hardware and software 
components into unique systems 
capable of extending human performance aboard spacecraft 
duringflight and payload operations. He has a M,YEE&CS 
@om University of California, Berkeley. 
3-1092 
