Ultra-Wideband for Navigation and Communications 
John Carl Adams, Walt Gregokch, Larry Capots, Darren Liccardo 
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center 
L9-70, B201,3251 Hanover St. 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 
larry.capots@lmco.com 
650-424-3033 
Abstract- Precision coordinated maneuvering of multiple 
space vehicles would offer significant performance 
advantages to both commercial and scientific missions by 
increasing the versatility and potential capabilities of the 
formation. However, to make coordinated maneuvers 
feasible, an accurate, robust, and self-contained navigation 
system, that is small, low power, and low cost is required. 
The use of ultra-wideband RF ranging and communication 
technologies can achieve this objective with the added 
benefits of being resistant to jamming and multipath 
interference. Ultra-wideband systems can provide 
centimeter level accuracy ranging measurements over 
distances of kilometers, using only milliwatts of power from 
an omni-directional transceiver no bigger than a pager. 
Using these precise range measurements between the 
vehicles, it is possible to resolve the relative geometry of the 
entire formation. The ultra-wideband (UWB) system 
presented in this work is not RADAR; it is active ranging 
over a code divisible multiple access (CDMA) 
communications channel with no carrier fiequency. Each 
transceiver is given a unique pseudo-random noise code, 
which is broadcast using pulse position modulation (shifting 
pulses or monocycles forward or backward in time relative 
to an constant rate pulse train), in a type of call and return 
scheme to measure time of flight between vehicles. As a 
byproduct of CDMA encoding, a UWB navigation system 
could also provide a megabit per second communications 
channel to each vehicle, providing further savings of power, 
weight, and cost. 
In attempt to understand the fundamentals of such a system, 
in this research a simple ranging experiment has been 
designed as a proof of concept. The experiment includes 
bench top equipment for sending and receiving ultra- 
wideband monocycles and post processing algorithms for 
determining range. To implement the system, it was 
necessary to design and develop ultra-wideband antennas to 
efficiently propagate the monocycle pulses with minimal 
distortion. These antennas were tested in an anechoic 
chamber constructed for the ranging experiment and data on 
their characterization is presented in this paper. 
This paper presents the experimentally derived ranging 
accuracies and compares them to theoretically derived 
ranging accuracies for the UWB based measurement. It also 
provides a characterization of the distortions encountered in 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
the pulse waveform during transmission and reception from 
our custom antennas. UWB ranging systems offer a robust 
solution to relative vehicle navigation in a variety of space 
mission configurations. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
biTRODUCTION 
ULTRA- WIDEBAND 
RANGING EXPERIMENT 
UWB ANTENNA 
RANGING EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Formation flying of multiple spacecraft is an enabling 
technology for many future space missions. Sensing 
technology chosen to determine relative vehicle position and 
orientation will play an important role. We define formation 
flying as the coordinated motion control of a group of 
vehicles where the vehicle positions relative to each other 
are very important. These vehicles may be groups of trucks, 
aircraft, or spacecraft. The results in this paper are 
applicable to all of these vehicle formation applications 
since they share common sensing research issues [ 11. 
Formation flying technologies for spacecraft will enable the 
use of a ‘virtual spacecraft bus’ where multiple distributed 
spacecraft could be coordinated to act as one. This Will 
enable new scientific missions involving coordinated but 
distributed measurements, leading to improved stellar 
interferometry, gravimetry, and synthetic aperture radars. 
Spacecrafi formation control will require a measure of the 
formation states, i.e., the relative attitude and positions of 
the vehicles, and ultra-wideband RF ranging offers a 
promising relative navigation sensor. Our approach is an 
extension to previously explored carrier differential GPS 
techniques that have been examined by Olsen, Corazzini, 
Robertson, and How [2], [3]. 
Ultra-wideband ranging techniques will improve on the 
differential carrier phase GPS ranging techniques by both 
improving accuracy to the sub-centimeter level and 
eliminating the measurement bias ambiguity problem. This 
paper examines the accuracy of ultra-wideband range 
2-785 
measurements made in a laboratory experiment. The 
experiment setup is described in sections 2 and 3, the ultra- 
wideband antenna design and performance characteristics 
are described in sections 4 and 5, and some ranging results 
are presented in section 6. 
File sinalelids Data CoUecled at 11 13on21-JUL-00 
2. ULTRA-WIDEBAND 
Ultra-wideband (UWB) ranging techniques involve the 
transmission of short electromagnetic pulses via a current 
radiating antenna. These short pulse width signals (-0.5 ns 
pulse width, see Figure 1) have a very large signal 
bandwidth (-1-2 GHz). In contrast to most continuous wave 
ranging techniques, ultra-wideband signals have no carrier 
and are inherently spread spectrum, making them more 
immune to multipath errors due to interference from a 
reflected carrier wave signal. By resolving the phase of an 
incoming UWB pulse to within 1%, sub-centimeter ranging 
accuracy is possible. 
Currently, the FCC is considering permitting the operation 
of UWB technology on an unlicensed basis. This testing will 
resolve current concerns that UWB signals may interfere 
with existing navigation signals from GPS. 
In addition to using UWB pulse phase measurement, a pulse 
train of UWB pulses can be modulated with a pseudo 
random code to create a CDMA type system for wireless 
LAN applications and GPS-like 3-D positioning 
applications. Round-trip time is measured to determine 
distance between transceivers, using a cooperative 
handshaking scheme. This technology has the advantage 
over GPS that a precise absolute time reference is not 
required (a lower stability quartz or MEMS oscillator is 
sufficient rather than a more expensive atomic time 
reference). Using five navigation transcievers completely 
resolves 3D relative position ambiguities between vehicles, 
assuming there are no geometric colinearities. 
3. RANGING EXPEIUMENT 
Procedure for Ranging Experiment: 
A ranging experiment was constructed, consisting of two 
UWB antennas, one for transmitting and one for receiving, 
placed in an anechoic chamber (see Figure 2 block 
diagram). A high speed pulse generator was used to 
generate a 3 ns pulsewidth monocycle and a pseudorandom 
code generator was constructed using an FPGA. This code 
was modulated onto the pulse train and broadcast through 
the transmitting antenna. This first experiment used a 
digitizing oscilloscope as the receiver and the correlation of 
I 
2 4 6 8 10 12 
time (ns) 
Figure 1. Example UWB monocycle pulse, 3 ns pulsewidth. 
the received pulse train delayed by time of flight with a 
replica pulse train was done in post-processing to produce 
range estimates. The maximum sample rate achieved was 10 
gigasamples/sec, which allowed for the capture of 4 pulses. 
High Level Block Diagram 
Figure 2 shows a high level block diagram of our UWB 
ranging experiment. Figure 3 shows some of the hardware, 
including the pseudorandom code generator, the impulse 
network for generating the monocycle, and a coax trombone 
used to simulate range changes before our UWB antennas 
were developed. Note that a wired epoch trigger signal and 
a wireless UWB link couples the receiver to the transmitter. 
The epoch trigger is used to trigger the oscilloscope’s 
sampling window, thus avoiding the need to implement 
complex synchronization algorithms. As in all Code 
Divisible Multiple Access systems, the pseudo random code 
must be known by both the receiver and transmitter 
(represented by the ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - ~ ~ n ~ ~ ) .  Both the receiver and 
transmitter must also have a clock for accurately timing the 
transmission and reception of monocycles. Ultimately, such 
a time of flight system is limited by the resolution and 
stability of its clocks. 
2-786 
Pseudo Random Bit Trigger Pulse Generator 
Code Generator (3ns pulse width) Amplifier 
....... ..... Code .......... 
.......................................... 
; Processing Trigger 
.............................................. ............................. (pos. edge 
Antenna 
Antenna 
Figure 2. High level block diagram of Ultra-Wideband ranging experiment. 
Pseudo Random Code Generator Design (FPGA) 
The Pseudo Random Code Generator was designed using a 
XILINX Field Programmable Gate Array integrated into a 
demonstration board from Insight Electronics (see Figure 4). 
Using Pulse Position Modulation, this design modulates the 
&bit binary code specified by the user DIE' switches. The 
bit rate is 937.5 MHz, or 1/32 of the clock rate input at pin 2 
of the FPGA (30 MHZ clock on board). Each bit cycle is 
broken into 16 subdivisions. If the corresponding DIP 
switch is set to zero, then a trigger edge is output on the bit 
trigger pin at subdivision 0. If the DIE' switch is set to one, 
then the output is active during subdivision 1. Thus, this 
design modulates pulses by a shift 1/16 that of the bit rate or 
66.6 ns. Output flip flops are utilized on the triggering 
outputs for improved synchronization, delaying all trigger 
outputs until the next rising edge of the system clock. At the 
beginning of each 8-bit epoch a trigger edge is output to the 
epoch trigger pin to provide the digitizing oscilloscope with 
a synchronized time window during which it should sample 
the waveform. 
Figure 3. Ranging experiment hardware for pulse 
generation and range variation. 
2-787 
OFD 
0 0 
I cLKn- -LJ  
Figure 4. Schematic for the FPGA design for the pulse generator. The output of the pulse generator is the pseudo-random 
noise code for CDMA code phase ranging. 
Figure 5.  UWB antenna design; modified Vivaldi with 
In order to efficiently propagate a 3 nsec pulse, a UWB 
Antenna was designed and developed that had a bandwidth 
between 300 MHz to 2700 MHz, (9 to 1). The design was 
based on a previously developed antenna [4] by modifying 
the “rabbit ears” into “Mickey Mouse” ears. By extending 
the ears into a large circular arc instead of abruptly 
truncating them, this prevented the pulse fkom ringing back 
and forth within the aperture. The UWB Antenna, shown in 
the photo of Figure 5 was made by simply photo etching the 
“Mickey Mouse” pattern on one side of the copper-clad 
fiberglass board and etching the electromagnetically 
coupled, broadband microstrip feed on the opposite side of 
the board. This gave us ample bandwidth; however to obtain 
even greater bandwidth 18 to 1, a more complex, multilayer 
stripline antenna can be designed, see reference [ 5 ] .  
Measured E- and H- plane radiation patterns of our UWB 
antenna are shown in Figure 6. 
microstip feed. 
2-788 
ta 
5 
a 
;;; - I 0  
;;I -28 
-5 
r) 
P 
z 
W 
-15 
-25 
-30 
735 
-dR .- 
-ma -(sa -128 -98 -69 - ~ a  a 38 fi8 9a 1213 158 iaa 
i a  
5 
0 
-5 
r\ 
;;; - I %  
H <I: -20 
3 -15 
W 
-25 
-30 
-35 
-A0 
1" 
-ma -158 -128 -98 -68 -30 a 3a SEI 9a iza 158 188 
- ~ , , G r r ~ l =  SCAN CUlKiLE CDE6S.l Fr-y: -w 
i?rfmi &-UW& 3oktm-. 3 3t.p *I.' 89 89 
(B) 
Figure 6. E-plane (A) and H-plane (B), Measured radiation 
patterns at 580 MHz. 
5. RANGING EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Correlation Software 
The post-processing algorithm for determining range using 
captured waveforms was implemented in Matlab. A single 
range measurement requires the comparison of two captured 
waveforms. The fxst waveform represents a base 
measurement that establishes the experimental frame of 
reference. In most cases, the base measurement was 
captured with an antenna separation of 1 m. The second 
waveform is the range measurement relative to the 
established frame of reference. The post-processing 
algorithm calculates the change in distance between the base 
measurement (experimental frame of reference) and the 
range measurement. 
The fimdamental operation used by this algorithm is 
correlation, a form of mathematical convolution. 
Conceptually, the position of the peak of a correlation curve 
represents the amount that one waveform must be shifted to 
most accurately match another waveform. This shift 
represents the added delay from a signal that must travel 
further during the reception of the second waveform. 
Multiplying this delay by the propagation speed of the signal 
(speed of light z 30 cdns)  produces a distance 
measurement representing the change in distance between 
the antennas from when the first waveform was captured to 
when the second waveform was captured. 
However, inspection of the raw correlation curves presented 
in the results section will reveal that the peaks are not 
centered over the mass of the curves. Noise in the received 
signals can cause random correlation near the peaks of the 
curves, thus reducing the precision of the system. This 
problem is solved by filtering the curves through a weighted 
averaging filter. A weighted averaging filter rejects noise 
and helps extract information about the peaks of the curves 
from nearby points. 
To further increase precision, the filtered correlation curves 
were interpolated tenfold using the cubic spline method. In 
other words, ten new points were fit in between every two 
original points by solving for third order polynomials 
between points. The position of the peak values of these 
filtered, interpolated correlation curves are the delays used 
to calculate distance. This entire process is depicted below 
(Figures 7 thru 12). 
Static Range Measurements 
In order to evaluate the precision and accuracy of our 
system, multiple range measurements were taken at a 
constant distance of 1 meter. 
x 10'0 Raw Correlstion 
I , 
--- -3cm 
- Ocm 
- 3cm 
0 cm 
-4 , 
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 
Delay in ns 
Figure 7. The raw correlation curves of 11 range 
measurements at a fixed distance. (1 meter 
antenna separation = 0 cm in this experimental 
frame of reference). 
2-789 
x IO”  Fikered Correlation , 
I -  ocm I 
I I -16 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 
Delay in ns 
Figure 8. The raw correlation curves were sent through a 
smoothing weighted average filter to reject noise. 
r4n” Cubic @!me Interpolation of Filered Correlation 
2 2  
2 15 
2 1  
2 05 
2 
1 95 
1 9  
185 
1 8  
1 75 
1 7  
-03 -02 4 1  0 0 1  0 2  0 3  0 4  0 5  0 6  
Delay in ns 
Figure 9. The filtered correlation curves interpolated using 
a cubic spline fit to increase resolution. 
Assuming a normal distribution, the 11 range measurements 
have a standard deviation of 0.375 cm and a mean of -0.355 
cm. In other words, this is a measurement error of -0.355 
cm (accuracy) with 95% of the measurements falling within 
k 0.740 cm (precision). 
Dynamic Range Measurements 
Raw Correlation 
I 
0 1 2 3 4 
Delay in ns 
Figure 10. The raw correlation curves of 5 range 
measurements at increasing distances. (1 meter 
antenna separation = 0 cm in this experimental 
fiame of reference). 
Delay in ns 
Figure 11. The raw correlation curves smoothed using a 
weighted average filter to reject noise. 
Below are the results of five range measurements, each at a 
distance 3 cm greater than the previous measurement. The 
expected results are 3 cm, 6 cm, 9 cm, 12 cm, and 15 cm. 
2-790  
Cubic Spline lnlerpolalion 01 Filtered Correlation 
- 3 3 c m  
2 4  156cm 
I 
[4] W. Gregonvich, “An Airborne Ground Penetrating 
Radar System”, 1996 IEEE Aerospace Conference, 
February 1996, Vol. 1, pp. 157-161. 
[5] J. D. S. Langley, et al, “Novel Ultrawide-Bandwidth 
Vivaldi Antenna With Low Crosspolarization.” IEE 
Electronics Letters, Vol. 29, No. 23, November 1993, pp. 
2004-2005. 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Delay in ns 
a cubic spline fit to increase resolution. 
Figure 12. The filtered correlation curves interpolated using 
Subtracting the actual distances from the calculated results 
reveals measurement errors of 0.3 cm, 0 cm, -0.3 cm, 0 cm, 
and 0.6 cm, respectively. The average error is then 0.12 cm 
with a standard deviation of 0.251 cm. Assuming a normal 
distribution, 95% of measurements would be within 0.12 * 
0.502 cm of the actual distance. 
6 .  CONCLUSIONS 
This fist experiment in using UWB signals for ranging 
provides a proof of concept of the usefulness of using this 
technology for ranging measurements in multi-vehicle 
formations. It also suggests that further theoretical analysis 
is needed to determine the full potential performance of an 
UWB ranging system. Some of the important questions to 
be resolved include determining the effects of signal 
bandwidth, pseudorandom code bit rate, pseudorandom code 
length, sampling rate, and correlation techniques on the 
accuracy and precision of the range measurements. 
REFERENCES 
[1] The Measurement, Instrumentation, and Sensors 
Handbook, CRC Publishing, 1998. 
[2] T. Corazzini, A. Robertson, J. C. Adams, A. Hassibi, J. 
P. How, “Experimental Demonstration of GPS as a Relative 
Sensor for Formation Flying Spacecraft,” Navigation, 
volume 45, no. 3, Fall 1998, pp. 195-207. 
Dr. John Carl Adams is a senior research scientist at the 
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center. 
Walt Gregorwich is a senior advanced systems staff 
engineer at the Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology 
Center. 
Dr. Larry Capots is the manager for advanced programs at 
the Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center. 
Darren Liccardo is a senior at the University of California 
at Berkeley, majoring in Electrical Engineering. 
[3] E. A. Olsen, GPS Sensing for Formation Flying 
Vehicles, Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University, Dept. of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sept. 1999. 
2-791 
