HUMS - The Benefits =- Past, Present and Future1 
James E. Land 
President, Irvine Labs, Inc. 
15 Bellevue 
Newport Coast, CA 92657 
j land @ irvinelabs.com 
949-7 19 9807 
Abstract- This paper presents a comprehensive model of 
how military and commercial operators achieve benefits in 
Health and Usage Monitoring Systems (HUMS) equipped 
helicopters. The model uncovers the substantial set of the 
potential benefits and presents a framework that each 
operator can use as a tool to analyze particular benefits 
that are tuned to the operating environment for which 
HUMS is being used or being considered. 
The model presents real-life cases to show the benefits 
that can be achieved from operational HUMS systems and 
actual operational data and analysis. The paper examines 
HUMS as it affects potential roles and missions of 
helicopters; including commercial and military. 
Consideration is given to such issues as fleet readiness, 
management of spares assets, cost of M&O staff, and 
effects of aircraft downtime. The model includes all 
sources of costs for the HUMS, including the costs of 
equipment, installation costs, downtimes for installation, 
cost of support of the HUMS, etc. 
The model also looks into the perceived future operational 
environment, where the Operator and the Aircraft 
Manufacturer are integrated into a real-time team to get 
the best performance from the deployed fleet. 
A major emphasis of the paper is the use of practical, real- 
life experience as a feedback into the HUMS System. That 
system includes equipment, operating procedures and 
personnel, integrated into a cohesive force. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
INTRODUCTION 
THE NORTH SEA EXPERIENCE 
WHAT IS A HUMS? 
CURRENT STATE OF HUMS DEVELOPMENT 
A GENERAL COST AND BENEFTr MODEL 
A WORLD VIEW OF HUMS BENEFlTS 
CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE 
WHO ARE THE STAKEHOLDERS? 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Nearly everyone who has been actively involved in 
helicopter operations or in engineering of avionics 
systems for helicopters will by now have at least heard of 
HUMS. This paper considers the capabilities of the early 
systems, newer attempts to launch even more 
comprehensive systems, and the likely direction that 
HUMS development will take into the future. It also 
provides a general framework and model in which 
stakeholders can consider the costs that they will likely 
encounter when facing HUMS and the benefits that may 
accrue to them. 
The history of HUMS is considered in order to place its 
current status into perspective. This historical perspective 
can also be a guide to help shape the vision of what a 
HUMS should be in future implementations. 
With the perspective of the early history of HUMS, a 
definition of HUMS is provided. This definition 
considers its functions, features and benefits, its 
components, and what it is not. 
The costhenefit model is intended to be comprehensive. 
It encourages a broad look at the benefits to be achieved. 
It also takes a pragmatic look at the real costs in terms of 
timescales and financial outlays to achieve the benefits. 
Finally, a challenge is put forth to those who are engaged 
in HUMS development. HUMS should be considered in 
the framework of a major change in the way the helicopter 
is operated and maintained. 
2. THE NORTH SEA EXPERIENCE 
The concept of monitoring the performance of important 
subsystems on aircraft is not novel to the helicopter 
industry. Such systems were first employed in the civil air 
transport market soon after the introduction of the wide 
body jet circa 1960. Then, with a concern over the safety 
of this new generation of aircraft, major regulatory bodies 
including the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
and United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority (UK CAA) 
mandated crash survivable flight data recorders. With the 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
6-3083 
availability of such information on the aircraft, soon the 
airline engineering staff was clamoring to get the 
information to assist them in day-to-day operations and 
maintenance activities. Thus was borne the Aircraft 
Integrated Data System (AIDS) and the newer generation 
Aircraft Condition Monitoring System and Aircraft Data 
Acquisition System (ACMWADAS). In the US Navy, 
with a concern over specific engine performance of 
aircraft such as the venerable A-7, the FlOO engines on 
the US Air Force F16 and F15, and the turbine engines on 
the USAF A10, a new generation of engine vibration and 
performance monitors was borne. 
This monitoring technology, however, was not applied to 
the helicopter in earnest until the North Sea fleet-wide 
program. A brief history of the evolution of HUMS is 
shown in Table 1.  
“Recommendation 1: The CAA should set up a working 
group party between experts in the Airworthiness 
Division, Ministry of Defence and selected specialists 
from universities and industry to draw up proposals or 
requirements for parameters to be measured and for new 
and improved condition monitoring devices or systems, to 
be widely publicised.” 
A companion “Report of the CAA Working Group on 
Helicopter Health Monitoring”, CAA paper 8501 2, was 
released in August 1985. From this start came industry 
and government sponsored research, leading to the 
establishment of the Helicopter Health Monitoring 
Advisory Group (HHMAG) that continues to meet and 
develop guidance material to assist in the evolution of 
HUMS. Also, from these early efforts came the industry 
and government sponsored North Sea Trials that 
ment program starte 
cident attributed to driv 
positively demonstrated the technical and operational 
viability of HUMS. 
The first of hundreds of operational HUMS went into 
service in the North Sea in the commercial arena in 1991 
- nearly 10 years ago. Now we have 10 years of 
experience as well as a growing experience in other civil 
and militarylgovernment operations. What have we 
learned? What do we know about system characteristics 
now that we must include in the evolution of these 
systems? Are these systems as complex as many would 
Unfortunately, HUMS came into being following a 
terrible accident in which nearly 50 souls lost their lives in 
the North Sea onboard a BV-234 (commercial variant of 
the CH-47). This accident and its subsequent inquiry 
prompted the establishment of a Helicopter Advisory 
Review Panel (HARP). The HARP published its report as 
CAA Report CAP 491, June 1984. Among other 
recommendations, HARP concluded, 
6-3084 
make them out to be? Can the touted benefits be achieved 
at an affordable cost? 
HUMS equipment was first put on the North Sea 
helicopter fleet for the simple reason that the customers 
demanded it! This arena of helicopter operations is one of 
the most demanding in the world. Helicopters begin 
flying at the break of day and continue until nightfall 
flying from bases in Scotland, England, Norway, The 
Netherlands, and other European coastal bases into the 
harsh environment of the North Sea. There are periods of 
the year when the only mode of transportation to and from 
the oil platforms is by helicopter. But the incident rate of 
these helicopters was not satisfactory to the customers - 
the oil and gas companies. So an edict went out, put 
HUMS on the aircraft or we will not buy a ticket! The 
result? Since 1991, there has been a major reduction in 
helicopter incident rates as reported by the UK CAA. The 
safety objectives of HUMS have been achieved there. 
Now, helicopter operations are safer in the North Sea than 
on fixed wing, turboprop commuter operations in the US. 
This rush to HUMS in the North Sea also caused a 
number of other operators around the globe to take a 
positive decision to employ these new systems. As new 
aircraft and major aircraft upgrade programs emerged, the 
aircraft manufacturers introduced HUMS programs. 
Eurocopter made systems available on its Super Puma 
aircraft - both the older Mark I and the new Mark 11. 
Other off shore operators and some military operators 
such as the Royal Dutch Air Force and the Singapore Air 
Force selected HUMS as part of upgrade and new aircraft 
purchases. Rega Swiss Air Ambulance procured a light 
HUMS system that could be implemented in functional 
modules on their fleet of 15 Agusta A109K2 helicopters. 
The Canadian Defence Forces selected HUMS as part of 
its CH146 (Bell 412) purchase of 100 ships. Sikorsky 
selected a HUMS for its S76 and S92. All new aircraft 
programs today have some type of HUMS as at least an 
option and some are moving to a standard fitting. 
The experience to date in HUMS installations around the 
world could be seen as having yielded mixed results - else 
there would be a rush by all the operators - civil and 
military alike - to get systems on their aircraft. But the 
data seems to be there to show that when done right the 
benefits can far outweigh the costs. A number of studies 
have shown on paper, at least, that the benefits are there 
and that they can yield a commercial payback period that 
is within the window where a prudent businessman would 
make an investment. 
One of the facts to be considered is the time frame 
required to implement something like HUMS into an 
aircraft and then into an operational fleet. The case for 
the military operator is especially demanding as a number 
of factors have to be considered, especially the need for 
training, changes in operating procedures, changes in 
maintenance practices, changes in the support systems, 
and availability of operational aircraft to retrofit HUMS. 
But there are more sinister culprits lurking in the darkness 
that tend to undermine the honorable attempt of the 
technical community to get HUMS to the market. This 
paper will look at some of the more subtle aspects of 
HUMS implementation. 
3. WHAT IS A HUMS? 
HUMS can be defined in a number of ways. The first way 
is to define what a HUMS does - what are its functions. 
Another way is to describe its attributes - what it is made 
of, what it produces and how are the products used. Yet 
another way is to define what it is not. As there has been 
a lot of confusion surrounding HUMS, we will do all three 
here. 
HUMS is an acronym for a system that includes: 
0 Avionics equipment, 
Associated ground equipment, and, most 
importantly, 
Changes in the way that a fleet of helicopters is 
operated and maintained. 
“Health” is a measure of the overall flightworthiness of 
the aircraft. Health is assessed by examining the 
instantaneous indicators of the well being of vital 
components on the aircraft as well as trend analysis of 
these indicators. 
“Usage” is a measure of how the life of components is 
being expended on the life-limited parts of the aircraft as 
well as determining the time to overhaul of some major 
components such as engines and gearboxes. 
“Monitoring” is the means by which information is 
gathered on the aircraft on the vital systems. 
“System” tell us that there are a number of parts that must 
operate together towards a common objective. The 
system includes on-board equipment and human- 
implemented processes to carry out the objectives of 
HUMS. 
The UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) defines HUMS in 
DEF STAN 00-970* thus: 
“The purpose of health and usage monitoring (HUM) is to 
improve flight safety, rotorcraft availability, 
maintainability, the ability to complete a mission, and to 
reduce life cycle costs. In order to fully utilise the benefits 
of Health and Usage Monitoring the outputs from the 
Reference 2. 
6-3085 
system should be fully integrated with the maintenance 
philosophy of the rotorcraft.” 
HUMS is a new way of employing helicopters. It impacts 
the flight crew, the ground crew, the storeroom, the supply 
chain of spares and repairs, the aircraft manufacturer, the 
regulator, and the insurer. HUMS requires a change in the 
“world view” or gestalt of how we operate, maintain, 
design and build, and provide fiscal, legal and public 
accountability of the use of helicopters as a vital mode of 
transportation. We simply cannot approach HUMS as if 
it were some new type of gadget that we simply buy and 
bolt on the aircraft. HUMS requires a paradigm shift. 
HUMS is above all a system - of machines and 
equipment, people and processes - aimed at improving the 
safety and the operational efficiency and reducing the cost 
of owning and operating a helicopter. It supposes the 
technical means for gathering important information from 
the aircraft is available through sensors, avionics 
equipment, software processing and operating procedures. 
The purposes and intents of HUMS as stated have not 
always been realized due to the relative ease associated 
with getting new equipment designed, built, bolted on and 
qualified for use on an aircraft. As long as this equipment 
is provided to the aircraft in a way in which it does not 
endanger the aircraft, it can be used in a “no hazard, no 
benefit” way. That is, the civil operator can fly with the 
equipment, but no direct benefit to change life limited 
inspections, component removal or service intervals or to 
change the operating envelope or deviate from the flight 
manual can be granted. There are no safety credits or 
maintenance credits allowed by the book. Today there is 
a plethora of these types of systems emerging. There are 
at least a dozen makers of equipment that claim they have 
a HUMS or at least others refer to the system as a HUMS. 
What was once a simple engine monitoring system is now 
referred to by its manufacturer as a HUMS. 
The initial response to the immediacy of the need in the 
North Sea was to develop “bolt on” equipment and 
provide an associated ground station that would 
implement the functionality that was proven in a set of 
earlier aircraft trial installations. These systems did fulfill 
the mandatory UK CAA requirements for crash survivable 
flight data and cockpit voice recording. Systems were 
configured with near off-the-shelf Flight Data Recording 
(FDR) equipment from similar installations in air transport 
with the addition of sensors taken from laboratory 
environments and coupled with vibration-based signal 
processing. This technology had been successfully 
demonstrated in North Sea trial installations in the latter 
part of the 80’s. These systems and those that followed 
established the baseline standards for HUMS, even though 
they fell short in a number of respects. They provide the 
following major features: 
Table 2: Functions of the North Sea HUMS 
I North Sea HUMS Functions 
Permanently mounted Rotor Track and Balance’ 
Drive system vibration-based monitoring4 
Rotors (main and tail) 
Engine Performance Monitoring 
Engine Power Assurance Check 
Flight Regime Monitoring 
Flight Data and Voice Recording5 
Parameter Monitoring and Out of Limit Alarms 
But the svstem consists of more than the avioni s. It 
includes a means to remove data from the aircraft and 
maintain the exact configuration of aircraft equipment and 
a comprehensive ground station that captures the data 
collected during flight. These provide the tools to assist 
the maintainer in determining the overall health of the 
aircraft and the manner in which the aircraft was used and 
supports the means to return the aircraft to service when 
maintenance actions are performed. 
HUMS provides essential information that is used in 
conjunction with existing maintenance practices to 
improve the maintenance of the aircraft. When the 
aircraft manufacturer is part of the HUMS program, the 
HUMS forms an integral part of these maintenance 
practices. It provides information to the manufacturer that 
supports the overhaul and repair of major components and 
assemblies on the aircraft. It provides fleet-wide data that 
can be used by the underwriter to assess the safety 
practices of the operator. It provides information to the 
regulator to assist in continued airworthiness information 
on the aviation fleet. 
The helicopter dynamic system (engines, drive shafts, 
gearboxes, main rotor, tail rotors, hanger bearings) are key 
elements that must be effectively monitored to achieve the 
aims of the HUMS. The sensor suite includes those to 
measure temperatures, pressures, flow rates, oil-borne 
metallic chips, rotational speeds, and vibration details. It 
is in this latter area that much progress has been made. 
Many helicopter accidents can be attributed to mechanical 
failures of the drive system. These failures are a result of 
unexpected levels of wear on drive system components 
due to: 
1. Manufacturing flaws in components, 
Some units have a permanent mount but a removable optical tracker 
Implemented by as many as 16 vibration sensors (accelerometers). 
This is a CAA mandatory function, implementing the requirements of 
for the main rotor and a removable tracker for the tail rotor. 
EUROCAE ED55/56a requirements. 
6-3086 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. Errors in maintenance. 
Errors in assembly into subsystems, 
Errors in assembly on the aircraft, 
Collateral damage caused by failure of related 
systems and components on the aircraft, 
External or Foreign Object Damage (FOD), 
Improper operation of the aircraft, or 
One of the major advances in aircraft monitoring in the 
North Sea HUMS was proving of the viability of 
vibration-based techniques to monitor the health of the 
gears and bearings in the single load path of the helicopter 
drive system. These deterministic techniques modeled the 
dynamic characteristics of the gears and bearings and 
related those characteristics to the types of damage that 
could be underway inside the gearboxes or in the bearings. 
Figures of Merit, non-dimensional measures of the types 
of damage accumulation, were developed based on the 
Fast-Fourier Transform (FFT) of the signal averages (over 
several rotational periods of the component being 
observed) from each vibration sensor - accelerometer. 
Not all of the objectives of these early North Sea systems 
were met by the major stakeholders. But, for all the 
deficiencies of these early systems, the result, whether 
direct or indirect, was a major improvement in the safety 
of operations in the North Sea - as demonstrated in UK 
CAA review of incident data over a period of five years. 
The companies buying the tickets were at least pleased 
that their safety goals were achieved. 
The following were some of the deficiencies in the North 
Sea HUMS process. Some of this may be “Monday 
Morning Quarterbacking”, but true, nonetheless. 
The aircraft manufacturers or “constructors” 
were not initially involved in the system 
architectures, especially in determining how 
HUMS indications of problems would be 
managed. Thus there were no immediate and 
direct maintenance or safety credits. 
The regulators were only asked to give a “no 
hazard - no benefit” approval of the HUMS 
aspects of the installations. 
The operators were only involved in a minimal 
sense in the definition of the system 
characteristics. 
The underwriters were not engaged to see how 
they would respond to these systems that had an 
aim at reducing their risk exposure. 
The systems were configured from equipment 
and sensors designed for other applications and 
not optimized for daily helicopter application. 
4. CURRENT STATE OF HUMS DEVELOPMENT 
North Sea HUMS equipment has been operational 
approaching ten years. Rega has been operating HUMS in 
the equally demanding high-altitude Alps environment for 
nearly 5 years. Now a new generation of equipment is 
emerging, taking benefit of the “lessons learned” as well 
as employing more modern technology in the HUMS 
implementation. An excellent example of the type of 
developments that are emerging is that which now has 
received production go-ahead from the US NavyMarines 
- the Integrated Maintenance Diagnostic - Health and 
Usage Management System (IMD-HUMS) from 
BFGoodrich Aerospace in cooperation with Vibrometer. 
This system has now completed its Development Testing 
and has received the production go-ahead with the aim of 
employment on all the newer US NavyMarine fleet. To 
emphasize the use of the system in a proactive aircraft 
management mode, the “M” in HUMS has been changed 
to “Management” from “Monitoring”. These newer 
systems employ the following key features. 
Open Architecture: Allows new hardware 
modules and software modules to be added into 
the system as the technology expands, 
Modern digital processor technology: taking 
advantage of the growth in processor speeds and 
low power devices and manufacturing processes, 
Open Ground Station Environment: Microsoft 
Windows NTTM allows easy migration of HUMS 
information into different processing domains, 
Commercial Software Components; such as 
Microsoft Windows NTTM and ORACLE 
database management systems, 
Vastly improved sensors: Sensors designed to 
meet the demanding environment of continuous 
operation in harsh aviation applications, 
Non-optical based rotor trim and balancing: 
eliminating the annoyance of a camera-like 
device on the nose of the aircraft, 
Major advances in processing algorithms: 
especially in vibration-based signal processing 
that are adaptive to the expanding operational 
knowledge base. 
Most of the aircraft manufacturers have an active HUMS 
program. Included are: 
1. Bell Helicopter: Has adopted the IMD-HUMS 
for the AH-1ZILTH-IY US Marine Upgrade 
Program. Continues towards STC on the Bell 
412 Standard HUMS in conjunction with PHI. 
Has a limited functionality system in 
development for the AB609. 
2. Eurocopter: Continues to offer the 
EuroHUMSTM and EuroARMSTM systems on the 
Super Puma. Has a small system available for 
the AS365N4 and the AS350135 
6-3087 
3. Sikorsky: Is implementing the IMD-HUMS on 
the S-92 and the S-76. 
Some industry-sponsored organizations such as the 
Rotorcraft Industries Technical Association (RITA) 
continue to sponsor HUMS technology development. In 
addition, the SAE E-32 committee continues to advance 
standards and recommendations for engine monitoring. 
The CAA supported HHMAG continues to advance new 
developments in HUMS and provide a forum to express 
HUMS technologies. 
There are some newly introduced aircraft monitoring 
systems that are directed at specific needs of the 
helicopter operator. Some of these are in response to the 
emerging requirement in Europe called JAR OPS 3, which 
will require aircraft monitoring for small, single engine 
helicopters. Some of these smaller systems have been 
employed by commercial and military operators to 
improve their operations in specific areas. 
One example of the application of smaller systems that are 
HUMS-like is that currently operational on the US Air 
Force H-53 fleet. This system is a version of the 
Chadwick-Helmuth CHAAMPTM system that has 
implemented a permanently fitted rotor track and balance 
system and is used on the USAF H-53 fleet to manage the 
vibration of the aircraft, including track and balance. It 
has been reported that the US NavyMarines are planning 
on employing a similar but carry-aboard approach using 
the Chadwick-Helmuth track and balance equipment in an 
integrated program for the CH-46. (This aircraft type may 
be replaced in the near future and would not be a 
candidate for receiving the IMD-HUMS.) 
One of the dangers in these smaller systems is that of 
narrowing the expectations of the operator. By 
concentrating on a narrow field of benefits, as good as 
they may seem, the real value of a full HUMS 
implementation may be overlooked. It is important, 
however, that the experiences of these smaller systems be 
captured in the full HUMS context. Capital expenditures 
to acquire a limited capability system will surely 
financially impair the ability of the operator to employ a 
full functionality system when available. 
Smaller HUMS-like systems may emerge to provide 
functional capability on smaller aircraft such as the single 
engine, turbine or piston engine aircraft. Such systems 
should take benefit of the modern approaches to rotor trim 
and balance as well as limited vibration monitoring of 
drive system components. These are not likely to be as 
extensive as the HUMS designed for the large, multi- 
engine turbine aircraft. Again, realizing the full benefits 
of such systems demands cooperative development 
between operators and the airframe manufacturer. 
Research and development continues in some important 
areas. Three are noteworthy: 
1. On-Rotor Monitoring: To date, there has been 
no reasonable means to get sensors located on 
the rotor directly. The sensor technology was too 
weighty and there was no convenient means to 
get power to the sensor and signals from the 
sensor to the main body of the aircraft. Micro- 
minute, low- power sensors are in development 
that employ ASIC and MEM technologies. 
Spread spectrum signaling methods are available 
now that will enable signal transmission and 
command transmission from the sensor to the 
control unit. Low power generators can be 
developed using wind turbine approaches on the 
rotor. In several years, this technology should 
mature and be available for integration into the 
open architecture systems. BlueToothTM or other 
emerging commercial wireless methods may be 
employed once they are available in the general 
communications market. 
Air/Ground Data Extraction: Currently, the most 
attractive means to remove information from the 
aircraft is the use of a PC-card. However, there 
is a need to have event data and summary data 
available well before the aircraft has landed and 
disembarked its passengers. Use of GateLinkTM 
or like technologies will enable timelier reporting 
of information as the aircraft approaches the 
terminal area or landing site. Newer air/ground 
data link systems may be employed to telemeter 
incidents and parameter anomalies while in- 
flight, much like that currently done by some 
major airlines around the world using 
ACARS/AIRCOM. 
3. Algorithm Development: Much is being learned 
from the HUMS systems to date in the area of 
information extraction. Systems such as the 
IMD-HUMS will allow modular upgrade to the 
data processing suite of software as newer 
techniques emerge. These systems are 
employing a layered approach to information 
extraction: 
0 On-board to provide essential real time 
information, 
0 Flight line to ensure rapid fault isolation and 
return to service, 
Central fleet-wide data management and 
algorithm improvement. 
With the use of an open architecture and use of 
standard software, it is easier to implement 
change and take advantage of new knowledge. 
2. 
Use of an open system architecture, such as that employed 
by the IMD-HUMS approach, will help to assure that 
these newer technologies can be readily added to 
operational systems. 
6-3088 
Another important area of HUMS development is in the 
regulatory arena. The UK CAA took the first bold steps 
in mandating CVR/FDR systems ten years ago. The FAA 
now has similar requirements for public transport category 
helicopters that are brought onto the registry. However, 
the most important development is that of the publishing 
of draft Advisory Circular material (intended to be 
amended to AC-27-1 and AC-29-2). This material, 
released in July 1999 recognized three important HUMS 
aspects: 
(1) Installation, 
(2) Credit validation, and 
(3) Instructions for Continued 
Airworthiness (ICA). 
This material has helped to shape the development of the 
newer IMD-HUMS, resulting in a system developed from 
the ground-up to a Flight Essential criticality level and 
software development to RTCA DO-l78B, Level B for 
the airbome system. Although such a development is 
costly, it is vital to the ability of the HUMS to achieve the 
needed maintenance and safety credits to assure that the 
benefits are achieved. 
5. WHO ARE THE STAKEHOLDERS? 
The costs and the benefits of HUMS must be considered 
from the perspective of the stakeholders involved in 
HUMS. These include: 
2. The HUMS equipped operator, 
3. 
4. 
5.  The Aircraft Manufacturer, 
6. 
7. Aircraft Service Providers, 
8. 
9. Insurance Underwriters, and 
10. Aircraft Financing Institutions 
The flight and maintenance crews, 
The HUMS equipped aircraft owner, 
The Equipment Manufacturers of the HUMS 
components - Air and Ground, 
The Regulating and Aviation Safety Agencies, 
Each of these stakeholders has an associated “cost” of 
implementing HUMS as well as a “benefit”. 
0 Aircraft Operator: The aircraft operator has a 
vested interest in HUMS. HUMS provides 
unprecedented amounts of information that tells 
the operator how a particular aircraft has been 
used as well as provides fleet-wide statistics that 
is useful in the general management of the fleet. 
Such items as dispatch reliability, daily usage 
rates, sortie rates, times in each aircraft flight 
mode, aircraft flight conditions when a mode 
transition occurs, etc. are all valuable in the 
management of the assets of an operator. Such 
information is also valuable to the flight safety 
officer in determining supplemental training 
needs. Furthermore, the operator benefits from 
using HUMS by having more useful time from 
the asset due to the reductions in out of service 
times while investigations are carried out, 
reductions in sortie turnaround times, and overall 
improvements in equipment utilization. 
Flight Crew and Ground Maintenance: The 
crew will benefit from HUMS in that it assists 
them in operating and maintaining the aircraft. 
Decreases in workload allow the flight crew to 
concentrate on the more important tasks of flying 
the aircraft. The ground crew is assisted in 
taking more informed decisions about 
maintenance actions and returning the aircraft to 
service faster. Finally, through improved 
monitoring programs such as Flight Operations 
Quality Assurance, actual training time can be 
reduced, allowing more productive flying time. 
0 Aircraft Owner: The owner may be different 
than the operator. In this case, the owner has a 
need to know the manner in which his property 
has been used or misused. This provides 
invaluable information in the determination of 
lease rates, maintenance actions, etc. 
Aircraft Manufacturer: The manufacturers 
will receive considerable benefit from employing 
HUMS on their aircraft. Major domestic 
operators have entered very vocal complaints in 
the last several years about the high cost of 
operating and maintaining commercial 
helicopters. Maintenance is the single most 
costly element of the aircraft ownership cost. 
There has been a general rise in the cost of parts 
and overhaul charges imposed by manufacturers. 
Much of this increase is reported to be traceable 
to the higher cost of a regulated industry. HUMS 
provides valuable information to the 
manufacturer to assist in the long-term reduction 
of the cost of ownership of the product. Such a 
trend will expand the usefulness of the helicopter 
into other transportation applications. For 
example, there is a growing need for intercity and 
intra-city flights. However, the use of the 
helicopter in the United States for general public 
carriage has disappeared. Were HUMS able to 
achieve the safety records of the North Sea 
experience (better than the turboprop commuter 
experience) then the helicopter could be viewed 
as a very viable transportation option. In 
addition, the utility of HUMS information will 
allow the aircraft to move to an on-condition 
approach to maintenance in most instances and 
avoid “fixing” systems that are not broken. 
0 Equipment Manufacturers: The equipment 
manufacturer will obviously benefit from 
increased equipment sales - both directly and 
6-3089 
indirectly as a result of increased application of 
the helicopter to expanded missions and roles. 
Aircraft Service Providers: These include 
Fixed Base Operators and other servicing 
organizations to the small operator as well as 
those who provide this type of service on a 
grander scale. HUMS provides the information 
to the maintainer that allows a knowledge-based 
maintenance program. 
0 Regulating and Aviation Safety Agencies: 
Currently, only mandatory FDR and CVR 
information is required as a means to support 
incident investigations. Further, this equipment 
is required in limited circumstances - weight 
limits, when the aircraft is placed on the registry, 
number of passengers, etc. HUMS information 
supplements that obtained via FDR and CVR to 
assist in many, non-catastrophic incidences. 
There are even events in fixed wing applications 
where non-crash protected memories have been 
used in incident investigations. Furthermore, as 
the application of HUMS is expanded to more 
aircraft, the regulating agencies will have an 
expanding frame of reference from which to 
judge the merits of each new application. 
0 Insurance Underwriters: Insurance costs have 
increased considerably over the last decade. 
However, even more alarming is the expansion in 
the perception of risk exposure in aviation in 
general. Such a system as HUMS not only 
improves the safety of helicopter operations, it 
reduces the uncertainty in the risk exposure by 
those who provide the coverage. 
0 Aircraft Financing Institutions: Those who 
bear the ultimate responsibility for the financing 
of the aviation equipment will benefit from 
reduced probability in loss or severe damage of 
equipment. 
6. A GENERAL COST AND B E m  MODEL 
This section provides a general cost and benefit model. It 
identifies the sources of costs and benefits in a general 
framework and suggests a general approach to developing 
a HUMS decision process. The information in this 
section is drawn from data developed in the UK and the 
US military, especially the study performed by Draper 
Laboratory6 and the study prepared by Bell Helicopter and 
 PHI.^ 
When considering the costs and the benefits of HUMS, it 
is important to consider all the possible sources of costs as 
well as the sources of benefits. 
The well-known chart that illustrates the general means by 
which maintenance savings are achieved is shown in 
Figure 1: The figure illustrates that if any particular 
aircraft is used in a manner that is milder than the design 
flight profile, then there is potential for “maintenance 
savings”, expressed in an increase in the useful service life 
of the part. If, however, the aircraft is used in a manner 
that could be classified as “severe usage” then the life may 
be expended well before the normal design life. 
Continued operation beyond the real life could place the 
aircraft at risk. Examples of severe usage include 
maneuvers to get a military aircraft into a hostile landing 
zone or landing on an off shore oil platform in inclement 
conditions. While these types of usage are allowed and 
may be operationally mandatory under the circumstances, 
a means of knowing the accumulated damage must be 
made available. In either case, HUMS offers the potential 
for cost savings. The mild case produces direct savings in 
life extensions. The severe case supports risk avoidance. 
The benefit of HUMS is that the system collects flight 
information that can be used to calculate the loads on each 
part and thus determine the rate at which the lives are 
being expended. 
A lot of attention has been directed to the potential 
savings through service life extension. The lives of 
components on an aircraft are dictated by a number of 
factors among them being the hours flown with the part as 
well as calendar time. Calendar time limitations are 
usually a result of deterioration as a result of exposure to 
the environment. The flight hours approach assumes that 
“damage” to a part occurs as a result of stresses placed 
upon it. This damage is assessed during the design of the 
aircraft; especially data collected during the flight trials. 
From this data, the designers select a design life for the 
part. The flight trials are based upon an assumed flight 
profile of a “worst case” situation - within reason. 
However, experience shows that most operators do not 
come close to the worst case. In some cases, the lives of 
these life-limited parts could be extended indefinitely. 
“Cost / Benefit Analysis for htegrated Mechanical Diagnostics”, 
Report R-2782, Draper Laboratory, April 1997. 
“Operational Evaluation of a Health and Usage Monitoring System 
(HUMS)”, NASNCR-1998-207409, dated April 1998, by J. Cronkhite, 
B.Dickson, W.Martin, and G. Collingwood. 
6-3090 
,Design Life 
/’ 
FLIGHT TIME 
Figure 1: Maintenance Savings Through Life Extension 
This concept was first presented at an HHMAG meeting. 
In addition, these life-limited parts are usually associated 
with assemblies such that when one part is replaced, a 
number of collateral parts are replaced during the same 
overhaul. The “long pole in the tent” determines the time 
when the overhaul must be performed. In addition, the 
time of the overhaul may be performed during slow period 
of operation so that the aircraft are available when the 
demand is there. The net result is removal of parts that 
may have valuable time remaining. 
This situation is exacerbated when an aircraft must be 
readied to send on detachment - for military use as well as 
for other uses such as dispatch to a fire hazard area. The 
cost impacts not only include the actual removal of the 
parts before the lives are expended but all the collateral 
work effort needed to manage the system - from parts 
management to operational scheduling difficulties. 
Moving into a HUMS world requires careful deliberation 
and cooperation of all the stakeholders. These 
stakeholders are encouraged to take a proactive role in the 
evolution of HUMS. Taking a “wait and see” attitude will 
delay the realization of the benefits to all the stakeholders. 
This type of “wait and see” thinking is akin to the failure 
of the American automotive industry to make reliable 
automobiles prior to the emergence of foreign 
competition. Who ever heard of cars that were good for 
250,000 miles and tires that lasted 60,000 miles in 1950? 
Although we may look back with nostalgia at the cars of 
our youth, we would not trade the reliable and durable 
machines we have now for the vehicles of yesteryears to 
serve our daily transportation needs. The net result for the 
automobile is still cars that get traded in every three to 
five years, but with major increases in their use. Such a 
trend is the likely trend when HUMS benefits are finally 
realized. When we can get better economic performance 
Table 3: Potential Areas o 
Major Costs Savings Area 
Reduced Inspection Times 
Reduced Unneeded 
Maintenance 
Reduced unscheduled 
Enabled by continuous 
monitoring and knowledge 
planning using HUMS 
Experience is that actual 
e avcraft accumulates 
age, a better use profil 
from the helicopter, we will find more uses for it. 
In this era of increasing emphasis on productivity and 
operating cost reduction, the helicopter needs ways to 
become more competitive from the points of view of 
reducing total ownership cost and improving readiness for 
service. The transition for unproductive practices of the 
past-involving overhaul and parts replacement on a fixed 
interval basis- to a usage based determination of need will 
make the helicopter more productive and more 
competitive as a mode of transportation. The resultant 
savings will be applied to purchase of more aircraft and 
application to additional missions for the helicopter. For 
example, if the vastly improved incident rates of the North 
Sea can be realized in normal operations (better than the 
US commuter operations), then we could see a greatly 
expanded application of the helicopter in public service 
such as in highly congested population centers. 
At this time, the world is operating aircraft with a high 
degree of uncertainty. When modem information 
gathering devices like HUMS are applied, we can operate 
with a high degree of certainty and can better manage the 
assets. Let’s have a closer look at the sources of costs and 
the potential benefits. 
6-3091 
certification mission. 
The greatest savings can be realized by taking advantage 
of the manner in which aircraft are actually operated as One of the major differences between the assumed 
compared with the assumed flight profiles used for certification flight profile and that for the Gulf Coast 
certification. The data collected by Bell and PHI during mission is that in the Gulf, the aircraft spent over 50% of 
the NASA sponsored activities shows a comparison. In its time in level flight. This has a profound effect on the 
this data there are three missions (reference 6): rate of life consumption of the drive system components. 
Table 4: Usape Profiles of a Bell 412 
1. The assumed flight modes used in the 
certification program, 
2. The mission as recorded during Gulf of Mexico 
Coastal operations, and 
3. A short-haul mission during the Atlanta Olympic 
Games. 
The flight spectra in each of these missions are shown in 
the table 2. This table shows the percentage of time that a 
Bell 412 aircraft spent in each of 54 flight conditions for 
the above three missions. The table is constructed 
showing every regime where in any of the missions the 
percentage of time in that regime is 1% or more. The 
rows are shown in order of decreasing usage in the 
Another interesting observation is that the 
aircraft spend nearly 95% of the flight time 
in less than half of the defined regimes. 
The net effect on these usage profiles is that 
for the Gulf mission, the rate of life 
consumption is less - one would expect this 
for a long-haul, cruise flight from the coast 
to an offshore platform versus short haul 
flights within the city with increased 
maneuvering. 
In the analysis conducted in the NASA 
study, it can be seen that the knowledge of 
the operating altitude of the aircraft (load 
impact) can have a profound impact on the 
rate of usage of components. In the cases 
shown, just simply dividing the regimes 
into two altitude regions (below 3,000 ft 
and above 3000 ft) can affect the life by an 
order of magnitude in some cases. 
In the study, the calculations were 
performed for four parts. The results of 
that study are summarized in Table 5; 
assuming that the lives are calculated by 
using a simple split altitude approach (even 
larger increases are possible by fine tuning 
the altitude effects.) 
In all but one condition, the life of the parts 
could be considerably extended. Only in 
the case of the main rotor yoke in the short 
haul mission was the life comparable to that 
of the value used coming from the 
certification program. With an extended 
algorithm to better account for the effects 
of altitude, even that could be improved. 
An equally important observation is that the actual usage 
bears little resemblance to the usage profiles assumed in 
certification for typical commercial missions. 
8. A WORLD VIEW OF HUMS BENEFITS 
This section explores the concept that we must move away 
from the “bolt-on” solutions of the past to a system that is 
designed from the ground up with cooperation of the 
operator and the aircraft manufacturer with a view to 
HUMS operation from the start. 
6-3092 
Table 5: Typical Part Life with HUMS (HOURS) 
When considering HUMS, it is important that a 
comprehensive set of the potential benefits be assessed 
prior to the implementation. This extensive analysis needs 
participation of the design authority and the operator to 
of the aircraft components are moving to on-condition 
maintenance. The same approach to these programs could 
be selectively applied to current airframes if an effective 
HUMS program were to be put in place. 
9. CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE 
This section challenges the technical community to make 
the paradigm shift into the world of HUMS. Only by such 
a move will the full potential benefits be realized. 
Such a move requires the full participation and 
involvement of the following: 
1. Operator Design of the Operational Usage: 
The operator understands how the aircraft are 
used now and can help shape the paradigm shift 
assess the features and the benefits. 
There is clear evidence that for commercial 
helicopter operations, use of monitoring can 
cause or contribute to major improvements in 
the safety of aircraft operations. The benefits 
are manifold, but the costs are not insignificant. 
In fact the perceived high cost of bolt-on 
HUMS equipment has caused most operators to 
shy away from HUMS. But there is a way 
forward. 
Figure 2 shows a sample comprehensive cost 
and benefit model. 
In this model it is important to list all of the 
potential areas of cost as well as benefits. The 
costs include those to implement a HUMS 
program to begin with as well as the recurring 
costs to maintain the program. On the benefit 
side there are direct costs that are readily seen 
and directly attributable to the HUMS. There 
are other benefits that may be of equal 
importance and potentially of even higher value 
but are less easy to determine. For example, the 
cost of safety is difficult to assess. In the long 
0 AVIONICS 
EQUIPMENT 
0 INSTALLATION 
KIT 
0 SPARES 
0 INSTALL LABOR 
0 INSTALLATION 
FACILITIES 
0 AIRCRAFT 
DOWN TIME 
0 FLIGHTTEST 
0 TRAINING 
HUMS 
EOUIPMENT 
MAINTENANCE 
GROUND 
STATION 
OPERATIONS 
FLIGHT CREW 
OPERATIONS 
RECURRING 
TRAINING 
LOST FLYING 
TIME DUE TO 
FALSE ALARMS 
AfRCRAFT 
WEIGHT 
INCREASES 
INCREASED TBO 
INCREASED 
SERVICE/ 
INSPECTION 
INTERVALS 
IMPROVED 
OPERATIONS 
AND 
MAINTENANCE 
PLANNING 
DECREASED 
EVENT 
RESPONSE 
AIRCRAFT 
RESALE VALUE 
0 DISPATCH 
RELIABILITY 
IMPROVEMENT 
ACCURATE 
WEIGHT AND 
BALANCE  SERVICE LIFE 0 MORE 0 IMPROVED 
0 IMPROVED 
AVAILABILITY 
0 REDUCED 
TURNAROUND 
TIMES 
P REDUCEDRTB 
FLIGHTS 
0 REDUCED 
AIRFRAME 
VIBRATION 
DAMAGE 
0 REDUCEDCREW 
FATIGUE 
0 RAPIDFAULT 
ISOLATION 
0 FASTER 
RESPONSETO 
ADVISORY 
DIRECTIVES 
0 SUPPORT TO 
PUTTING 
AIRCRAFT IN 
SERVICE 
0 IMPROVED 
SAFETY 
0 REDUCED 
INSURANCE 
COSTS 
3 IMPROVED 
CUSTOMER ONFIDENCE 
c 
Figure 1 : A Comprehensive HUMS Cost and Benefit Model 
run, safety impacts the operator in a number of ways. 
There is the impact of the loss of life and equipment in a 
the risk cost and the cost of insurance for operators that 
experience losses. However, there are many other indirect 
benefits of HUMS. How does one calculate the effect on 
cost of having higher dispatch reliability? 
catastrophic accident. There is an associated increase in 2. 
The major studies to date have shown a positive 
costhenefit for even the bolt-on solutions for the larger 
airframes. However, these studies did not account for the 
effect of the paradigm shift in operations and support that 
will be achieved with a HUMS equipped fleet. 3. 
New aircraft programs are under development where most 
to the HUMS operational environment. 
Design Authority Design of the HUMS 
Implementation: The aircraft design authority 
(in the civil sector that means the aircraft 
manufacturer with the full cooperation of the 
regulatory authority; in the military community 
that may mean the military operator with input 
from the aircraft manufacturer) can take the 
important decisions about how HUMS is used to 
affect their documented maintenance and 
operating procedures. 
Design for the Future: Benefits of HUMS 
show economically justified investments now. 
However, as these systems are employed in day- 
6-3093 
to-day operations, new methods will evolve. In 
addition, as new technologies emerge, the HUMS 
design must be such that the continued evolution 
of HUMS can be accommodated. Only in open 
system architecture can this be achieved. 
The way forward is to examine the world of helicopter 
operations where continuous and accurate conditions in 
which the aircraft is flown are known versus the current 
state of affairs where we only know in a gross sense how 
the aircraft was operated and the impact of that operation 
on the useful life of the aircraft. 
Effective employment of HUMS demands a fresh look at 
the whole concept of helicopter operations - from time in 
the air to the shop to the office where parts are ordered, to 
the supply chain and into the manufacturer and 
repair/overhaul shop. This global examination will lead to 
a new way of operation whereby information is obtained 
and shared to the benefit of all the parties. 
In the new world of HUMS operated fleets, we will move 
from the removal in many cases of perfectly good parts to 
more on-condition maintenance. We will remove 
maintenance as a headache and improve the use of the 
aircraft into more applications than those for which there 
just is no other way. 
With the life of the modem aircraft being twenty-five or 
more years, we cannot wait until the next generation of 
aircraft are deployed. We are challenged to undertake an 
overhaul of our current practices and relationships 
amongst all the stakeholders to achieve benefits for all 
those involved that are commensurate with the costs that 
they will outlay. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
10. REFERENCES 
Report of the Helicopter Airworthiness Review 
Panel (HARP) CAp419,1984. 
“Health and Usage Monitoring Systems”, DEF 
STAN 00-970, United Kingdom Ministry of 
Defence, 1988. 
“Report of the Helicopter Health Monitoring 
Maintenance Credit Working Group (MCWG)”, 
UK CAA, 24 November 1992. 
“A Guide to Health Monitoring in Helicopters”, 
UK CAA, September 1990. 
“Cost / Benefit Analysis for Integrated 
Mechanical Diagnostics”, Report R-2782, Draper 
Laboratory, April 1997. 
“Operational Evaluation of a Health and Usage 
Monitoring System (HUMS)”, NASAICR-1998- 
207409, dated April 1998, by J. Cronkhite, 
B.Dickson, W.Martin, and G. Collingwood. 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
James E. (Jim) Land, BSAE, MSAE, is 
currently the President of Irvine Labs, 
Inc., a consulting company located in 
Newport Beach, CA, specializing in 
high integrity avionics design and 
development and high reliability 
internet servers. He is also a founder 
and director of High Integrity 
Solutions, Ltd., a United Kingdom company formed to 
develop web based, integrated design environments for 
safety critical and flight essential flight systems. Previous 
positions have been Helicopter Systems Business Unit 
Manager in Teledyne Controls and the manager of the 
Systems Engineering Section at the California Institute of 
Technology, Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He graduated 
with honors from the University of Southem California 
and was awarded a Masters of Science Degree in 
Aerospace Engineering. 
6-3094 
