STRV-2 Payload 
Early Orbit Experience and Findings 
Kerry D. Erickson 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, California 91 109 
Kerry.D.Erickson@jpl.nasa.gov 
818 354-3567 
Kathleen D. Kelleher 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, California 91 109 
kelleher@pop.jpl.nasa.gov 
818 354-1122 
James T. Kenny 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, California 9 1 109 
James.T.Kenny@jpl.nasa.gov 
818 354-3719 
Lee D. Wigglesworth 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, California 91 109 
Lee.D. Wigglesworth@jpl.nasa.gov 
818 354-5094 
Abstract - The STRV-2 (Space Technology Research 
Vehicle) Experiment Module (EM), was launched June 7, 
2000 on a Pegasus XL launcher out of Vandenberg Air 
Force Base. STRV-2 is the primary payload on this Tri- 
Service Experiment Mission 5 (TSX-5), which is the sixth 
mission for the Air Force Space Test Program (STP). The 
EM is an integrated collection of eleven active Experiments 
and one passive. The active Experiments are commanded 
and controlled by the STRV-2 System Control Module 
(SCM) over a 1553 bus. The SCM is also the data interface 
to the spacecraft’s command, communications, and data 
handling processors. The active Experiments include high 
data rate optical communications, infrared imaging of 
aircraft and ships, vibration isolation and suppression, 
micrometeoroid impact detection, active pixel sensor 
imaging, micro-g accelerometers, contamination transport 
mechanisms, advanced solar photovoltaic systems, thermal 
control materials, and radiation monitors on a chip. The 
TSX-5 orbit is a 410-km by 1710-lun elliptical orbit, which 
takes STRV-2 into the Mid-Earth Orbit (MEO) region of 
space. STRV-2 is the first to study the micrometeoroid and 
debris population at these altitudes. 
Nine Principal Investigators (PIS) are associated with the 
active Experiments. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is 
coordinating with the PIS to establish weekly operation 
timelines for all Experiments; each competing for limited 
spacecraft resources. This paper describes the processes for 
developing deconilicted operation schedules, for developing 
the operation files, which are loaded to the SCM to 
command and operate the individual Experiments, and for 
processing, distributing, and reporting Experiment operation 
results. Eight to ten space ground link sessions are required 
daily to upload and download STRV-2 command and data 
files. Experiment results will be described for the first 
seven months of mission operations, as will the plans for the 
last few months of this one-year mission. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
1-171 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. EXPERIMENTS 
3. OBJECTIVES 
4. OPERATIONS PROCESS 
6. MISSION OPERATIONS ACTMTIES 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
5. PLANNINGCYCLE 
7. FUTURE OPERATIONS PLAN 
BIOGRAPHY 
EXPERIMENTS & CONTROL SUBSYSTEM DEVELOPER SPONSOR 
All Composite Experimental Spacecraft Structure 
Electronics Test Bed Ni4SA JPL BMDO & NASA 
Boeing Defense & Space Group Air Force Research 
Laboratorv (AFRL) 
Micrometeoroid and Debris Impact Monitor NASA 
Micrometeoroid Impact Detection System Innovative Dynamics, Inc BMDO 
Active Pixel Sensor Ni4SA JPL NASA 
Micro Electrical Mechanical Svstems AFRL, NASA JPL AFRL. NASA 
Lasercom AstroTema Corporation BMDO 
Mid Wavelength Infrared Imager DERA UK MOD 
Space Active Modular Materials Experiments Physicall Sciences, Inc. BMDO 
NASA Langley Research Center (LaRC) 
Calorimeter Test Module 
Low Earth Orbit Test Module 
Solar Photovoltaic Test Module 
Temperature-controlled Quartz Crystal 
Microbalance Test Module 
. Vibration Isolation and Suvuression Svstem AFRL & Honeyvdl Space Systems Grouu AFRL 
System Control Module Physicall Sciences, Inc. BMDO 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Space Technology Research Vehicle-2 (STRV-2) 
Experiment Module (EM) is a technology demonstration 
payload flown as part of the TSX-5 space vehicle (SV). The 
STRV-2 is integrated by JPL, California Institute of 
Technology under the sponsorship of the Ballistic Missile 
Defense Organization (BMDO). 
BMDO initiated the STRV-2 Project as a technology 
demonstration project with the Defense Evaluation and 
Research Agency (DERA), Ministry of Defense (MOD) of 
the United Kingdom (UK) as a cooperative partner. STRV- 
2 is the second of three BMDO and DERA cooperative 
missions dedicated to technology advancement. 
BMDO requested JPL to define and organize a technology 
demonstration payload that would benefit BMDO, NASA, 
industry, and DERA. JPL completed a systems study in 
June, 1994 which defined payload and orbit options for an 
integrated technology demonstrations payload. The payload 
options were selected to enhance or enable technology 
The EM payload consists of the All Composite Experiment 
Spacecraft Structure (ACESS), the Electronics Test Bed 
needs for future Department of Defense (DOD) programs 
such as the Space Missile Tracking System (SMTS). 
Candidate Experimenters participated in the study. 
Experimenters provided technical information used to select 
the expi:riment/technology suite for the various payload 
options. Agreements between the BMDO and 
Experimenters, and their sponsors, included (1) BMDO 
Power, Materials and Structures (PM&S) Office would 
provide the payload integration, launch, and mission 
operations at no cost to the Experimenters, and (2) the 
Experimenters, if selected, agreed to develop their 
experiments at no cost to the BMDO PM&S Office and 
deliver the experiments to JPL for integration with the EM. 
Experiments were selected in October, 1994. 
The EM was designed in advance of a spacecraft selection. 
The Project defrned and developed Experiment interfaces 
(mechanical, electrical and commanddata) prior to 
spacecraft selection. From the requirements and design 
phase, a Spacecraft Requirements Document was prepared 
in conjunction with Air Force Space Test Program (STP). 
STP utilized the Requirement Document in their Request for 
Proposal to industry to supply a spacecraft and launch 
vehicle. 
2. EXPERIMENTS 
The payload option selected is a combination of synergistic, 
interdependent subsystems and twelve experiment systems: 
The twellve experiments were developed by twelve separate 
organizations and agencies under independent sponsorships. 
The STRV-2 EM Experiments and subsystem, the 
developers, and the sponsors are listed in Table 1 .  
(ETB) with four sub-experiments, the Laser 
Communications (Lasercom) Experiment, the Medium 
Wavelength MaRed  (MWR) Imager Experiment, a Space 
Table 1. STRV-2 Developers and Sponsors 
1-172 
Effects and Environmental Monitoring Experiment which 
includes the four Space Active Modular Materials 
Experiment System ( S A M M E S )  Test Modules, and the 
Vibration Isolation and Suppression System (VISS) 
Experiment. The ETB sub-experiments include the 
Micrometeoroid Impact Detection Monitor (MDIM) 
Experiment, Micrometeoroid Impact Detection System 
(MIDS), the Active Pixel Sensor (APS) Imager, and two 
microaccelerometer devices packaged in the Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS) Experiment. 
The EM employs a System Control Module (SCM) which 
acts as the command and data handler for all the 
Experiments and a command and data interface to the 
spacecraft. The SCM provides some power control and 
distribution to the EM Experiments. The STRV-2 EM is 
shown in Figure 1. The STRV-2 EM dimensions are 
approximately 38 inches wide by 35 inches high, and has a 
mass of 220 pounds. 
Figure 1. STRV-2 Experiment Module 
3. OBJECTIVES 
The overall objectives of the STRV-2 Mission are to: 
Obtain MWR background, clutter data at high latitudes 
versus seasonal variations, using SMTS filters. 
0 Demonstrate use of adaptive structures for vibration 
isolation suppression. 
Measure hazardous space environment factors 
(radiation, debris/micrometeorites). 
Determine durability of critical materials and 
components in space environment. 
Demonstrate space-based airbome target detection. 
Demonstrate high bandwidth space ground laser 
communications. 
The STRV-2 objectives are in support of Experiment 
objectives. The Experiment objectives follow. 
ACESS: 
Demonstrate a simple, low part count, light-weight all- 
composite spacecraft structure. 
ETB: 
Assess the performance of advanced electronics ME0 
radiation environment. 
0 Measure micrometeoroid and debris in Low Earth Orbit 
(LEO) and MEO. 
0 Provide resources and command, control and 
communications for sub-experiments. 
APS: 
0 Demonstrate radiation tolerance of APS technology. 
MDIM: 
0 Measure man-made debris population in LEO a decade 
after the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). 
0 Measure the variation of particle population with 
altitude to 1800 km (MEO). 
MIDS: 
0 Measure number and size of micrometeoroid impacts. 
MEMS: 
0 Measure the degradation of micro-(; accelerometers 
due to space radiation. 
MWIR: 
0 
0 Evaluate image-processing techniques. 
0 
Detect non-afterburner aircraft in flight in 4.3 to 6.0 
micron-band. 
Collect image data of terrestrial backgrounds in 4.3 to 
5.0 micron-band. 
Image ships, ship wakes, and ship induced cloud wakes 
in 4.3 to 5.0 micron-band. 
Lasercom: 
0 Demonstrate 155Mb/s space to ground laser 
0 Demonstrate 1,2Gb/s ground-space-ground laser 
0 
communications for altitudes up to 1500 km. 
communications. 
Demonstrate S/N of >5 and 0.4W peak power 
SAMMES: 
0 Measure space environment effects on selected 
materials. 
0 Measure long term performance of advanced solar cells. 
0 Collect contamination and radiation environment data. 
VISS 
0 Demonstrate greater than 20db reduction of vibration 
transmission (isolation) to payload over 5 to 200Hz. 
Demonstrate greater than 20db suppression of 
fundamental and first harmonic frequencies on payload 
(cryocooler). 
Demonstrate 0.3 degree steering of payload. 
1-173 
Orbit 
The orbit selected for the STRV-2 Mission is one that 
reaches into the radiation belt. The orbit is 410 km by 1710 
km at 69 degree inclination as shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2. TSX-5 Orbit 
4. OPERATIONS PROCESS 
STRV-2 operates continuously throughout its planned one 
year mission. ETB and S A M M E S  Experiments will be 
powered continuously to obtain space background 
information. The Lasercom, MWIR, and VISS Experiments 
will be operated at various times in the mission to 
demonstrate specific Experiment objectives. On the 
average one or more of these latter three Experiments 
operate every day. All activities are referenced in Universal 
Coordinated Time (UTC), also referred to as Greenwich 
Mean Time. 
Organizational Interfaces 
Overall operation of the TSX-5 mission is under the 
direction of the US Air Force Space and Missile Systems 
Center (SMC), Test and Evaluation Directorate, System 
Program Office (SPO) located at Kirtland Air Force Base 
KAFB), NM. Within SMC, the SMC/TEL branch, also 
referred to as STP, performs the mission management and 
the SMC/Test and Evaluation Office (TEO) branch 
performs the daily mission operation. 
BMDO provides the overall direction for the operation of 
the STRV-2 experiments, as shown in Figure 3. 
STRV-2 Operations Center - RSCITEO 
JPL 
ETB Lasercom MWIR SAMh4E.S VISS 
JPL AstroTerra UK Aerospace A m  
Figure 3. STRV-2 Organization Interfaces. 
JPL-A, the experiment integrator for BMDO, JPL is 
responsible for coordinating the STRV-2 Experiment 
activities with the TSX-5 mission. Specifically, it integrates 
all of the individual Experiment requests and commands and 
produces; an integrated operating plan with associated 
command schedules and scripts. Included in the 
responsibility is assessment of the EM health and operation, 
removal of the ground added security transfer protocol, pre- 
processing of the state-of-health and ancillary data, STRV-2 
file server administration, and data archival. 
At the STRV-2 Ops Center, engineers develop the SCM 
command schedule (CS) and spacecraft Experiment 
Interface Processor (EIP) script (SCF) to sequence the 
Experiments according to defined EM States. There are 
approximately 25 States identified which integrate the 
Experiments into complete observation timelines. The 
individual Experiments are controlled through the use of 
Experimenter-provided Operational Configuration (OC) and 
Experiment Configuration (EC) command files. Parameters 
within the files provide internal Experiment configuration 
and timing. 
Experimenters-The Experimenters prepare and provide 
individual Experiment requests, OCs and ECs, evaluate 
health and performance, and provide Experiment data 
analysis. Additionally, Lasercom coordinates the operation 
of its ground terminal, and MWIR coordinates associated 
DERA target activity. The Experimenters, operating fiom 
their horne facility, communicate with STRV-2 Operations 
Center and exchange data files using the Internet. Standard 
phone and Fax communication are used as backup. 
Experimenter Locations 
ETB - Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 
Laserconn - AstroTerra, San Diego, CA 
S A M M E S  - The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, CA 
VISS - Air Force Research Laboratory, KAFB, NM 
MWIR-DERA,LJK 
RTC-The STRV-2 Operations Center interfaces with the 
USAF Research, Development, Test and Evaluation Support 
Complex (RSC) located at KAFB, NM. The RSC refers to 
the facility housing the equipment, software and personnel 
used in alperating the TSX-5 mission. The exchange of data 
with the RSC is through a RSC file server referred to as the 
Automated Data Distribution System (ADDS). The Internet 
is the primary method for communication (e-mail) and 
exchange of data products. Standard phone and Fax 
communication are used to supplement and backup the 
Internet. 
The RSC uploads and downloads command files and data 
files to and from the spacecraft through the Air Force 
Spacecraft Communications Network (AFSCN) Remote 
Ground Facilities (RGFs). The facility also provides orbit 
planning, coordination of spacecraft activity with the 
Experiment Module, ground system scheduling, spacecraft 
health assessment and maintenance, spacecraft command 
1-174 
file generation, spacecraft orbit determination (predict and 
final), coordination for Space Safety, weather information, 
integration of mission-unique equipment and mission 
unique software, and staging of received Experiment- 
Module data on the ADDS for STRV-2 access. Real-time 
Experiment state-of-health data is monitored for alarm 
conditions with contingency actions taken should an alarm 
violation occur. 
Experiment Data 
Orbit Ephemeris 
Spacecraft Data - 
Encrypted Data Transfer 
EC, OC, Memory Files 
Mission Plan 
Long T e n  Plan 
In addition, the RSC provides the following: 
Experimenter 
Computer 
\ 
1. Program Action Plan lists the RSC requested supports 
submitted to the Range Scheduling. The actual 
scheduled supports are not be final until the day prior to 
the day in question. The information is used as a guide 
to satellite-to-ground contact passes which may be 
available for a particular Experiment activity. 
2. Pass Plan, also called a 24-hour board, shows the 
passes expected for next 24 hours (1600 to 1600 UTC). 
Included are objectives to be accomplished during the 
pass, the pass rise, fade and duration times, and the 
RGF to be used. 
Contact Reports compiled at the end of a day contain 
details regarding the accomplished tasks during each 
support pass, successlfailure rate, and any problems 
encountered. 
Copies of RSC Operator screens displays containing 
anomalies observed are faxed to the STRV-2 
Operations Center. Screens indicate greedyellowlred 
condition levels for temperature and current. 
3. 
4. 
Data Interfaces 
The ground system architecture is shown in figure 4. 
RSCKEO Operations STRV-2 Operations 
ADDS 
Encrypted Data 
Experiment Data 
Orbit Ephemeris 
Spacecraft Data 
PC Workstation STRV-2 Server 
II I ( Data J . SCM Files 
DecrypVEncrypt EC, OC, Memory Files 
SCF Files 
Long Term Plan 
Short Term Plan 
Archive 
- FAX Daily Schedule (Planning Board) 
Pass Activity Reports 
FAX * Memograms 
Figure 4. Ground System Architecture 
The ADDS file server is used for transferring the command 
files, Experiment data files, orbit files, planning files, and 
spacecraft related data files between the RSC and STRV-2 
Operations Center. A backup server provides basic 
uploddownload capabilities should ADDS fail. 
STR V-2 File Server-The primary Experimenter interface 
with STRV-2 Operations is through the STRV-2 Server. 
Through the server they receive planning, Experiment, orbit, 
and related spacecraft data, and provide command files and 
reports. A Bulletin Board provides a shared space for status 
and other communication. 
The STRV-2 server is organized into group files and Julian 
days. Group files include orbit and planning data, bulletin 
boards, and the Master Database containing current versions 
of State upload files. Julian days are further organized by 
Experimenter and Spacecraft data. Read and write 
permissions control Experimenters access to specific 
subdirectories. 
Data Security-& compliance with BMDO and USAF 
security policies, mission data products are considered 
STRV-2 Project Only. Data products coming from the RSC 
are exchanged using FTP with specified levels of security. 
Data files are encrypted using a Fortezza card system. The 
STRV-2 file server is a dedicated access-controlled system. 
Data files are exchanged using FTP with specified levels of 
security. Products are encrypted using Pretty Good Privacy 
(PGP) software. 
5 .  PLANNING CYCLE 
The MWIR and Lasercom Experiments require accurate 
orbit predict knowledge of spacecraft location and pointing 
to accomplish their objectives. To achieve this, the RSC 
1 - 1  7 5  
provides two orbit prediction files, Long Range Ephemeris 
Predict and Short Range Ephemeris Predict. These files are 
used by the Experimenter to accurately forecast their 
operation and subsequently develop the precise time related 
commands required by their Experiments. 
The files are in Earth-Centered Earth-Fixed (ECEF) format 
with 1-minute increments. The Short Range file provides 
accuracy to f 0.5 km (goal of 100 meters) in cross-track, 
and in-track. For post MWIR andfor Lasercom events a 
daily reconstructed orbit Ephemeris is provided. Full 
weekly reconstructed post-pass Ephemeris are provided 
each Thursday. 
The Long Range Ephemeris Predict file covers a 30-day 
period and is used to schedule resources up to 18-days in 
advance. It also provides, although with somewhat less 
accuracy, the ability to forecast activities 4 weeks out. The 
Short Range Ephemeris Predict file covers the upcoming 
72-hour period. 
Deconfliction Process 
To resolve conflicts in Experiment operations, the project 
uses planning calendars to alert Experimenters of each 
other’s plans and potential spacecraft resource conflicts, e.g. 
power or ground resources. The calendar provides 
information on Experiment mode (State), time, type of 
activity, and level of importance to enable most conflicts to 
be resolved at the operations level. Those that cannot be 
resolved are taken to the program level for BMDO 
direction. 
However, conflicts can also occur later in the planning 
process when the SMC/TEO fmds out it may not have a 
specific ground station to support the activity. Generally 
these occur a few hours before the activity and therefore 
there is little that can be done to recover, and therefore, an 
Experiment opportunity is lost. 
Monthly Calendar (MC)-The MC contains projected 
Experiment operations for the next 30 days and is updated 
weekly. The plan is provided for Experimenter use in 
adjusting or specifying Experiment operation timeis for the 
next week being planned. Experimenters use the MC and 
the Long Range Ephemeris to plan their week of activity. 
MCs are placed on the STRV-2 server on Fridays. 
Long Term Plan (LTP)-The LTP is used to identify all 
Experiment operating times during a seven-day period. The 
seven-day period is defined to start on Monday at 0000 
UTC and runs through Sunday 2359 UTC. The plan is 
developed and submitted to RSC operations each 
Wednesday, 12 days in advance of the active operating 
week, in order to obtain the necessary ground resources. 
being run, estimated MWIR and Lasercom event time (if 
applicable), script duration time, and a comment field to 
relay noitices on special types of Experiment activity. 
Short Term Plan (STP)-The STP is used to identify all 
Experiment operating times during a UTC day (24 hours). 
The plan is developed by the JPL Operations Engineer and 
submitteid to RSC operations by 2300 UTC for the day 
beginning 49 hours later. Script start times should not 
deviate jiom those in the Long Term Plan by more than ten 
minutes. There is an option to update the STP up to 6 hours 
before ai scheduled MWIR or Lasercom event to further 
adjust timing. 
. 
For each. State being run, the plan contains the date and time 
in UTC for the script start, MWIR and Lasercom event 
times, exact names of the command files to be uploaded to 
the spacecraft and Experiment data files produced by the 
state. Available command files called out should be 
submitted with the STP: 
1. Experiment Configuration Files (EC) 
2. Experiment Operational Configuration Files (OC) 
3. SCM Command Schedule (CS) 
4. EIP script file (SCF) 
All files must be binary except the STP. 
Operations Timeline 
MWIR rmd Lasercom Experiments utilize absolute times 
embedded within their EC files to achieve absolute event 
times during the states in which they run. When the STP is 
submitted to the RSC 49 hours in advance of the start of that 
day, orbit predicts are not as precise as are needed to define 
Experiment absolute event times. 
Increased accuracy of orbit data is required as a planned 
event aplproaches and necessitates a later submission of ECs 
with the absolute times embedded. These files are identified 
with aste:risks on the STP as late submission files. 
For an N W l R  or Lasercom event, the EC files are placed on 
the STRV-2 Server no later than 12 hours before the State 
Script start time (T-12). Files to be uploaded to the STRV-2 
must be provided to the RSC 9.5 hours from the scheduled 
event script start time (T-9.5). MwlR and Lasercom have 
the option to provide the EC files or updates as late as seven 
hours before the State Script start. However, if the update 
option is exercised, 1) the names of the files must be 
provided at the 12 hour point, and 2) the update option is 
subject to RSC ground contacts being available for upload 
of the files. Available contacts are determined from the RSC 
24-hour Pass Plan. All files for a state run must be to the 
RSC no later than six hours prior to the start of the State 
Script. See Figure 5. 
The plan contains the date and time in UTC for the State 
1-176 
Figure 5. Lasercom & MWIR Command Planning 
6. MISSION OPERATIONS ACTIVITIES 
Weekly Activity 
1. Transfer Long Range Ephemeris Predict file and 
weekly reconstructed orbit files from ADDS to STRV-2 
server. 
2. Receive Experimenter inputs to Long Term Plan, 
integrate requests, decodict and provide final to RSC. 
3. Receive Experimenter inputs to draft Monthly Plan, 
integrate requests, deconflict, and place it on STRV-2 
Server with the LTP. Notify Experimenters of plan 
availability. 
Archive previous week of data on STRV-2 server. 4. 
Daily Activity 
1. Transfer Short Range Ephemeris and daily 
reconstructed orbit files fiom ADDS to STRV-2 server. 
2. Receive any T-12 hour EC and OC files fkom 
Experimenters and process and approve change 
requests. Revise STP to note any event and script start 
time changes. Transfer updated files to ADDS and e- 
mail approved change request back to originator. 
Notify RSC of availability of updated files. 
Develop new STP at T-49 hours and venfj times and 
name entries. On Fridays and holidays, additional STPs 
and command files must be created to adjust for 
weekendstdays off. 
4. Integrate command activities and develop SCM 
command schedule and EIP command script in text 
format, then convert to binary. 
Place copies of all available command files (STP, SCF, 
CS, OCs, and ECs) on both ADDS and STRV-2 
servers. Notify RSC of availability of files. 
6. Retrieve data products fkom RSC. (state run data 
products, orbit, spacecraft files). Verify that data 
products meet the criteria expected for the activity 
3. 
5 .  
being performed. (i.e., file type, name, size). Record 
file size and any missing or zero byte files. 
Process SCM files to create MWIR and VISS State of 
Health (SOH) files for any states involving those 
Experiments. 
Encrypt Experiment SOH and data products and place 
into designated STRV-2 server directories. Place 
message on server flight data bulletin board announcing 
availability of files. 
Process tarred spacecraft files to extract MWIR data 
(current, thermal, engineering and spacecraft attitude 
data, converted to engineering units). Zip together 
separated MWIR data and original tarred files and place 
them on the STRV-2 server. 
10. Verify Experiment Module operation by running 
analysis programs on spacecraft SOH data files plotting 
temperatures and currents. 
11. Receive RSC pass summary. 
Experiment Health Status Monitoring 
The SMC/TEO provides an initial assessment of the overall 
payload by observing specific payload parameters. These 
parameters, currents and temperatures have red and yellow 
alarm limits assigned to them. There can be both upper and 
lower limits depending on the Experiment. Observed 
violation of these limits during a real time pass will cause 
the RSC controller to contact STRV-2 and follow a specific 
contingency procedure. The RSC also has a set of display 
screens showing Experiment health data, including the 
above parameters. These screens were used during launch, 
Experiment checkout and for special events. 
STRV-2 Operations routinely scans the Experiment state of 
health data provided by the spacecraft to assess overall 
payload health and operation. Should a discrepancy occur, 
the Experimenter andor SMC/TEO are advised. 
1-177 
Status Reporting 
Experimenters and STRV-2 Operations provide weekly 
status reports to the project manager. Each report 
summaries the past weeks' Experiment activity and 
identifies any observed anomaly or problem. Reports may 
include trending analysis to forewarn of possible problem, 
i.e., temperature rising or tabulation of recurring problems. 
ConJiguration Management 
The project uses Change Requests to maintain configuration 
control of all files. 
Experiment OC and EC default files are on-board the 
satellite and are tracked by version number in the Master 
Database on the STRV-2 server. Each submittal of an 
updated OC or EC with a new version number requires an 
upload to the E P  for any state that uses that file. The 
Operations Engineer draws all command files from the 
Master Database to be used for a given operation. Should a 
different OC, EC, CS or script be required, a change request 
will be submitted to update the appropriate files. 
Experimenter requests to change a previously submitted 
Experiment operating plan or individual EC or OC will 
require submission of a change request. Change requests 
are submitted on the STRV-2 Change Request Form along 
with the changed OC or EC files. These are uploaded to the 
STRV-2 Server in the Experimenter's folder under the 
Julian Day affected by the change. An e-mail should then 
be sent to notify the JPL Operation Engineers of a change 
request and new files. 
Data Backup and Archive 
STRV-2 Operations performs a precautionary Server 
backup every 24 hours and archives the data to C!D-ROM 
every two weeks in a sliding window format. Requests for 
archived files are submitted via e-mail to the Systems 
Administrator. 
Anomaly and Contingency Process 
Anomalies determined to be within STRV-2 are handled by 
the STRV-2 Operations Team with concurrence by BMDO. 
Anomalies involving the spacecraft or RSC actions will be 
handled by SMC/STP. 
Contingency action plans and associated com"md files 
were developed and rehearsed with SMCDEO prior to 
launch. Two levels of contingencies were developed: 
1. 
2. 
Level-1-SMC/TEO takes immediate action to safe 
(turn-off) an Experiment. 
Level-2-STRV-2 is contacted prior to SMC/TEO 
command action. 
The contingency criteria is based on current levels and 
temperature limits. 
Bypass Operation-Should an SCM failure occur the 
Experiments can be operated directly from the EIP. In this 
by-pass mode the CS and OC files are not used. During 
SCM Bypass operation, the EIP will perform most of the 
functions the SCM previously provided. 
7. FUTURE OPERATIONS 
For the remainder of the mission, STRV-2 will continue to 
operate according to plan. Several Experiments have 
already met their primary objectives, which allow STRV-2 
Operations to go to reduced staffing as planned for the 
remainder of the project while continuing to meet the 
remaining Experiment objectives. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
The STIRV-2 Operations Team has been successful in 
supporting the Experiment payload and meeting many of the 
primary objectives to date. The Internet has shown to be a 
reliable and expedient interface for daily file transfers of 50- 
75 MB. STRV-2 Operations has successfully handled 
numerous data products in a labor-intensive operation 
between Experimenters and RSC using minimal staffing and 
changes in file delivery times to meet the challenges 
encountered in providing support across several time zones. 
The basic operation plan was structured to be a 5-day per 
week operation, but was augmented to handle after hour and 
weekend activity support as necessary. 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The space flight experiment described in this paper is being 
performed by the Device Research and Applications Section 
and the Space Instruments Implementation Section of the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
and sponsored by the Ballistic Missile Defense 
Organization/ Materials, Structure and Power Technology 
Office. The authors are grateful to Dr. John Stubstad, Major 
James Shoemaker, and Major Gary Hay of the Ballistic 
Missile Defense Organization for their support of this 
project. 
Kerry D.. Erickson is the STRV-2 Experiment Operations 
Manager. He is supervisor of Advanced Mission System 
Engineering in the Mission Systems Engineering Section at 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technologv. He has over 30 years experience in the 
development and operations of fright operations at Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. He has a BSEEfrom the University 
of Illinois. 
Kathleen D. Kelleher is the Lead Operations Engineer and 
Systems Administrator for the STRV-2 Project. She is 
employed by User Technology Associates under contract to 
the Space Instruments Implementation Section at the NASA 
1-178 
Jet Propulsion Laboratov, California Institute of 
Technology. She has a BA from the University of 
Minnesota-Tkin Cities. 
James T. Kenny is a Project Manager in the Space 
Instruments Implementation Section at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratoiy, California Institute of Technology. He has 
developed and led development of space hardware at 
Martin Marietta Corporation and Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. He has a MS in Solid Mechanics from 
Colorado State University and a MS in Computer 
Information Systems from the University of Denver. 
Lee D. Wiggleworth is the Sofhvare Engineer for the STRV- 
2 Project. He is a member of the technical staff in the Space 
Physics Research Element at the NASA Jet Propulsion 
Laboratov, California Institute of Technology. He has a 
BS in Computer Information Systems from Califomia State 
Polytechnic University-Pomona. 
1-179 
