The CONTOUR Radio Communications System1 
Matthew J. Reinhart, J. Robert Jensen, James M. Cloeren, 
Christopher C. DeBoy, Karl B. Fielhauer, and Ron C. Schulze 
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory 
11 100 Johns Hopkins Rd. 
Laurel, MD 20723 
matthew.reinhart@jhuapl.edu, bob.jensen@jhuapl.edu, james.cloeren@jhuapl.edu, 
chris.deboy@jhuapl.edu, karl.fielhauer@jhuapl.edu, and ron.schulze@huapl.edu 
443-778-5000 
Abstract-This paper provides a detailed description of 
the radio communications system developed for the 
Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Project. The commu- 
nications system embodies a delicate balance of mini- 
mizing cost while providing the high performance needed 
to support a deep-space science mission. CONTOUR 
employs a transceiver-based X-band system instead of 
traditional deep-space transponders. For navigation, we 
have a conventional ranging channel and employ a novel 
Doppler fiequency measurement technique. A reference 
oscillator with low phase noise is included to allow 
narrow bandwidth downlink carrier tracking at the ground 
stations. The antenna system is a combination of high- 
and low-gain antennas to support high-data-rate science 
returns and low-data-rate emergency operations. As 
CONTOUR is spin stabilized for most of the mission, 
including emergency operations, all antennas have been 
designed to provide continuous coverage around 360” of 
spacecraft rotation. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
INTRODUCTION 
NAVIGATION 
OSCILLATOR 
UPLINK CARD 
DOWNLINKCARD 
A ” A S  
CONCLUSIONS 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) spacecraft will 
explore comet nucleus properties and diversity by flying 
past two comets over the course of its 4-year mission, 
with an option to extend the mission to visit three comets 
in 6 years. It is scheduled for launch in July 2002 and is 
one of NASA’s low-cost Discovery Program missions. 
The spacecraft trajectory includes a brief period of 
phasing orbits around the Earth, followed by a lengthy 
heliocentric phase that includes the comet encounters [l]. 
The heliocentric phase brings the spacecraft within 
several hundred kilometers of Earth and as far away as 
0.7 A.U. fiom Earth. During this phase of the mission, 
lengthy hibernation periods with no ground contact will 
save money. The relevance to the communication system 
is that the spacecraft will be spin stabilized to maintain a 
fvred spacecraft attitude at all times except during comet 
encounters. Therefore, all antenna patterns are symmetri- 
cal about the spacecraft spin axis to allow routine and 
emergency operations while spinning. 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The CONTOUR radio communications system is 
designed to provide uplink command capability, high- 
data-rate science return downlink, and high-precision 
navigation data. In an effort to minimize cost, the radio 
communications system is based on a high-performance 
transceiver architecture that is simpler to build than tradi- 
tional transponders. The transceiver is also better suited 
for our card cage approach to integrating spacecraft 
electronic subsystems. This integrated electronic module 
(EM) approach further reduces cost by reducing space- 
craft size and cabling, which reduces launch mass [2]. 
The uplink receiver and downlink exciter are highly inte- 
grated assemblies that encompass a variety of functional- 
ity and are realized in a 15 x 23 cm plug-in card format. 
Some of the functionality that has traditionally resided in 
the spacecraft command and data handling (C&DH) 
system is now incorporated into the RF cards to achieve a 
higher level of integration. Both cards use field program- 
mable gate arrays (FPGAs) to compactly implement the 
digital functions and have much flexibility in terms of 
data rates and carrier fiequency assignment. 
The communications system, depicted in Figure 1, is a 
fully redundant system to support the reliability demands 
of spaceflight use. Each E M  card cage also contains 
other spacecraft electronics such as flight computers, 
solid-state memory, and instrument interfaces. The low 
phase noise oscillators provide a reference for generation 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
- -- .-2-. 1-81 
I Forward LGA 
Filter 
e- LNA 
0: Oscillator 
Uplink 4 
card 
e- - Oscillator - 
* 'E Downlink card Diplexer 
Uplink card 4 
Downlink 
card 
IEM A 
~~-~ __I 8 r..--.- 
:---.-- 
0: 
I - - - - . - . Diplexer 
Aft IGA T w r A  
I t  i I  
I 18-inch dish 
of local oscillator frequencies in the uplink receiver and 
generation of the modulated downlink carrier in the down- 
link exciter card. 
A remote low noise amplifier (LNA) precedes, the uplink 
signal flow to the receiver card to minimize noise figure, 
and a bandpass filter attenuates out-of-band signals. The 
largest out-of-band receiver signal is the downlink signal, 
which is not adequately isolated by readily available 
diplexers. A purchased traveling wave tube amplifier 
(TWTA) boosts the downlink signal power to 15 W for 
transmission back to the Earth. 
A coaxial switch network allows selection of one of four 
dual-feed antennas for connection to either communica- 
tions system. While a coaxial realization introduces more 
loss than waveguide, the size and weight penalties of 
waveguide were considered excessive. The redundant 
communications electronics independently connect to the 
antennas, but common feed structures and reflectors are 
utilized where applicable. Left- and right-hand circular 
polarization feed networks provide isolation between the 
redundant systems. While only one downlink will be active 
at a time, both receivers are always powered to enable 
omnidirectional command coverage with the appropriate 
choice of antennas. 
3. NAVIGATION 
The CONTOUR communications system is based on a 
transceiver rather than a coherent transponder to save 
cost. :Because the standard Doppler tracking techniques 
are based on the use of a transponder, the CONTOUR 
hardware includes provisions for making accurate 
Doppler measurements with a transceiver. An approach to 
Doppler tracking with a noncoherent transceiver and its 
implementation within the communications system are 
described here. 
SimpLified Noncoherent Navigation Concept 
Accurate Doppler measurements are possible with a 
coherent transponder because the downlink signal gener- 
ated zit the spacecraft is derived from the uplink signal. 
The downlink fi-equency that would be observed on the 
Earth in the absence of spacecraft motion (relative to the 
ground station receiver) is precisely known. Any devia- 
tion of the actual downlink frequency froin the zero- 
velocity value is due to spacecraft motion. With a trans- 
ceiver, the downlink frequency that is observed by the 
ground station has two contributors: the spacecraft veloc- 
ity and the spacecraft reference fi-equency. If the space- 
craft reference frequency were sufficiently stable or well 
1-82 / '- 
characterized, then a measurement of the downlink 
frequency would reveal the spacecraft velocity. However, 
this places extraordinary requirements on the spacecraft 
oscillator that are not consistent with a small, inexpensive 
system. 
An approach has been developed that allows accurate 
Doppler measurements to be made with a simple trans- 
ceiver and a moderately stable oscillator. This approach 
. involves a measurement of the uplink frequency at the 
spacecraft that is included in the telemetry. The observed 
downlink frequency is corrected with the use of this tele- 
metered information to result in a Doppler measurement 
that is equivalent to that which would have been obtained 
with a coherent transponder. A conceptual drawing of the 
approach is shown in Figure 2. Details of the implemen- 
tation and error analysis were described in a prior paper 
[31. 
A design goal for the noncoherent navigation approach to 
Doppler tracking with a transceiver is that no new equip- 
ment is required at NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) 
ground stations. The only impact is on ground operations 
where the observed Doppler frequencies are corrected 
with the use of telemetered measurements prior to the use 
of the Doppler measurements in spacecraft navigation. 
Transmitter fl-, Receiver -7
Corrected 
2-way Doppler 
t 
Uplink #Downlink 
Correction 
of measured 
2-way Doppler 
and associated 
time tags 
Figure 2. Two-way, Noncoherent Navigation Concept 
Implementation 
The provisions in the CONTOUR communications 
system that allow accurate Doppler measurements are 
principally contained within a programmable gate array 
on the transceiver downlink card. Two 16-bit counters are 
involved. One counter is clocked by a downconverted 
uplink signal with a frequency of about 5.3 kHz. The 
second counter is clocked by the spacecraft reference 
frequency of 30.6 MHz. This second counter is reset at 
the start of each telemetry frame transmission while the 
frst  counter is free running. Both counter values are 
latched at the first increment of the low-rate counter that 
follows a telemetry frame start. These latched values 
constitute the onboard measurement that is included in the 
telemetry. The two 16-bit measurements are placed 
directly into the secondary header of each telemetry frame 
by the framer, which is also part of the downlink card. 
At the lowest telemetry rate of 12.5 bps, the telemetry 
frames are 748 seconds long. The achievement of accu- 
rate Doppler measurements at such low telemetry rates 
will require that the onboard measurements be made more 
frequently than once per frame. For CONTOUR, meas- 
urements are made at intervals that do not exceed 5.9 
seconds, which is slightly longer than the frame duration 
at a data rate of 1.6 kbps. At lower data rates, the C&DH 
system collects the onboard measurements at 5-second 
intervals for inclusion in data packets within the teleme- 
try. These data are in addition to the data placed directly 
into the secondary fkame header. In this worst case 
telemetry mode, the Doppler navigation data occupies 
roughly half of the telemetry bandwidth. 
Navigation Testing and Operational Use 
The CONTOUR communications system was tested at the 
DSN Development and Test Facility (DTF-21) during 
July 2000 to demonstrate its performance and its com- 
patibility with the DSN equipment. Testing was 
conducted at all of the CONTOUR data rates and under a 
variety of other conditions, such as variations in the 
uplink frequency and power. The tests included placement 
of the onboard measurements into the secondary frame 
header and recovery of these from the telemetry for use in 
correcting the observed Doppler fkequencies. Because a 
C&DH system was not present during this testing, the 
additional measurements that would have been included 
in the telemetry at low data rates were collected directly 
from the downlink card via the same PCI bus interface 
that will be used by the C&DH system in flight. These 
tests and prior tests [4] were successful in demonstrating 
that the system meets the CONTOUR goal of supporting 
velocity measurements with a precision of 0.1 “/s for 
60-second measurement intervals. 
The correction of the observed Doppler measurements 
based on the telemetered secondary header and directly 
collected sub-frame data was performed by software that 
- -a. 1-83 
will serve as a prototype for operational use. During 
flight, the measurements recovered from the telemetry 
will be passed to the navigation team along with the 
Doppler measurements. The Doppler measur'ements will 
be corrected and then' used with standard navigation 
methods as if the data were obtained with a coherent 
transponder rather than a noncoherent transceiver. 
r + e q u e n n y ) o f f s e t  
1 
Ranging Considerations 
The use of a noncoherent transceiver has an impact on 
ranging measurements because advantage is normally 
taken of the fact that the ranging tones experience the 
same Doppler scaling as do the uplink and downlink 
carrier frequencies. The transponder's downlink carrier 
frequency observed at the Earth, which is affected by the 
uplink Doppler shift as well as the downlink shift, is used 
to compensate for the two-way Doppler shift of the rang- 
ing tone. Such a direct compensation is not possible with 
a noncoherent system, because the ground received carrier 
signal experiences only a one-way shift. Ranging meas- 
urements during CONTOUR'S flight will be performed by 
adjusting the uplink frequency to remove the one-way 
uplink Doppler shift seen at the spacecraft. The downlink 
carrier frequency and the ranging tone will then both 
experience a one-way downlink Doppler slhift, and a 
normal ranging measurement can be made. This approach 
requires only an approximate knowledge of the spacecraft 
velocity and frequency reference, and does not require 
special spacecraft or ground-based hardware. For 
example, adjusting the uplink fractional frequency to 
within lxlO-' relative to zero Doppler, limits the range 
accuracy to 10 m for a 0 dBHz ranging sigrial to noise 
power ratio. 
Phase Noise at 30.6 MHz 
-90 
( B C f i )  
4. OSCILLATOR 
The quartz reference oscillators for the CONTOUR 
program, as with most spacecraft oscillators, are very 
mission specific. The primary function of the CONTOUR 
oscillator is to provide a very low phase noise source for 
the downlink carrier synthesizer and uplink receiver local 
oscillators (Table 1). The secondary purpose is to provide 
some capability for one-way Doppler tracking to aid in 
verification and provide limited redundancy for the 
noncoherent navigation technique just described. 
-130 I I 10,000 
Design Approach 
A simplified block diagram of the CONTOUR oscillator 
is shalwn in Figure 3. The output of the 5.1 MHz oven- 
controlled crystal oscillator is f i s t  frequency multiplied 
by 2 and then, in succession, multiplied by 3. The result- 
ing 30.6 MHz is split in an emitter follower circuit and 
supplied to two buffer amplifiers which each generate 10 
dBm of power. A high-efficiency, ground-isolated, 
switch-mode power converter provides secondary power to 
the oscillator circuits directly from the spacecraft bus 
supply. Telemetry is provided for critical oscillator func- 
tions. 
[ I Resonator 
; 5.1 MHz circuit 
Oscillator h i 
L I !  
buffer multiplier multiplier : Thermistor 
I 
power  eater amp ~ ~ - 1  converter DC-DC I-- Spacecraft power 
30.6-MHz 
output 
30.6-MHZ 
output 
Figure 3. Oscillator Block Diagram (AGC = automatic gain control) 
1-84 
The oscillator circuit is a modified Colpitts design first 
developed for high-stability oscillators by Sulzer [SI. This 
circuit as used with the stress-compensated (SC) resonator 
used in the CONTOUR oscillator was later modified and 
improved by Norton and Cloeren [6]. This oscillator 
configuration has a long and enviable record of perform- 
ance and reliability. The resonator used in the CONTOUR 
oscillator is a 5.1000000 h4Hz third-overtone SC unit, and 
is enclosed in a hermetically sealed HC-40 metal housing. 
Ci ystal Oven 
Stable and accurate temperature control is essential to the 
optimum performance of the CONTOUR oscillator. The 
oscillator contains an oven that maintains the resonator to 
within 0.001'C of the set point over the entire operating 
temperature range expected onboard the CONTOUR 
spacecraft. This performance provides an average frac- 
tional frequency vs. temperature coefficient of 1 x IO-'' per 
degree Celsius. The mechanical design of the oven 
assembly includes shock mounts to protect the resonator 
from damage during spacecraft launch. 
Frequency Multipliers 
The CONTOUR oscillator output frequency of 30.6 MHz 
requires a total frequency multiplication of 6. The 
requirements for low phase noise with harmonic and 
spurious frequencies down -65 dl3c and -80 dBc, respec- 
tively, made the selection of multiplier configurations 
important. The even-order multiplier (x2) is a push, push 
configuration [7,8] in which the bases of two matched 
transistors are fed 180' out of phase and the collectors are 
tied together to drive a tuned circuit. This type of 
multiplier has been proven to have very low phase noise, 
at the same time suppressing the baseband frequency and 
the odd-order harmonics. The odd-order multiplier (x3) is 
a grounded base differential pair configuration, which 
also provides very low phase noise while suppressing the 
even-order harmonics. This configuration also has very 
good temperature stability due to the soft limiting nature 
of the circuit. 
Reliability 
The oscillator makes use of heritage circuit designs to 
minimize cost and ensure high reliability. The Johns 
Hopkins University oscillator enjoys an excellent 
reliability record with over 375 oscillators launched in a 
37-year period without any mission critical failures. 
5.  UPLINK CARD 
The CONTOUR uplink card provides X-band carrier 
tracking, command detection (demodulation), real-time 
critical command decoding, and ranging tone demodula- 
tion. The card consists of three separate boards; each 
mated to an aluminum heat sink. On one side, an X-band 
downconverter, assembled on a microwave substrate, is 
attached to an aluminum carrier, along with a multilayer 
polyimide analog board for carrier tracking and control. 
On the other side, a multilayer polyimide digital board 
containing the command detector unit (CDU) and the 
critical command decoder (CCD) are installed, as shown 
in Figure 4. 
Figure 4. Photographs of Uplink Card (RFhalog side 
and digital side) 
Design Approach 
The external reference oscillator is used to generate a 
local oscillator (LO) at 15.3 MHz by using a divide-by- 
two circuit, and at 2.34 GHz by using a programmable S- 
band frequency synthesizer as shown in Figure 5. This 
2.34 GHz LO is doubled for the initial downconversion, 
with the fundamental output used for the second stage of 
down conversion. A third and final downconversion using 
the phase-locked loop's voltage-controlled oscillator 
(VCO) completes the translation from X-band to wide- 
band and narrowband 15.3 MHZ intermediate frequencies 
(IF) for the analog board. 
The narrowband IF is passed through a 4.5 kHz noise 
bandwidth crystal filter and further split for carrier track- 
ing and coherent amplitude detection. Carrier acquisition 
and tracking is provided via a type-I phase-locked loop 
with a bandpass limiter and a temperature-compensated 
surface acoustic wave (SAW) VCO. Automatic gain con- 
trol (AGC) is active once the carrier has been acquired. 
AGC control 
15.3-MHZ 4 4  wideband IF 
7181.846-MHz 
narrowband IF reference 
Offboard 
LNNfilter 
' _ _ _ - * _ _ - _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - * - - - - -  Limiter I 
Synthesizer 
Reference vco 
oscillator 
30.6 MHz 
)p5.3-MHz Divide by 2 reference 1 
detector 
control 
To downconverter 
handling; Figure 5. Uplink Card Block Diagram (CCI) = critical command decoder; C&DH = command and data 
CDU = command detector unit; IF = intermed-iate frequency; SAW = surface acoustic wave; VCO = voltage-controlled 
oscillator) 
The coherent amplitude detector generates a c8ontrol volt- 
age for two voltage-variable attenuators in the down- 
converter. This control maintains both wideband and 
narrowband IF outputs at a constant power level for a 
dynamic range of over 85 dEi, from input powers at 
threshold to -70 dBm. 
The wideband downconverter IF output is amplified and 
detected, resulting in a baseband tone ranging signal (sent 
to the downlink card for retransmission), and a 16 kHz 
command subcarrier signal for the uplink card's CDU (on 
the digital board). For the CONTOUR Mission, this sub- 
carrier is binary phase shift key (BPSK) modulated with 
commands at data rates of 500, 125, or 7.8125 bps. (A 
higher rate ground test mode at 2 kbps is also possible.) 
The CDU locks to and tracks the 16 lcHz sublcarrier and 
demodulates the command signal, passing data and clock 
over to the CCD. In the CCD, designated critical relay 
commands are decoded, detected, and immediakely sent to 
the power switching system. The CCD also forwards all 
commands to the C&DH system, and when a low bus 
voltage condition is sensed by the spacecraft's power sub- 
system, issues a stored set of relay commands for orderly 
load reduction. 
Features 
This highly integrated, high-performance assembly has a 
number of unique features. The use of a long loop com- 
bined with the excellent temperature perform:mce of the 
card's multipliers, VCO, and the external reference oscil- 
lator obviate the need for any extensive temperature com- 
pensation, saving fabrication time and cost. The pro- 
grammable synthesizer allows flexibility in channel 
assignments throughout the deep space fiequency band. 
Digitail circuitry is implemented primarily in FPGAs, 
reducing overall part count. Significant command and 
control functions are placed in the uplink card, which 
being powered continuously, provides a reliable and effi- 
cient means of switching spacecraft loads and handling 
low-voltage conditions. 
6 .  DOWNLINK CARD 
The primary function of the downlink card is to generate a 
phase modulated X-band carrier, which contains the 
fiamed and encoded downlink telemetry stream for 
reception by the DSN. In addition, the downlink card 
plays an important role in navigation of the CONTOUR 
spacecraft by supporting ranging and Doppler measure- 
ments, without the complexity of a deep-space trans- 
pondelr. 
Construction of the downlink board is accomplished in 
three basic subassemblies: an analog board, a digital 
board, and an RF board, as shown in Figure 6 and func- 
tionally depicted in Figure 7. These boards are con- 
structed and tested separately and later integrated to form 
the downlink card. The downlink card is built on a stan- 
dard ]EM card size, which is 15 x 23 cm with a 0.13 cm 
heat sink separating the digital board from the RF and 
analog boards. This arrangement not only is a logical 
Figure 6. Photographs of Downlink Card 
(RF/analog side and digital side) 
separation of circuitry but also enables electromagnetic 
interference (EM)  shielding of sensitive RF parts from 
potentially noisy digital circuitry. Test results show that 
this approach works extremely well. The RF board and 
the phase-lock loop circuitry on the analog board are 
contained within separately shielded areas. The shields 
are simple structures, which fit well within the E M  
envelope. 
bus - 
Digital Board 
The digital board's function is to accept data packets from 
the solid-state recorder and real-time telemetry from the 
C&DH via a PCI interface and form CCSDS-compatible 
transfer frames, which are 1164 bytes long in this case. 
The data are encoded with a concatenated code forming 
an inner and outer code. The outer code is formed using a 
b interface framer encoder 
Reed-Solomon code with an interleave factor of 5, and the 
inner code is formed using either a rate 1/2 or a rate 116 
convolutional code. Data are modulated as bi-phase-level 
directly on the carrier at high rates, or the data can be 
modulated on a 25.5 lcHz subcarrier using NRZ-L 
modulation at low rates. The mission data rates range 
from 85 kbps to 12.5 bps (including the Reed-Solomon 
overhead of 1.14 times the information data rate). 
- 
The bulk of the digital circuitry is contained on three gate 
arrays and one ASIC, which support all the data encoding 
schemes, plus the navigation circuitry. The navigation 
circuitry measures the downconverted uplink fiequency 
relative to the reference oscillator frequency, which is 
transmitted to Earth for ground processing as described 
previously. Also in support of the navigation systems, the 
downlink board has a Doppler one-way ranging (DOR) 
tone capability at 15.3 MHz. Finally, the gate arrays also 
provide the circuitry necessary to form the PCI interface, 
which runs at 3.5 MHz. The gate arrays meet the mission 
requirements for radiation tolerance with the addition of 
20 mils of tantalum shielding. 
Analog Board 
M e r  the data are encoded on the digital board, the transfer 
h m e s  are sent to the analog board via a differential serial 
interface. To meet the requirements of the National Tele- 
communications and Information Administration (NTIA), 
the analog board filters the baseband data to eliminate out-of- 
band spectral content and level-shifts the data to drive the 
varactor diode modulator on the RF board. The analog board 
also accepts the demodulated ranging signal from the uplink 
card and remodulates this signal onto the downlink carrier 
after passing it through a level-control circuit that maintains a 
fixed ranging modulation index. 
I A1 RF 
Frequency 
synthesizer 2109.5 MHz 
30.6 MHz 
t MlHZ 
Modulator 
1 33-MHz 
from uplink 
Navigation Clock Convolutional 
counters gen. encoder 
card- ~ 0 . 2 5  I, 
I 4 
Figure 7. Downlink Card Block Diagram (AGC = automatic gain control; LPF = low-pass filter) 
1-87 
A frequency synthesizer is contained on the analog board 
to establish the downlink carrier frequency. The fie- 
quency is offset from the downlink frequency to prevent 
self-modulation effects fiom the data and is referenced to 
the 30.6 MHZ oscillator. To simulate coherent trans- 
ponder operation, the card is capable of shifting its 
downlink frequency slightly when the uplink card 
achieves carrier lock. This gives feedback to ground sta- 
tion personnel that uplink lock has been achieved. 
RF Board 
The RF board is constructed on temperature-stabilized 
microwave material and provides frequency multiplica- 
tion and phase modulation of the carrier frequency. The 
fi-equency multiplication occurs in two stages of x2, with 
microstrip filtering to reduce the effects of the harmonic 
energy with a minimum overall part count. The phase 
modulators operate at 4219 M H z  and are based on a 3 dB 
hybrid topology with varactor diodes to provide the vari- 
able phase terminations. The telemetry phase shifter read- 
ily supports the operational data rates at either 1.2 radians 
or 0.9 radians peak. The 1 M H z  ranging tones are sepa- 
rately modulated to avoid nonlinear summing effects 
incurred with a single modulator. The output llevel of the 
RF board is 0 dBm to drive a TWTA. 
waveguide type antenna. The 0 dBic beamwidth of an 
open-ended waveguide antenna is approximately k60°, 
which does not satisfy the CONTOUR communications 
requirement. The beamwidth of the aft end antenna is 
improved by placing a parasitic element [9] a short dis- 
tance in front of the waveguide opening and a conical 
reflecting surface at the aperture of the open-ended 
waveguide, as shown in Figure 8. The parasitic element is 
sandwiched between two layers of a quartzlcyanate ester 
composite material to maintain the element's shape and its 
distance from the waveguide opening. The pattern of this 
antenna is plotted in Figure 9, which shows the 0 dBic 
coverage is now *SOo, a 20% increase in coverage over an 
open-ended waveguide antenna. 
Tests conducted at the DSN show that the telemetry bit 
error rate performs within 1.5 dB of theoretical with either 
the rate 1/6 or rate 112 convolutional code concatenated 
with Reed-Solomon code. In addition, the navigation 
systems functioned within 0.1 " I s ,  satisfying the navi- 
gation requirements of the mission, as described previ- 
ously. The design incorporates a high degree of integra- 
tion without compromising performance, thus satisfying 
the needs of the CONTOUR mission and also subsequent 
missions. 
Figure 8. Aft Low-Gain Antenna 
7. ANTENNAS 
The CONTOUR antenna system is designed to support 
low- and high-data-rate communications from a spinning 
platform. The spacecraft is spin stabilized and communi- 
cations must be possible for all phases of the mission. 
Thus, the pattem of the low- and high-gain antennas must 
be symmetrical and positioned away from the spacecraft 
structure to prevent blockage and interference nulls in the 
pattem. Careful consideration was also given to the posi- 
tion and size of the low-gain antennas to prevent solar 
array blocking on the aft end and dust impact damage on 
the forward end. 
Aft Low-Gain Antenna 
A broadbeam, low-gain antenna is placed on each end of 
the spacecraft, and both are derivatives of an open-ended 
i \I 
4 
-90 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 
Angle (deg) 
Figure 9. Pattem of the Aft Low-Gain Antenna 
1-88 
Forward Low-Gain Antenna 
The low-gain antenna on the forward end is different from 
the aft low-gain antenna because it must withstand the 
heat generated by a STAR 30BP solid rocket motor, and 
as a goal, dust impacts fkom three different comets. The 
latter requirement is difficult because there is no guaran- 
tee any antenna can withstand high-velocity impacts from 
small dust particles. Nevertheless, an antenna derived 
from an open-ended waveguide horn was a selected 
because it can withstand the thermal environment created 
by the rocket motor. The fronthack ratio of an open- 
ended waveguide is about 13 dB. This ratio is improved 
on this antenna by introducing chokes [lo] on the outside 
of the waveguide walls. A good fronthack ratio will 
reduce pattern ripple in the coverage region due to the 
spacecraft structure reflections. The chokes will also 
improve the axial symmetry of the radiation pattem, 
which is important because the spacecraft is spin stabi- 
lized. A picture and pattern of the forward low-gain 
antenna are shown in Figures 10 and 11, respectively. 
. 
Figure 10. Forward Low-Gain Antenna 
-90 4 0  -30 0 30 60 90 
Angle (deg) 
Figure 11. Pattern of the Forward Low-Gain Antenna 
Equatorial Plane Antenna 
The coverage from the two low gain antennas at 90" off 
boresight does not meet the communications gain require- 
ments, so a third antenna was added to support communi- 
cations around the equator of the spacecraft. This area is 
served by a waveguide fed, reflector-type antenna as shown 
in Figure 12. This antenna consists of a conical, corrugated 
horn and a rotationally symmetric reflector. The generating 
line of the reflector surface is a parabola with the focus of 
the parabola at the apex of the horn. The pattem of this 
equatorial plane antenna for angles near the equator of the 
spacecraft is shown in Figure 13. 
The equatorial plane antenna, along with the forward and 
aft low-gain antennas, provides omnidirectional command 
capability while the spacecraft is spinning in deep space. 
High-rate communications are supported by a 0.5-m 
prime focus fed parabolic reflector antenna. The feed 
structure is the same choke ring horn design as is used for 
the forward low-gain antenna. All antennas have isolated 
left- and right-hand circular polarization feed ports and 
can easily handle the transmitter power levels. 
Figure 12. Antenna for Equatorial Plane Coverage 
6 
4 '  
Angle = 03 
Angle = 96 
Angle = 99 
-2 * 
-4- 
-150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150 
Spin angle (deg) 
Figure 13. Pattem of Equatorial Plane Antenna 
- -_ . 1-89 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has described an X-band communications 
system that does not compromise performance in the face 
of restricted spending budgets. A novel navigation tech- 
nique is in place that allows accurate Doppler measure- 
ments without a transponder or an ultra-stable oscillator. 
The oscillators have been designed around the require- 
ment for low phase noise, but also provide good 
frequency stability. The deep-space transceiver cards have 
been developed for use in our E M  card cage, and they 
incorporate a wide range of functionality to firther 
increase the level of electronic assembly integration. The 
antennas provide the required coverage area and gain for 
all phases of operation while spin stabilized. All devel- 
opment work is complete, and flight production is under- 
way in support of a July 2002 launch date. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  Robert W. Farquhar, David W. Dunham, and S. Jen, 
"CONTOUR Mission Overview and Trajectory Design," 
Advances in Astronautical Sciences 95,92 1-934, 1997. 
[2] Martin E. Fraeman, "A Fault Tolerant Integrated Elec- 
tronics Module for Small Satellites," Proceedings of the 
I I' IAAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, ~~c97-1-3,  
1997. 
[3] J. Robert Jensen and Robert S. Bokulic, "Highly 
Accurate, Noncoherent Technique for Spacecraft Doppler 
Tracking," IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Elec- 
tronic Systems 35 (3), 963-973, July 1999. 
[4] J. Robert Jensen and Robert S. Bokulic, ":Experimen- 
tal Verification of Noncoherent Doppler Tracking at the 
Deep Space Network, I' IEEE Transactions on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems 36 (4), October 2000. 
[5] Peter G. Sulzer, J. K. Sulzer Model FS-I 1 OOT Instruc- 
tion Manual, James Knight Inc., May 1, 1960. 
[6] Jeny R Norton and James M. Cloeren, "Precision 
Quartz Oscillators and Their Use Aboard Spacecraft," 
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest 15 (l), 30-37, 1994. 
[7] Donald Halford, A. E. Wainwright, and James A. 
Barnes, "Flicker Noise of Phase in RF Amplifiers and 
Frequency Multipliers: Characterization, Cause, and 
Cure," Proceedings of the 22"' Annual Symposium on 
Frequency Control, 326-33 1, October 11-15, 1'968. 
[SI M. M. Driscoll and T. D. Merrell, "Spectral 
Performance of Frequency Multipliers and Dividers," 
Proceedings of the 4 t h  Annual Symposium on Frequency 
Control, 193-200, 1992. 
[9] Gary G. Wong, "A Novel Hemispherical Coverage 
Waveguide Antenna, 'I Proceedings of AP-S Symposium, 
566-569, October 11-15,1976. 
[ 101 IR. Wohlleben, H. Mattes, 0. Lochner, "Simple Small 
Primary Feed for Large Opening Angles and High Aper- 
ture Efficiency," Electronic Letters, 8, 474-476, 
September 21, 1972. . 
Matt Reinhart is currently the lead 
engineer for the CONTOUR space- 
craft radio communications system. 
He received his B.S. from the 
University of Malyland in 1984 and 
his MS .  from the Jolins Hopkins 
University in 1987, both in electrical 
engineering. He joined the Applied 
Physics Laboratoiy (APL) Space 
Department in 1989, where he has designed a variety of 
RF and microwave electronic assemblies. Prior to 
working at APL, Mr. Reinhart designed solid-state 
microwave transmitters for the Westinghouse Electric 
Corporation. 
Bob Jensen (M'92) received a B.A. 
+om Come11 CoNege in Mi. Vernon, 
Iowa, in 1973, and the Ph.D. in 
physical chemistry @om the Univer- 
sity of Wisconsin, Madison, in 1978. 
He joined The Johns Hopkins 
University APL in 1978 and worked 
on a variety of nonacoustic detection 
problems, principally involving 
radar performance analysis, signal processing 
algorithms, and rough surface scattering. In 1989, he 
joined the APL Space Department and has participated in 
the TOPEX altimeter pre-flight testing, the development 
and testing of algorithms for the beacon receiver on the 
MSX Satellite, the NEAR telecommunications system, and 
on other satellite programs. He is a member of the APL 
Principal Professional Stay and the IEEE. 
Jim Cloeren has been designing and 
building high-performance oscilla- 
tors for nearly 40 years. He has been 
with APL's Space Department since 
1982, where he delivered oscillators 
for the GRACE, TOPEY, DPCS, 
COBE, EUVE, Mars Observer, 
Polar Bear, MSX, and Cassini 
spacecraft. He is currently the 
supervisor of APL's Precision Systems and Signal 
Processing section. Previously he worked for Sulzer Labs, 
Austron, and Tracor. 
1-90 
Chris DeBoy is the lead uplink card 
engineer for the CONTOUR Mission. 
He received his B.S. >om Virginia 
Tech in 1990 and his M.S. in 1993 
fiom The Johns Hopkins University. 
Since joining APL in 1990, he has 
been involved with the design and 
development of RF systems for a 
variety of spacecra#, including 
serving as the lead RF engineer for the TIMED mission. 
Karl Fielhauer (M'85) is a senior 
engineer in the RF Engineering 
Group of APL's Space Department. 
He received a B.S. in 1985 +om 
Lawrence Technological University 
in Southfield Michigan and is an 
MS.E.E. candidate at The Johns 
Hopkins University in Baltimore 
Maryland. Prior to working at APL, 
Mr. Fielhauer was the Lead RF Communications Engi- 
neer for the EO-I Mission for Litton Industries, Amecom 
Division in College Park, Maryland. Since joining APL's 
Space Department in 1997, he has focused primarily on 
the design and development of digital hardware for the 
TIMED and CONTOUR missions and their ground sup- 
port equipment. Mr. Fielhauei- is a member of IEEE and 
Mentor Users Group (MUG). 
Ron Schulze is currently the lead 
antenna engineer for both the 
CONTOUR and STEREO missions. 
He received his BS. >om Virginia 
Tech in 1989, and MS. *om the Ohio 
State University in 1991, both in elec- 
trical engineering. He started his 
career at APL in 1991 in the Fleet 
Systems Department, where he 
performed propagation analysis studies related to low- 
elevation radar issues. He joined APL 's Space Department 
in 1997, where he has designed a variety of antennas. Prior 
to working at APL, Mr. Schulze worked at COMSAT Labo- 
ratories. 
. - _  a-. 1 - 9 1  
