Real-time Command, Data and Control Concepts for the 
Instrument on the 
Space Interferometry Mission’ 
Matt Wette 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
M / S  198-326,4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
Matt.Wette@j pl.nasa.gov 
818-354-6265 
Abstract - The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM), slated 
to launch in 2008, will require simultaneous operation of 
tens of control loops running at kiloHertz rates. The task of 
designing a computer control system to run this complex, 
distributed system will require careful requirements analysis 
and design flow. Though the project is in early phases, the 
process to flow the flight system command, data, and 
control system requirements to the instrument real-time 
control design is well along. In this paper we give a 
glimpse into the process and resulting design. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 .  INTRODUCTION 
3. CONTROL ARCHITECTURE 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
5. REERENCES 
6 .  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
7. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
2. f%N INSTRUMENT USE SCENAFUO 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The Space Inteferometry Mission (SIM) is slated to launch 
in 2008. The SIM Flight System is shown in Figure 1. The 
figure shows seven siderostat bays housed in the precision 
structure, the metrology boom with attached kite, solar 
panels and the high-gain antenna. Below the precision 
structure are the two backpacks which house the spacecraft 
avionics and instrument electronics. SIM is described in 
some detail in [l]. 
The purpose of the SIM Flight System is to (1) provide 
precision relative stellar angular measurements, (2) 
demonstrate the capability of interferometers for imaging, 
and (3) demonstrate interferometric nulling, all in the visible 
spectrum. Items (2) and (3) are technology demonstrations 
for SIM. Item (I), measuring angles of stars precisely, is 
the main focus for SIM and, for example, will allow 
scientists to generate detailed maps of the Milky Way 
galaxy. A Michelson stellar interferometer, like that used 
on SIM, allows one to make accurate angular measurements 
of stars provided that the baseline vector (in “star space”) 
and the starlight pathlength difference from the CCD pixels 
to the endpoints (or fiducials) defining the baseline can be 
accurately determined. On SIM these quantities must be 
derived from knowledge of distances on the order of 
picometers. The Flight System is required to make 
repeatable metrology and fringe measurements at the sub- 
nanometer level in order to meet this goal. 
I lApLZWX 
Figure 1. SIM Flight System 
The basic hardware components of interferometers are the 
siderostats, steering mirrors, delay line and beam combiner. 
The siderostats are steerable flat mirrors that direct starlight 
down the optical axes that comprise the arms of the 
interfererometer. On SIM, the siderostats have comer-cubes 
mounted on their surfaces that provide the means for 
defining the fiducials of the interferometer. Articulated 
stirring mirrors, or fast steering mirrors, provide fine control 
of the light beams that are transmitted from the siderostat 
mirrors, through the delay lines and to the beam combiner. 
The delay lines, one passive and one active for each 
interferometer, provide the means to accurately control the 
difference in pathlength that the starlight travels through 
~~ 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
4-2083 
each arm to reach the beam combiner. The beam combiner 
combines the starlight from the two arms to produce a 
measurable fringe on CCD pixels. 
The SIM Flight System provides seven siderostats, with 
accompanying steering mirrors, and four beam combiners, 
with accompanying delay lines. An optical switchyard 
allows sinnultaneous operation of three interferometers with 
the capability to route starlight from any pair of siderostats 
to any beam combiner. There is one spare siderostat and 
one spare beam combiner for redundancy. The reason for 
operating three interferometers will be explained shortly. 
In order to measure changes in the interferometer baseline 
absolute llengths and relative orientations accurately, the 
Flight System is equipped with a metrology system. This 
system measures the pathlength of laser light from each of 
the corner cubes attached to the siderostats to a coimnon set 
of four comer-cubes on the kite. This set of measurements 
provides information to compute the position of all the 
corner-cubes in a common (flight system fixed) frame. 
Thus, the metrology system provides the capability to 
measure the lengths of the baselines accurately as well as 
the relative orientations of the baselines. However, the 
metrology system does not provide the capability to track 
changes in any baseline orientation in inertial space. This 
takes more work. 
With the SIM Flight System at a fixed inertial attitude, the 
system provides the capability for any of its interferometers 
to observe any sufficiently bright star within a fifteen- 
degree field of regard. While SIM is pointed at a fixed 
attitude, two of its interferometers, acting as guide 
interferometers, will be locked onto two guide star:;. This 
provides the capability to track relative changes in the 
baselines in inertial space. 
The SIM Flight System requires a high precision attitude 
control system (ACS) to provide precision spacecraft 
attitude control. Slews and precision pointing are 
accomplished under the control of six reaction wheels. The 
spacecraft is equipped with a high-gain antenna operated in 
B A N D  iind a solar array which provides over 4000 watts 
of power. The antenna and solar array are both articulated 
to provide minimum pointing constraints on the Flight 
System. There is a sun exclusion zone of +I- 30 degrees 
fkom the center of the instrument field of regard. 
The SIM Flight System is composed of the Spacecraft 
Subsystem (SCS), the Real-time Control Subsystem (RTC), 
the Starlight Subsystem (STL) and the Metrology 
Subsystem (MET). Operation of the Flight System will be 
controlled1 primarily on computers operating within the 
Spacecraft and Real-time Control subsystems. The SCS and 
RTC subsystems will communicate over a common data bus 
such as IvEL-STD 1553b. The SPC is equipped with a 
48Gb solid state recorder. The RTC has 512 MB of 
volatile memory and 5 12 MB of non-volatile memory. For a 
more complete description of the electronics see [ 2 ] .  
The instnment on SIM is a complex system with tens of 
control loops, over a hundred actuators and sensors, and 
. 
hundreds of electronics boards. It is important in designing 
a system of this complexity to do carefiil top-down analysis 
of its operation. In this paper we show a glimpse into the 
analysis dlesign flow that is being done to insure a properly 
working system is developed for flight. In Section 2 we 
provide a brief description of the instrument RTC 
subsystem. In Section 3 we provide a top-level use case for 
the instrument and in Section 4 describe the control 
architecture for the system. 
2 AN INSTRUMENT U S E  SCENARIO 
The job of the ground operators is to provide sequences to 
operate thLe flight system and the job of the flight system is 
to implement the furctions called out in the sequences. The 
process of developing sequences, or use-cases, early in the 
project allows the operators and system designers to agree 
on a set of functions to be provided by !he flight system. In 
the following scenario we will explore some of the functions 
to be pelformed by the flight system and the following 
sections will explore the preliminary design implied by 
these functions. 
The scenario we chcose to explore is that of getting fringe 
measurements for a set of stars at a specific spacecraft 
attitude. The science team will provide a list of target stars 
for observing. The science operations team will add to the 
list several grid star observations. The grid star observations 
provide a reference grid for generating a global map of the 
Once this is done the uploaded sequence is delivered. The 
sequence may includle the following: 
1. Instrument reccmfiguration. This ihnction will specify 
which elements of the instrument will be grouped to 
establish the required three interferometers. 
2 .  Instrument caliibration. After each reconfiguration, 
some level of calibration may be required. The 
sequence will call out specific calibrations to be 
performed. 
3. Tile observation. This function will get the spacecraft 
pointed to the correct attitude, acquire guide stars and 
iterate through the list of science stars. At the end of 
this 'time the required science data will be stored in the 
spacecraft solid-state recorder (SSR), ready for 
download. 
The Flight System Operations Team has worked with 
scientists. spacecra ft  engineers, instrument engineers, 
ground system engineers and operators to define a set of 
baseline we cases. The use-cases have been analyzed and 
carried to the RTC subsystem, where the direct user, or 
actor, is tlhe Spacecraft Subsystem. 
sky. 
2.1 Instrument Configuration 
Configuration of the instrument is based on the following 
defining principles. These will be used to drive 
4 - 2 0 8 4  
requirements on the associated RTC flight software. In the 
description below an IFC is an Instrument Flight Computer. 
The current SIM baseline provides four IFCs. 
The Instrument is configured for one science baseline if 
holding G1 DL delay hold G1 fnnges 
hold G2 P-poinbng b 
hold G2 Q-poinhng 
hdd G2 fnnges 
the instrument is configured for external metrology 
two sidbays and one combiner-IFC pair are configured 
to operate as a guide interferometer, named Guide 
Inteferometer 1 
two sidbays and, one combiner-IFC pair are configured 
to operate as a guide interferometer, named Guide 
Interferometer 2 
two sidbays and one combiner-IFC pair are configured 
to operate as a science inteferometer, named Science 
Interferometer 1 
the instrument is calibrated for baseline estimation, the 
three interferometers (two guide and one science) are 
calibrated 
The Instrument is configured for external metrology if 
0 
0 
one or more IFC is executing the External Metrology 
Function 
the instrument interconnect (the interface beween the 
IFCs and the remote actuators/sensor cages) is 
configured to allow the above IFC to sample all 
available external metrology sensors (phasemeters) 
the IFC is receiving metrology data at the nominal rate 
(e.g., 1000/sec) 
A guide interferometer is configured if 
the instrument interconnect is configured to route data 
from two specified siderostat bays to a specified IFC 
the software in the IFC is configured to run all control 
servos associated with a guide interferometer 
Figure 2 illustrates how siderostat bays are paired with 
combiners to create three operating interferometers. 
0 
Science Observation Activity Diagram 
Start 
Figure 2. Instrument Configuration 
The command sequence will explicitly call out the above 
configuration information prior to any observations. 
2.2 Tile Observation 
A tile observation is the nominal sequence for gathering 
science data. This sequence requires the following 
conditions to be satisfied to start: 
1. The Instrument is configured for one science baseline 
(as defined above). 
2 .  The Instrument is calibrated for science. This has not 
yet been explicitly defined in the project to date. 
The spacecraft is capable of precision pointing. 3 .  
Before starting the observation sequence the Instrument will 
insure the above conditions are satisfied. 
Figure 3 in the Appendix shows an activity diagram for the 
following sequence of operations. Each line of action in the 
figure represents, essentially, one concurrent task in the 
software. 
The sequence will start with the Instrument requesting a 
spacecraft slew to the target tile attitude. While the 
spacecraft is slewing, the Instrument will have the 
opportunity to point (without starlight sensors) siderostat 
mirrors and position delay lines. 
TileActDiagl b.vsd 
hold exi melrdogy 1 ? 
slew and settle .I 
slewing G1-P Sid acq’ G1 P-pointing 
slewing Gl-Q Sid hold G I  Q-pointing 
slewng S1-Q Sid hold S1 Q-wnbng 
slewmg S1 DL holding S1 DL posh hold S i  fringes 
‘ J  slew S1 Sid+DL I next star + 2Osec- =Peat 
7.5min *- 5sec 1’ 5sec* -e elhour 4 
Figure 3. Tile Observation Activity Diagram 
4 - 2 0 8 5  
The next step in the sequence is to acquire pointing in the 
guide interferometer siderostats. This requires acquisition 
and tracking algorithms to lock onto guide stars in each of 
the four 'guide siderostats. Once pointing in the: guide 
siderostat:; is accomplished, the guide interferometers will 
able to acquire and track fringes. The control system must 
be able to keep the central fringe stable (in the CCD frame) 
to less than 10 nanometers, 1 -sigma. 
When the: guide siderostats are tracking the guide stars, 
there will be sufficient angle feedforward information (see 
[l]) to aid in acquiring and tracking a (dim) science star. 
Once the guide fringe interferometers are tracking fringes, 
the science interferometer f h g e  acquisition and tracking 
can be accomplished. 
When all interferometers are tracking, the fringe tracking 
data is recorded for the specified amount of time. When the 
time is exceeded, the next science star sequence starts. Dim 
star pointing is acquired, followed by fringe acquisition and 
tracking. The process repeats (as shown in Figure 6 )  until 
all stars in the list are process or until a timeout is hit. 
:3 CONTROL ARCHITECTURE 
Based on the architecture of the system and the 
requirements illustrated by the activity diagram, the control 
architecture was partitioned into Instrument and 
Interferometer levels as illustrated in Figure 4. 
Interferometer 
Control 
Control 
J+ 
b 
Figure 4. Instrument Control Architecture 
The Instrument Control Function dictates the behavior of 
the three interferometers via commands to the three 
instances of the Interferometer Control Function. Each of 
the interferometers (two guides and one science) has direct 
control over the lowest level closed-loop control servo 
functions: wide angle pointing (WAF'), narrow angle 
pointing (NAP) and fringe tracking (FT). We will address 
each of these functions in the following paragraphs. 
3.1 Instrument Control Function 
The Instrument Control Function will exhibit behavior 
similar to the state diagram in Figure 5. The Instrument will 
start the sequence from the IDLE state. The initial 
command will cause the system to the SLEWING-AL,L 
state where mirrors and delay lines will be moved to known 
positions. When the positions have been achieved and the 
spacecraft is pointed the Instrument will transition to the 
ACQ-GUIDES state where fringes will be acquired on the 
guide interferometers. Once this is done the system will 
transition to the ACQ-SCIENCE state where it will acquire 
science fnmges, and 1 hen to the HOLDING-SCIENCE state 
where fringe data will be sampled on thLe guide and science 
interferometer until the requested integration time has been 
covered. 
( 7 - M  SLEWING-ALL 3cc'"'""") 
ACCGUIDES -pl-iGz) 
ACQSCIENCE -yGGk) 
InrlConStm M WsnS OSnpmD rad B SLEWING-SCI XGGGiE) 
Figure 5. Instrument Control State Machine 
Clearly, not all the behavior required to operate the 
instrument is represented here. What this state machine has 
given us is an initial design point to s t a  flowing design and 
requrirements to lower levels in the system. 
3.2 Int(erferomete,V Control Function 
The Interferometer Control Function will behave like the 
state machine shown in Figure 6. This state machine must 
implement the logic for acquiring trackhg on the pointing 
system followed by fringe tracking. 
I"Sbn1 vrd 
M WateOSpPY2 
Figure 5. Inteiferometer Control State Machine 
Initial trimsition from IDLE to SLEWING will be 
commanded by the Instrument Control Function. After 
slewing is, complete the system will transition to the open- 
loop HOILDING-POINT state until commanded by the 
Instrument Control Function. There will be the capability to 
have the Interferometer Control Function autonomously 
transition through the state machine. After pointing has 
been coimpleted imd the Interferometer has been 
commanded to start acquisition transition to the 
ACQ-ANGLE-TRK. state will occur. In this state the 
4 - 2 0 8 6  
interferometer will acquire and center the target star, first on 
a closed-loop wide angle pointing system (the front end), 
and then on a closed-loop narrow angle pointing system (the 
5 .  the algorithms which will be executed in that state . 
These might include different acquisition or tracking 
algorithms to be design by control system analysts. 
back end). Once closed-loop pointing is tracking on both 
systems, transition to a ACQ-FRINGE-TRK state will 
occur where the interferometer will acquire fringes. Once 
fringes are acquired, the interferometer will transition to the 
ACQ-CENT-FRINGE state to find the central fringe. Once 
the central fringe is found and stabilized, the interferometer 
is locked. 
Of course, closed-loop pointing lock is required for fringe 
acquisition and tracking so loss of pointing on any of the 
pointing control systems will likely cause fringe tracking to 
fail and the system will have to reacquire pointing. There 
are current efforts in the interferometry programs at P L  to 
address issue llke these in the area of fault tolerance. 
3.3 Control Servos 
At the lowest level of control are the closed-loop control 
servos. These are developed by the control system analysts 
and must exist in the framework to be developed by the 
software engineers. We have developed a spreadsheet for 
specification of attributes for each servo. The servos 
covered are the following: 
WAP, or Wide Angle Pointing. This servo is 
responsible for controlling the siderostat mirror to 
acquire and track the required star on a camera in the 
siderostat bay. 
NAP, or Narrow Angle Pointing. This servo is 
responsible for controlling a fast steering mirror in the 
siderstat bay to keep the star image centered on an 
angle tracking camera located in the beam combiner. 
FT, or Fringe Tracking. This servo is responsible for 
controlling the delay lines (with three stages of 
actuation) in order to acquire and track the central 
fringe. 
Further work to be performed, before detailed design and 
implementation can begin, includes defining the transitions 
between the different states in the servos. In addition the 
latency requirements for scheduling the servos must be 
determined. See [2] for a discussion of the latency 
requirements. 
4 CONCLUSION 
The flight system on SIM includes an instrument real-time 
control system which will have a high level of complexity 
and high demands on performance. This type of design 
requires a thorough analysis and design to achieve its goals: 
We have illustrated in this paper the process for achieving a 
workable design framework through systematic analysis. 
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research described in this paper was carried out by the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space AWstrat ion.  
I would like to thank Charles Bell and Marek Tuszynski of 
JPL for their contributions to this paper. 
6 REFERENCES 
[l]  Kahn, P., “Space Interferometry Mission: A Systems 
Perspective,” 2000 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Mar 2000. 
[2] Walker, W. J., “High Speed Interconnect for the Space 
Interferometry Mission,” 2001 IEEE Aerospace Conference, 
Mar 2001. 
7 BIOGRAPHY These servos must work in many states (e.g., idle, acquisition, tracking). For each servo we are tracking the 
following information for each state in which the servo will 
operate: 
1.  the set of measurements needed for the servo and the 
rates at which those measurements must be sampled. 
the set of controls (or control commands) for the servo 
and the rate at which those commands are being output. 
the set of inputs from other software functions and the 
rates at which they will be read. 
the set of outputs to other software functions and the 
rates at which they will be output. 
Dr. Matt Wette is a Senior Engineer 
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the 
Guidance and Control Analysis 
Group. His interests are in control 
system design, real-time systems, 
and discrete event control. Matt has 
contributed to several projects in the 
development of real-time simulation 
testbeds. He is currently working 
on pathlength control and several 
software testbeds on SIM. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
4 - 2 0 8 7  
This page intentionally left blank. 
4-2088  
