In Orbit Performance of the UNISAT 
Terrestrial Technology Solar Panels 
FSantoni, M.Ferrante, F.Graziani, F.Ferrazza 
Universita degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”, Scuola di Ingegneria Aerospaziale 
Via Eudossiana 16,00184 Roma, Italia; tel+39.06.44585328 e-mail: f.santoni@caspur.it 
Abstract-The UNISAT microsatellite solar panels are 
manufactured using a terrestrial technology solar panel 
fabrication technique, with some modification to improve 
reliability and make the system withstand the launch and 
space environment. The solar cells are encapsulated 
between two layers made of a special sunlight transparent 
polymer, resistant to W exposure and with very good 
mechanical properties. This technology, available at 
Eurosolare, has been employed for many years in terrestrial 
applications, including extreme environments, such as the 
Antartic polar region and Sahara desert, but there is no 
space flight experience. The ground tests performed for the 
UNISAT solar panels predict a reliable lifetime of about one 
year and data collected show also their good electrical 
performance in orbit. The UNISAT experience shows that in 
low cost space missions terrestrial technology solar panels 
can be employed, leaving the designer free to choose the 
most appropriate solar cell size and to cut down costs and 
development time. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THE UNISAT SOLAR CELLS 
3. SOLAR PANEL INTEGRATION 
4. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
5 .  
6. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
SPACE ENVIRONMENT EFFECTS ASSESSMENT AND 
GROUND TESTING 
LAUNCH AND PRELIMINARY IN Omrr DATA 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Solar panels are usually the most expensive components in 
low cost microsatellites. Moreover, due to the small number 
of companies involved in the space solar panels market for 
which small projects are not a high priority, long delivery 
times are often typical of space qualified solar panels. One 
possible way to make these indispensable components more 
affordable is to use industrial terrestrial technology standard 
solar panels. The procedures developed by the terrestrial 
photovoltaic industry reduce costs and allow fast 
construction. Of course one cannot expect these systems to 
perform as the space rated ones, but they could still be 
suitable for low cost University programs, in which often 
high efficiency and lifetimes are not required, while 
development cost and time play the major role. 
Terrestrial technology solar panels are flown on-board 
UNISAT, a microsatellite designed and built at Universita di 
Roma “La Sapienza”. It was launched on-board a DNEPR 
LV on September 26, 2000. Only commercial off the shelf 
(COTS) and no space rated components were flown on this 
microsatellite. This same philosophy was followed also for 
the solar panels. These were built in the frame of a 
cooperation established between Universita di Roma “La 
Sapienza” and Eurosolare, which provided the solar cells, 
the building materials, facilities and expertise. High 
efficiency monocristalline Si solar cells, commercially 
available from Eurosolare, are employed. The solar cells are 
encapsulated between two layers made of a special sun light 
transparent polymer, resistant to W exposure and with very 
good mechanical properties. This technology has been 
employed for many years in terrestrial applications, so that 
long experience and performance data are available. 
Terrestrial solar panels are typically guaranteed for ten years 
operation in the terrestrial environment. They have been 
operated in extreme situations, including the Antartic and 
the Sahara desert climates. This made us confident that 
operation of such systems in space was possible. Some 
improvements have been introduced in the standard building 
procedure, necessary to make the solar panel withstand the 
effects of launch and space environment. 
Since there is no space flight experience, many questions 
arise about reliability, performance degradation and lifetime 
of terrestrial solar panels in space. The ground tests 
performed for the UNISAT solar panels predict a reliable 
lifetime of at least one year, which fits very well within 
UNISAT objectives as well as those of many low cost 
programs. 
The successful launch of UNISAT and the operation 
conducted till now proved that the solar panels survived the 
launch. Preliminary data collected gives us confidence of 
their good electrical performance in orbit. The expected 
lifetime, evaluated by ground tests, will be compared with 
flight data, which will be available during the next months. 
A brief description of the UNISAT solar panels construction 
technique, the modification introduced in the terrestrial 
standard building procedure, the lesson learned in this 
process and the preliminary assessment of the performance 
in orbit are.given in the paper. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 EEE 
UNISAT solar wil efliuency distribution 
2. THE UNISAT SOLARCELLS 
The average power needed for UNISAT operations is less 
than 10 W. The external surface of the spacecraft is large 
enough that this amount of power can be provided by body 
mounted Silicon (Si) solar cells. Even if the comnion trend 
in spacecraft phovoltaic systems is to have very high 
efficiency solar cells, as Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) or multi- 
junction solar cells [l], [2], for UNISAT no one of these 
high performance components have been selected, for the 
reasons mentioned above. 
The UNISAT solar cells are obtained ftom usual terrestrial 
size Si solar cells, cutting a standard monocristalline Si cell 
[3] into smaller cells, dimensioned for optimal coverage of 
the external spacecraft surface. The only modification 
needed consist of an inexpensive custom design and 
deposition of the solar cell bus-bar. The cutting procedure 
leaves the designer free to choose the most appropriate cell 
size for the particular application, without limiting the size 
to the usual space standards (e.g. 2x4cm or 6x4cm). The 
UNISAT solar cell bus-bar layout is designed to have two 
soldering points on each connection side, which improves 
reliability in case of interconnection soldering failure. A 
standard terrestrial solar cell is shown in fig.1. From it, 20 
UNISAT 2x2.35cm solar cells are cut out (fig.2). 
140 - 
120- 
100- 
80 - 
60 - 
40 - 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
solar cell effidency (%) 
Figure 3 - UNISAT solar cells eficiency distribution. 
The solar cell efficiency has been measured using a sun 
simulator calibrated at AM1.5. The distribution of the solar 
cells efficiency, measured at 25 O C ,  is shown in fig.3. The 
average efficiency is found to be 13.761%. 
3. SOLAR PANEL INTEGRATION 
Geomehy 
Three different solar panels layouts have been developed, 
based on the shape of the external surfaces available for the 
solar panels. On each side of the external octagon two solar 
panels are installed, made of 35 solar cells in series, as 
shown in fig.4. Four solar panels are positioned on the upper 
basis, with the geometry shown in jig.5, while only two 
solar panels are installed on the lower basis, to leave room 
for the launcher interface hardware (fig.6). 
Figure 1 - Standard terrestrial solar cell, ftom which 
the UNISAT solar cells are cut out. 
Figure 4 - Lateral panel solar arrays. 
The electric connection path among the solar cells has been 
designed so that the current loops generated by two panels 
on the same spacecraft surface produce opposite magnetic 
dipole moments. Thus the total magnetic moment - in the 
order of 1.8 Am2, depending on the light intensity and 
the level of the solar panel degradation - is minimised [4]. Figure 2 - UNISAT 2x2.3cm solar cell. 
Figure 5 - Upper basis solar array. 
Figure 6 - Lower basis solar array. 
Construction and materials 
The current technology employed by Eurosolare for solar 
panels integration is a lamination process (fig.7, S), in which 
solar cells are encapsulated between two layers of Tedlar@ 
[5 ]  and Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA). Tedlar@ is a sunlight 
transparent polymer, very stable in many environmental 
conditions and already flown in space. EVA is a sunlight 
transparent polymer obtained by the polymerisation of 
polyethylene and vinyl-acetate [6]. Tedlar@ gives 
mechanical stifhess to the solar panel and protects it from 
adverse environmental effects. EVA is used to seal the solar 
cell between the two layers of Tedlar@. The components are 
disposed in a lamination machine. A curing cycle, carried 
out at the proper temperature and pressure, is employed for 
the polymerization of EVA, after which the solar panel is 
sealed. The whole process takes less than two hours. 
EVA 
Figure 7 - Solar panel and encapsulants. 
Figure 8 - Solar panel, Tedlar and EVA before 
On the external surface of Tedlar@ small pyramidal shapes 
(texturization) can be obtained during the lamination 
process, improving the solar array performances. 
For the UNISAT solar panels, this same process has also 
been used to fix the solar arrays to the aluminium sandwich 
substrate, by using EVA as an adhesive. In this way, the 
final product of the lamination is the flight panel of the 
satellite. 
Solar cell interconnections have been soldered using usual 
commercial electronics soldering equipment and materials, 
and a soldering procedure has been developed, improving 
reliability with respect to the standard procedure of 
terrestrial solar panels. In fact, the operating mechanical 
stress environment of space solar cells soldering during 
launch requires careful evaluation of the soldering reliability 
(par.5.2), which is usually superfluous when dealing with 
solar panels for terrestrial use. 
4. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The i-v curve of one of the UNISAT solar cells is shown in 
fig.9. For UNISAT, particular attention has been paid to the 
accurate evaluation of the solar panel behavior with respect 
to the sun angle, since they are used in an on-board 
experiment as a sensing system of the sun direction [7]. 
Figure 10 shows the solar panel short circuit current’. The 
experimental data (asterisks) are compared with the 
theoretical “cosine law”, represented by the solid line. The 
experimental data as a function of the angle of light 
incidence is different from the ones obtained for the usual 
space rated encapsulation technique, found in [SI. The 
deviation of the experimental data, in function of the angle 
* The graph in fig. 11 differs from the one in [SI, because of the different 
solar cells cover material used. 
!j 
8 L ...... ": _-I___" .... " .............. ~ ....... ..L 
,: 5 , ?  L 5 , E  
<';,:. r: 
Figure 9 - UNISAT solar cell i-v curve, as obtained 
by a AM1.5 solar simulator. 
of light incidence, from the theoretical behavior and from 
the usual space encapsulated Si solar cells seems due to the 
presence of the covering layers mentioned before. They 
present lower transmissivity with respect to the space Si 
solar cells coverslide, as it is evident from the drop of I,, 
even at 30" (or less). Obviously the transmissivity of the 
covering layers, as for other materials [9], decreases with 
increasing light angles, mainly because of the longer path of 
the light in the absorbing media. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
sun angle (degrees) 
Figure 10 - UNISAT solar array short circuit current as 
a function of the sun angle. 
5. SPACE ENVIRONMENT EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 
AND GROUND TESTING 
Environmental effects on solar arrays include degradation 
by space radiation, solar cells cover material light 
transmittance degradation due to W solar radiation, 
interconnect soldering failure due to launch vibration, solar 
panels encapsulation mechanical failure due to launch 
vibration, thermal cycling and atomic oxygen erosion. To 
evaluate these effects, a compromise must be reached 
between failure risks and testing cost and time, taking into 
account the short time from the beginning of the program to 
the launch date. 
By a qualitative costhenefit analysis, performed for the 
selection of the environmental tests necessary to fly the 
system in space with some confidence, it was concluded that 
W, vibration and thermal vacuum ('TV) tests were to be 
performed, while the space radiation and atomic oxygen 
effects, happening on long timescales (years), could be 
evaluated by literature data and numerical simulation, which 
is accurate enough for our purposes. No tests are then 
scheduled to evaluate these effects, also due to the high 
costs involved. 
UV solar cells cover material transmittance decrement 
The solar array encapsulation material!;, namely Tedlar@ and 
EVA, have proven to be stable to the sun W radiation 
reaching: the Earth surface [lo], [ll].  While Tedlar@ is very 
stable to W radiation, EVA decomposes in polyethylene 
and acetic acid. This acid is responsible for the 
encapsulation browning and, to a minor extent, of the metal 
interconnect corrosion. EVA brownirg process have been 
sometimes observed in terrestrial application solar panels. 
Considerable progress has been recently achieved in EVA 
chemisby and in the manufacturing process, leading to very 
W-stablle EVAs, as reported in [ 111. Moreover, protection 
layers are used to limit the total W dose reaching EVA, 
made of W absorbing materials, as Cjmorb 501. 
The UV spectral intensity on the sun light in space, in the 
UV-A and W - B  wavelength region (280-400 nm), can be 
more thm 100 times higher than on the Earth surface, since 
it is not filtered by the Earth atmosphere. Exposure of the 
encapsulation materials to such a high intensity radiation, 
makes the total dose accumulate very fast and the 
detrimental effects, as yellowing of EVA, to appear earlier 
than on the Earth surface. 
High intensity W is not completely filtered out by the 
protection layers and the long term degradation of EVA is a 
potential problem. It has been observed [lo] that this 
phenomlenon is more important in glass covered solar 
panels, while Tedlar@has a low, but finite, permeability 
allowing the acetic-acid to out-gas. This is confiied by the 
evidence that, in a module with EVA browning, the edges 
remain clear. Tedlar@ is also more transparent in the infrared 
band than glass. This makes the solar panels run cooler, thus 
at higher efficiency. 
Data available for terrestrial use of EVA makes us confident 
that it is suitable to survive the total UV dose of space, at 
least for the UNISAT one-year lifetime. However it is not 
known .whether a dose rate effect exists. In particular, the 
production of acetic acid might be so fast that it does not 
completely outgas through Tedlar'. 
W testing for EVA yellowing lhas been performed 
exposing samples of encapsulated panels to a UV lamp 
emitting in the UV-B region (25;' nm). h one year 
equivalent exposure to the sun UV light has been obtained 
with a light intensity roughly ten times higher than the sun 
in the W - B  region, thus accelerating the in orbit dose 
deposition by a factor of ten. Figure 11 shows the average 
spectral transmittance of 10 samples of encapsulated solar 
panels on which the UV exposure test was performed. The 
dashed line is the spectral transmittance at begin of life 
(BOL). The solid line is the spectral transmittance after one 
year equivalent exposure to the sun. Two performance 
degradation effects are evident. First, the transmittance 
decreases in the visible blue and near UV region (350-500 
nm), where the BOL transmittance, almost 90%, goes down 
to an average 75% in the same band, after UV exposure. 
Second, transmittance increases in the UV region, which 
means a loss of UV protection of the solar cells. The total 
power loss due to these effects is evaluated combining 
the spectral distribution of the sun light, the solar cell cover 
material transmittance and the solar cell spectral efficiency. 
After UV exposure, most of the transmittance is lost in the 
visible, where the sun light spectral distribution is 
100 
60 
g 
30 
wavelength (nm) 
Figure 11 - Encapsulated solar panel cover materials 
transmittance after one year equivalent exposure 
to the sun UV radiation. 
solar cell cover transmittance, spectral efficiency, powr output to sun light 
1.41 I 
1.2- 
1 -  
0.8 - 
0.6 - 
0.4 - 
0.2 - 
I 
4.21 I 
300 400 500 600 7M) 800 900 1000 11M) 
wavelength (nm) 
Figure 12 - Solar cell cover transmittance, spectral 
efficiency, power output to sun light. 
maximum. However the solar cell spectral efficiency is 
maximum in the infrared (E) (roughly 800 nm), where the 
transmittance remains close to the BOL values. The spectral 
combination of these effects is shown in fig.12. The total 
power output of the solar cell to the sun light is the integral 
of the curves 1, 2. It is less than 4%, assuming that the solar 
cell spectral efficiency does not vary in time under UV or 
other environmental effects. 
Mechanical test of solar cell interconnections soldering 
The solar cells are electrically connected using terrestrial 
standard solar cell interconnects. These are soldered to the 
solar cells using the soldering Sn-Pb technique employed 
for commercial electronics components. The procedure 
developed improves reliability with respect to the standard 
procedure followed for terrestrial solar panels, as results 
from the mechanical tests performed. A mechanical traction 
test of the soldering reliability was performed, showing that 
the soldering is so reliable that the solar cell breaks before 
the interconnect soldering fails. This does not happen with 
terrestrial soldering standards. The traction test is performed 
by a suitable mechanism, that permits tension to be applied 
to the interconnect by changeable weights, while the 
opposite side of the solar cell is fixed. When the weight 
reaches 0.3 kg, the solar cell breaks, as shown in fig.13. In 
any case the interconnections are made in such a way that 
relative movement between adjacent solar cells is allowed. 
Figure 13 - Traction mechanical test effect on the solar cell. 
Atomic oxygen erosion of the interconnects is not a 
concern, since these are completely encapsulated in Tedlar 
and EVA, and do not come in direct contact with the 
external environment. 
Vibration test 
The solar panel vibration test has been performed in the 
framework of the test required by the launcher for 
qualification. The details of the vibration test are described 
in [12]. As far as the solar panels are concerned, the test was 
intended mainly to assess the survival of the encapsulation 
Space radiation and atomic oxygen efJects 
Space radiation effects on Si solar cells and atomic oxygen 
erosion of Tedlar' are evaluated b:y literature data and 
numerical simulation. Testing in this field is prohibitively 
expensive and generalisation of results not always possible. 
Equivalent 1 MeV electron fluence has been evaluated using 
the SPENVIS EQFRUX software, available in the web site 
[15], of the European Space Agency. For the UNISAT orbit, 
at the maximum of the solar activity, the efficiency lost by 
the solar arrays after one year is estimated about 4.1%. 
The atomic oxygen effect can be evaluated using a 
SPENVrS code as well, available on the same internet site 
[15]. A fast assessment of the atomic oxygen effect can also 
be obtained by the data published in [ 161, where it is found 
that the Tedlar' reactivity with atomic oxygen causes an 
average loss of approximately 15 microndyear in the 
material thickness, for highest solar activity at 600 km, 
which is, the worst UNISAT orbital condition. 
The thickness of Tedlar' used for the UNISAT solar panel 
cover i!j 50 microns, then the lifetime of one year is 
guaranteed. 
6. LAUNCH AND PRELIMINARY IN ORBIT DATA 
Figure 14: UNISAT vibration test: the solar panel 
tested is in the flight codiguration. UNISAT was launched on-board a DNEPR LV on 
September 26, 2000. The launch activities included the fit 
and of the interconnections soldering, with a solar panel 
mounted on the satellite structure, as shown in fig.14. 
Vibration tests include a sinusoidal sweep in the 5-20 Hz 
range at 0.6g level and random test at 6.288 m s  for all of 
the three satellite axes. Shock tests has also been performed, 
following the launcher requirements. No damage was 
detected on the solar panel. In particular, the EVA used as 
an adhesive to encapsulate both the aluminium sandwich 
and the solar cell survived. Moreover the interconnections 
passed the test, since neither electrical or mechanical 
failures were detected on the solar panel. 
Thermal-vacuum and thermal cycling test 
Thermal-vacuum testing of the whole satellite was 
performed, according to the MIL-STD-1540, as reported in 
[13] including four temperature cycles between -20°C and 
61OC. Since the temperature extremes expected for the solar 
panels may exceed this temperature range, a different TV 
test was performed for the solar panels alone, reaching the 
extreme temperatures of -5OOC and 110°C. These values are 
beyond the expected extremes and they have been set in 
order to test the system. Moreover, since the solar panels 
experience a strong thermal cycling environment in orbit, 80 
cycles between the cited extreme temperatures where run, 
slightly exceeding the number of 78.5 cycles recommended 
by [14]. No failures have been detected after this test. 
check and separation test at the Yuzhnoye facilities in 
Dniepropetrovsk (Ukraine) and the satellite integration on 
the launcher at Baikonour Cosmodrome (Kazakhstan). 
Figures 15-17 show different phases of the integration on 
the PayLoadUnit of the DNEPR LV. Fig. 18 shows the 
DNEPR LV trajectory. Fig.19 shows the DNEPR LV and 
the spacecraft separation sequence. 
Figure 15- W S A T  on the DNEPR LV payload interface 
Figure 16 - The five satellites on the launcher 
Figure 17 - Closing the DNEPR launcher PayLoad Unit 
Figure 18 - The DNEPR LV trajectory and the Satellites injection points 
. . I I 1 , , 
' .. . -  
Figure 19 - The DNEPR LV and the spacecrafi separation sequence. 
Solar panels data recorded on-board are voltage, current and 
temperature. Figure 20 shows the measurements of current 
taken on October 11, f&een days after launch. These data 
are an example of the data recorded, showing that the solar 
panels survived launch and they are working correctly. All 
the solar panels are working and performing as expected, 
which means that no soldering failures occurred. To assess 
the UV EVA browning effect in orbit, long time exposure is 
needed. In fifteen days no browning effects are evid.ent. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
The results of ground testing show that terrestrial solar 
panels can be flown with confidence in space and that they 
are suitable for small missions, with lifetimes on the order 
of one to two years. Some improvements are necessary to 
make these systems withstand the launch vibration 
environment. In particular the solar cells interconnects 
soldering procedure requires much more care than the 
terrestrial standard does. The space environment has well 
known detrimental effects typical of the space rated 
photovoltaic systems, such as the solar cells efficiency 
decrease due to space radiation. In addition to these, the sun 
light UV radiation is responsible for the yellowing of the 
solar cells encapsulation materials used in the terrestrial 
UNISAT SOLAR PANELCURRENT (mA) 
11 OCT 2000 
1 20 
100- 
L 
1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
solar panel number 
Figure 20- UNISAT solar panel cmrent in orbit. 
Lateral Panels 1-8; upper panel 9; lower panel 10 
solar panels manufacturing, which causes a system 
efficiency decrease estimated in 4% per year with respect to 
the BOL performances, according to laboratory 
experimental data. This performance decrease is compatible 
with the UNISAT on board power requirements, and it is 
often admissible in small, low cost missions. 
The terrestrial solar panel manufacturing procedure has been 
found cost effective for the UNISAT microsatellite. The 
preliminary analysis of the flight behaviour seems to 
c o n f i i  the ground testing results. In particular all the solar 
panels survived launch and operate as expected in orbit. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of ENEA, 
Centro Ricerche Casaccia , ENEA Centro Ricerche Frascati, 
Oerlikon-Contraves Italia, for giving access to their 
facilities to the Universita di Roma “La Sapienza” 
researchers and students involved in the UNISAT program. 
9. REFERENCES 
[ 13 H. Curtis, Photovoltaics for space applications, in 26‘h 
IEEE photovoltaic specialists conference, September 
1997. 
[2] P. A. Iles, Future of Photovoltaics for Spaced 
Applications, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and 
Application, 8,39 -51, (2000). 
[3] http://www.eurosolare.it/CM102.htm 
[4] F. Santoni, Dimensionamento degli attuatori magnetici 
del microsatellite UNISAT, Quademi di Astrodinamica 
n.4, Rome, 2000, in publication. 
[5] hth3://m.dupont.com/corp/markets/aerospace/produc 
ts/tedlar.html 
[6] www.plasticsusa.condeva.htm1 
[7] F. Santoni, F. Bolotti, Attitude determination of small 
spinning spacecrafi using three axis magnetometer and 
and solar panel data, 2000 E E E  Aerospace 
Conference, Big Sky, Montana, USA, March 18-15, 
2000. 
[8] M. Di Ruscio, A. Agneni, J. H. Day Jr, San Marc0 D/L 
Solar Array System Design and Performance, NASA 
TM 86125,1984. 
[9] C. Arduini, G. Ravelli, A Non Conventional Solar 
Array for the San Mal-co C Satellite, International 
Colloquium on Solar Cells, Toulouse, F rance, 1970. 
[lO]S. B. Levy, Oriented Fluoropolymer Films for 
Photovoltaic Applications, 11” E.C.Photovoltaic Solar 
Energy Conference, 12-16 October 1992, Montreux, 
Switzerland. 
[ l l ]  W. H. Holloy, Jr., S. C. Agro, J.P.Galles, R. S. 
Yorgensen, UV stability and module testing of non- 
browning experimental PV encapsulant, in Conference 
record of the twenty j f i h  IEEE photovoltaic specialists 
conference, 13-17 May 1996, Washington D.C., USA. 
[ 121 F. Graziani, M. Ferrante, G. B. Palmerini, F. Santoni, P. 
Tortora, M. Muscinelli, F. Pirillo, Mechanical Tests for 
Low Cost Microsatellite Programs, to be presented at 
the 5lSt IAF Congress, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, October 
2000. 
[ 131 J. W. Welch, Thermal Testing of Small, Class C Space 
Vehicles: A Case Study, AIAA 2 6 ~  Thermophysics 
Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, June 24-26, 1991. 
[ 141 MIL-STD-l54OC, Test requirements for launch, upper 
stage and space vehicles, 15 Sept. 1994. 
[ 151 http://www.spenvis.oma.be/spenvis/ 
[ 161 L. J. Leger, J. T. Visentine, A Consideration of Atomic 
Oxygen Interactions with the Space Station, J.  
Spacecraft, Vo1.23, No.5, Sept-Oct. 1986. 
