Approximate CFAR Signal Detection in Strong 
Low Rank Non-Gaussian Interference 
lo= 
'Ivars P. Kirsteins and $Muralidhar Rangaswamy 
I 
I : 
'Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Code 8212, Newport, RI 02841 USA 
tARCON Corporation, 260 Bear Hill Road, Waltham, MA USA 
Abstract-We have derived a new generalized likeli- 
hood ratio test for detecting a signal in unknown, 
strong non-Gaussian low rank interference plus white 
Gaussian noise. An important advantage of the new 
test is that it needs essentially no knowledge of the 
non-Gaussian distribution, except that the coherent 
part of the interference is or can be approximated as 
low rank. Using perturbation expansions of the test 
statistic, we establish the connection of the proposed 
GLRT detector to the UMPI test and show that it is 
approximately CFAR. Computer simulations indicate 
that the new detector significantly outperforms tradi- 
tional adaptive methods in non-Gaussian interference 
and is insensitive to  signal and rank mismatch. 
1 10-1 I' , / ,I. 
i 
i 
I 
i - - Gaussian ASD 
i Non-Gaussian ASD 
I 
I 
I 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Non-Gaussian disturbances have been reported in di- 
verse applications such as radar, sonar, digital com- 
munications, and radio astronomy. Signal detection 
in unknown colored noise backgrounds has tradition- 
ally been accomplished using adaptive methods based 
on the Gaussian model, whether or not the noise is 
actually Gaussian distributed. However, recent work 
has shown that the performance of adaptive detec- 
tors based on the Gaussian model can degrade severe- 
ly when operating in correlated non-Gaussian noise 
backgrounds [l]. As an example, we computer simu- 
lated the invariant matched subspace detector (MSD) 
of Scharf et. al. [2] in noise consisting of a strong, 
highly correlated rank-2 compound-Gaussian compo- 
nent embedded in white Gaussian noise. Two versions 
were considered: the optimum MSD that knows the 
true interference subspace and, motivated by the Prin- 
cipal Component Inverse (PCI) method [3], an a d a p  
tive MSD (ASD) that uses an estimate of the interfer- 
ence subspace obtained from signal-free training data. 
For comparison, we also evaluated the ASD using pure 
Figure 1: Experimentally measured ROC curves com- 
paring the performance of the detectors at a signal- 
to-interference ratio of -5 dB. 
Gaussian noise that had the same nominal covariance 
matrix as in the non-Gaussian case. The results for 
all three caes  are plotted in figure 1. As is clearly 
seen, the performance of the ASD degrades substan- 
tially in the non-Gaussian noise, whereas, the a d a p  
tive detector in pure Gaussian noise has performance 
nearly identical to the optimum MSD. The effect of 
non-Gaussian interference on the PCI and subspace 
methods is further discussed in [4]. 
The underlying problem of designing detectors for 
non-Gaussian clutter has been the selection of a suit- 
able multivariate probability density function (pdf) 
family to model the clutter. The difficulty is that 
in most applications there exists no single family of 
multivariate non-Gaussian pdfs that accurately char- 
acterizes the clutter in all scenarios and environments. 
Regardless, even if the non-Gaussian pdf family is 
4-1783 
known, the pdf parameters themselves are usually un- 
known and their estimation from training data can be 
problematic. Another difficulty is the inherent sen- 
sitivity of parametric pdf estimators and detectors 
8 to contaminants in the training data. An alterna- 
tive approach is to use some sort of non-parametric 
method, e.g., such as designing locally optimum de- 
tectors based on non-parametric kernel-based pdf es- 
timators [5]. However, these methods are best suited 
for estimating univariate pdfs and are difficult to ex- 
tend to higher dimensions and require large amounts 
of training data. 
In many applications where the noise appears to 
be non-Gaussian, the noise can actually be modeled as  
consisting of two components: a strong non-Gaussian 
component which gives rise to the overall non-Gaussian 
characteristics, and a residual Gaussian part, made up 
of ambient noise and diffuse clutter. We now propose 
an alternative approach inspired by the methodolo- 
gy used in [6] to detect weak signals in non-Gaussian 
Arctic sea noise. Rather than trying to model the 
overall or individual non-Gaussian characteristics of 
the noise, a simpler approach is to develop compact 
representations to model the non-Gaussian and Gaus- 
sian waveforms. Then, treating their parameters as 
unknown, but deterministic, the detection problem 
can be formulated as a composite hypothesis testing 
problem [7]. This detection problem is often easier to 
solve than the original non-Gaussian problem, say by 
a generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT). 
More precisely we model the received complex- 
valued nz x 1 noise plus signal space-time data s n a p  
shot at time t k  as a superposition 
r ,  
j=1 - 
subspace interference 
zk = c u j ” b j  + 0 + nk v 
signal background white noise 
(1) 
of a strong subspace non-Gaussian interference com- 
ponent and a background white Gaussian noise com- 
ponent n k ,  and possibly a signal component. The 
and ck are the noise and signal expansion coefficients 
respectively and the bj and s are the noise and signal 
basis vectors respectively. The non-Gaussian nature 
of the noise is modeled as arising from the expansion 
Coefficients a; rather than the basis vectors bj. For 
convenience, a rank-1 signal is assumed. 
For the case of known bj, but unknown ajk with 
unknown multivariate pdf and unknown white noise 
variance. it is reasonable to seek a test which is invari- 
ant to these parameters. Ideally, we desire a uniformly 
most powerful invariant (UMPI) test [7] (the UMPI 
test maximizes the probability of detection regardless 
of the parameter values while keeping the false alar- 
m rate le,ss than or equal to some specified value). 
Scharf et. al. [2]  showed that for data of the for- 
m (1) with known interference and signal subspaces, 
the UMPI test, referred to as the makched subspace 
detector (MSD), is (in simplified form) 
where X is some threshold. The matrix PPls is the 
projection. operator onto the part of the signa that re- 
mains after the subspace interference has been nulled 
and P i s  is the projection operator that nulls out 
both the subspace interference and signal component. 
Mathematically, Ppks and P i s  are given by 
PPkS = P;S(SHP;S)-1SHP; (3) 
and 
Pi:? = I - [Bls]([Bls]HIBls])--’[Bls]H (4) 
where B := [bl,b2 ,..., b,_] and S = s. The matrix 
[BIS] is obtained by concatenating B and S column- 
wise) respectively, and 
P i  = I - B(BHB)-lB.H (5) 
Test (!2) is maximally invariant to scalings of the 
data and rotations in the column space of B. Hence it 
is CFAR with respect to the background noise level. 
It is emphasized since ( 2 )  is UMPI, 110 other CFAR 
test can perform better. 
Although test (2) is optimum, it is difficult to re- 
alize because the interference subspace B is seldom 
known beforehand in practice. One approach is to 
use the m.ethodology of the PCI method [3] and es- 
timate the unknown interference subspace from a set 
of signal-free training data. However, as the previous 
and upcoming numerical examples indicate, this a p  
proach may not be optimum when the low rank noise 
is non-Gaussian. 
The approach we take is to treat B,  ujk and the 
white noise variance as unknown, but deterministic, 
and derive the GLRT [SI (the GLRT is obtained by 
replacing the unknown parameters in the likelihood- 
ratio test by their ML estimates). Our motivation is 
that in certain instances, the GLRT can actually be 
UMPI and often leads to a reasonable or good test [2]. 
4-1784 
2. NEW GLRT DETECTOR 3. RELATIONSHIP TO UMPI DETECTOR 
A secondary data set of K signal-free data vectors is 
assumed available for training, stacked column-wise 
into a m x K matrix X .  Detection of the signal is to 
be performed on a primary data set, consisting of a 
single data snapshot, denoted as Y .  Under the null 
hypotheses RO and signal present hypotheses 311, the 
observed data matrices 2 = [XIY]  are modeled as 
310 : 2 = B A  + N (noise only) (6) 
R1 : 2 = BA + [O(Sc] + N (signal + noise) (7) 
where B is a m x T, matrix whose columns generate 
the low rank interference space, A is a T, x K + 1 
matrix whose elements contain the low rank interfer- 
ence expansion coefficients, S is a n x 1 signal replica, 
and c is the signal amplitude. The elements of ma- 
trix N are modeled as IID complex Gaussian random 
variables with zero-mean and variance u2. S is as- 
sumed known, but A, B,  c, and u2 are assumed to be 
unknown, but deterministic. 
A GLRT statistic for the hypothesis testing prob- 
lem of (6) and (7) is then 
(8 )  
which simplifies to the ratio of fitting errors 
The numerator of (9) is the square-error in fitting the 
matrix Z by a rank T,  matrix and can be easily evalu- 
ated using the SVD of 2. Similarly, the denominator 
of (9) is the error in jointly fitting Z by a rank T, 
matrix and the linear part [OlSc]. However, it can not 
be directly evaluated using the SVD of 2. 
To numerically evaluate the denominator, we pro- 
pose a simple scheme that is based on a criss-cross 
regression-like method. The idea is to linearize the 
minimization by holding, say B, constant and then 
minimizing with respect to only A and c. This is a 
standard linear least-squares fitting problem and is 
easy to  solve. The procedure is then repeated, this 
time replacing A with its estimate from the previous 
step and now minimizing with respect to B and the 
c. These steps are repeated until convergence. 
We now establish the connection of the proposed GLRT 
to the UMPI matched subspace detector of Scharf et 
al. [2]  by deriving a simple approximation to the test 
statistic. First, in order to make the comparison, we 
need to extend the single data vector optimum MSD 
( 2 )  to the multiple data vector case of (6) and (7). 
This is simple to do and by substitution (by concate- 
nating all the columns of 2 into one vector), we obtain 
the optimum MSD test statistic for the multiple data 
vector case: 
where z’ = wec(PiZ), S’ = [wec(Pb[OlS]), Ps, = 
S’(S’HS’)-lS’, and Pk = I - Ps,. 
We now use a first-order perturbation expansion 
for the SVD of a data matrix 191 to obtain an approx- 
imation to the GLRT test statistic (9) which can be 
related to the  UMPI MSD (10). In the analysis, both 
Sc and N are regarded as perturbations and weak rel- 
ative to BA. The specific derivation details are shown 
in appendix A. The final approximation for the GLRT 
statistic derived in appendix A is 
where z” = wec(PiZPi) ,  S” = wec(Pi[OIS]Pi), 
PSI, = S”(S”HS”)-lS”, Pk,  = I - ps,,, and P i  = 
I - AH(AAH)- lA.  
The only difference between the UMPI MSD (10) 
and the new GLRT (11) is the post multiplication of 
the data matrix 2 by Pi. Thus to first-order, the new 
GLRT is approximately equivalent to the optimum 
MSD. By inspection, it is seen that (11) is invariant 
with respect to common scalings of the columns of the 
data matrix 2, and thus the background noise level. 
Thus, the new GLRT is at least approximately CFAR 
with respect to the background noise level. 
When the interference is strong and signal weak, 
the loss in performance of the GLRT comes from the 
additional nulling due to the post-multiplication of 
the data matrix 2 by P i .  This loss can be interpret- 
ed as arising from having to estimate the interference 
subspace and is a function of the orthogonality of the 
interference matrix row space to the row space of the 
signal matrix [OISc] 
4-1785 
4. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES 
We now present some numerical examples where a 20 
element array is used to detect a weak monochro- 
matic signal embedded in strong, highly correlated 
rank-2 compound-Gaussian clutter plus white Gaus- 
sian noise. The output from the array elements is 
assumed to be already in complex envelope form, so 
all the data here is complex-valued. 
The interference components were computer syn- 
thesized as follows: The rank-2 clutter component, was 
modeled as the scattering arising from two indepen- 
dent random discrete reflectors excited by a monochro- 
matic signal pulse located f1/2 DFT bin in wavenum- 
ber space symmetrically about broadside. Their am- 
plitude was modeled as a unit variance K-distributed 
random variable with a shape parameter of .l. Choos- 
ing .1 as the shape parameter makes the amplitude 
distribution heavy-tailed. The background noise sam- 
ples were modeled as independent and identically dis- 
tributed zero-mean complex Gaussian random vari- 
ables. 
A total of 24 signal-free data snapshots were used 
for the secondary or training data set. The prima- 
ry data set for detection consisted of a single data 
snapshot. The white noise variance was set to .1 giv- 
ing a interference-to-white-noise ratio of 10 dB. The 
signal direction of arrival was chosen to be broadside 
to the array. The signal power to interference ratio 
(SIR) is defined as 10Zogloa2. 15000 independent tri- 
als with and without a signal were performed, com- 
puter simulating the new GLRT, optimum MSD, AS- 
D, and Kelly’s CFAR GLRT [lo] receivers. For com- 
parison, an analogous pure Gaussian noise case with 
the same nominal covariance matrix was also simu- 
lated. Note that the ASD was implemented by using 
the 24 snapshot signal-free secondary data set to esti- 
mate the rank-2 interference subspace via a SVD and 
plugging the estimated noise subspace into (2). 
Figures 2 and 3 show the empirically measured 
probability of detection (pd) curves obtained for a 
probability of false alarm (pfa) of .005 for the non- 
Gaussian and Gaussian cases respectively for all four 
detectors. From the pd curves in figure 2, it can be 
seen that the new GLRT has nearly the same perfor- 
mance as the optimum MSD and significantly outper- 
forms the ASD and Kelly’s GLRT when the interfer- 
ence is compound-Gaussian. However, it is interesting 
to observe that for the pure Gaussian case (figure 3), 
both the new GLRT and the ASD perform almost as 
well as the optimum MSD. 
4.1. Examination of Detector Sensitivities and 
Invariance 
We now examine by computer simula,tion the sensi- 
tivity of the new GLRT detector to signal and rank 
mismatch and also the invariance of the distribution 
of the test statistic under the null h;ypotheses with 
respect to the interference distribution. 
4.1 .l. Sensitivity to Signal Masmatch 
The same compound-Gaussian interference example 
was used i t s  before with S I R  = -5dB. We comput- 
er simulated three cases: no signal mismatch and the 
signal replica mismatched in spatial frequency by .2 
and .3 DFT bins. 2000 independent computer simu- 
lation trials were performed applying the new GLRT, 
optimum IVISD, ASD, Kelly’s CFAR GLRT detector 
to detect at signal arriving at broadside relative to ar- 
ray orientation. Note that in all the albove examples, 
the detectors were implemented using the mismatched 
signal replica. The receiver operating characteristic 
curves (ROC) were then measured using the 2000 in- 
dependent test statistic evaluations. The ROC curves 
are plotted in figures 4a-c. From the FLOC curves, we 
see that the probability of detection of the new GLRT 
detector is only slightly degraded in i,hese examples 
and appears to be robust against signal mismatch. In 
comparisoii, the performance of ASD degrades signif- 
icant ly. 
4.1.2. Sensitivity to Rank Masmatch 
Another important issue is the sensitivity of the de- 
tector to subspace model order errors. The detec- 
tor requires knowledge of the subspace model order 
of the interference or equivalently, the rank of the in- 
terference covariance matrix. Since this information 
is usually not available ahead of time, it must be es- 
timated from the data. If the interference is strong, 
then the rank can be estimated by counting the num- 
ber of 1arg;e singular values that the secondary data 
matrix X has. In our example, the eigenvalues of the 
nominal interference covariance matrix are 20.1, 20.1, 
.l, . . . , .1 and rank is easily determined by looking 
for the paint where the eigenvalues fall off rapidly. 
Here the rank or subspace order is 2. However, there 
may also be situations where the eigenvalues can not 
be clearly partitioned into a set of principal eigenval- 
ues. Thus, in practical implementations, the assumed 
rank may be erroneous and therefore it is important 
to examine the sensitivity of the detector to rank er- 
4-1786 
Tors. Using the same interference example as before, 
we evaluated the new GLRT performance on the ba- 
sis of ROC curves measured from 2000 simulations for 
ranks varied between 1-5 and plotted them in figure 
4. When the rank was underdetermined, that is, set 
to 1, the detector probability of detection was greatly 
reduced. This is to be expected since we are allowing 
strong coherent interference to be treated as white 
noise. When rank was overdetermined between 3-5, 
the detector performance gradually degraded as rank 
was increased. Hence we conclude that the new GLRT 
is insensitive to rank as long it is overdetermined. 
4.2.3. Invariance to  Noise Distribution 
One last issue to be discussed is the degree to which 
the new GLRT statistic distribution under the null 
hypotheses is affected by the distribution of the low 
rank interference component. The perturbation anal- 
ysis approximation (11) suggests that the GLRT is 
CFAR to at least first-order. However, the analysis 
ignores any higher order terms. To obtain insight, 
we computer simulated the new GLRT using the pre- 
vious non-Gaussian and Gaussian example for 20000 
independent trials for the null hypotheses only. We 
then calculated the empirical cumulative distribution 
function of the test statistic and used it to determine 
the threshold to achieve a given pfa. Figure 6 shows 
the pfa plotted as a function of threshold for both 
the non-Gaussian and Gaussian cases. As can be seen 
from figure 6, the pfas are very close. The pfas only 
slightly deviate as the threshold increases, implying 
that the new GLRT is approximately invariant to the 
distribution of the low rank interference component. 
, I  /"- - -  
adaptive msd 
kelly's gltl I 
Figure 2: Experimentally measured probability of de- 
tection in non-Gaussian interference at a pfa of .005 
based on 15000 trials. 
adaptive msd 
kelly's gltl 
0 8  
0 7  
5. CONCLUSION 
We have derived a new GLRT detector and shown 
its relationship to  the UMPI MSD. Our perturba- 
tion analysis and numerical examples show that the 
new GLRT is likely to be much more robust in low 
rank non-Gaussian clutter than ad hoc or convention- 
al adaptive detectors. Finally, further work needs to 
done in analyzing the detectors performance in re- 
gards to signal and rank mismatch and higher-order 
effects due to the non-Gaussianity of the interference. 
Figure 3: Experimentally measured probability of de- 
tection in Gaussian interference at a pfa of .005 based 
on 15000 trials. 
4-1787 
100 , . . ..... ~ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
optimum 
new glrt 
adaptive msd 
kelly's gltl 
t 
4a No signal mismatch. 
adaptive msd 
kelly's glrt 
104 --+--- 
104 10" 1 0" 10. 1 on 
Probsbili of fake alarm 
4b) Signal mismatch = .2 DFT bin. 
adaptive msd 
kelly's glrt 
IO= 104 10.1 100 
1 0' 
10' 
Robabilrm of fake alarm 
4c) Signal mismatch = .3 DFT bin. 
Figure 4: Experimentally measured ROC curves with and without signal mismatch.. 
4-1788 
- . , . -. .... -- - . . 
’ . . . . - 
rank = 5 
,/ 
J 
I *rank = 1 
,-, 
rank = 1 
rank = 2 (true rank) 
rank = 3 
rank = 4 
rank = 5 
10- 10.’ lo* lo-‘ 
Probability 01 false dam 
Figure 5: Experimentally measured ROC curves for 
the new GLRT detector when different ranks are as- 
sumed for the subspace interference component. 
APPENDIX A: PERTURBATION ANALY- 
SIS 
We start with the numerator of (9). Recall that the 
numerator is the square-error in fitting a rank r,  ma- 
trix to 2. Letting 2 = AB + N ,  where N is some 
perturbation and using the first-order subspace per- 
turbation expansion derived in [9] for the error in a p  
proximating a matrix by a matrix of lower rank, we 
obtain 
min 112 - BAll$ M n i m  = IIPiZPi11$ 
B,A 
(12) 
where Pi  = I - AH(AAH)-lA. 
We now approximate the denominator. If the de- 
nominator of (9) is solved with respect to only B1 
and AI (holding c fixed), it is equivalent to finding 
the rank r, approximation to 2 - [OlSc]. Treating 
[OlSc] as a perturbation (weak signal and noise case) 
initially and applying (12), we can approximate the 
denominator as 
M min l l P i Z P i  - cP,’[OIS]Pi11$ (13) 
The minimization of (13) is a standard linear least- 
squares problem and the residual fitting error is 
h 
den M I I P & , Z ” ~ ~ $  (14) 
where z” = vec(PiZPi) ,  Pk, = I - Pst,, Ps,, = 
S”(S”HS”)-lS”, and S” = [wec(P~[OIS]Pjf)]. The 
10’ 
104 
I 
0.W5 0 01 0.015 0.02 0.025 
Ihre$mlbl 
Figure 6: Experimentally measured probability of 
false alarm plotted as a function of threshold for both 
the Gaussian and non-Gaussian cases. 
operator vet(.) takes a matrix and converts it to a 
vector representation by stacking the columns. Final- 
ly, replacing the exact quantities in  (9) by their above 
approximations (12) and (14), and after some simpli- 
fication, we obtain 
REFERENCES 
[I] M. Rangaswamy, and J.H. Michels, “A paramet- 
ric detection algorithm for space-time processing 
in non-Gaussian clutter,” Signal Processing, 1999 
(to appear). 
[2] L.L. Scharf and B. Friedlander,“Matched sub- 
space detectors,” IEEE Trans. vol. 42, no. 8, 
pp.2146-2156, Aug. 1994. 
[3] I.P. Kirsteins and D.W. Tufts, “Adaptive detec- 
tion using low rank approximation to a data ma- 
trix,” IEEE Trans. AES, 30(1):55-67, Jan. 1994. 
[4] M. Rangaswamy, B.E. Freburger, I.P. Kirstein- 
s, and D.W. Tufts “Signal Detection in Strong 
Low Rank Compound-Gaussian Interference,” in 
Proc. of the IEEE SAM2000 workshop, Boston, 
MA, March 2000. 
[5] S.M. Zabin and G.A. Wright, “Nonparametric 
density estimation and detection in impulsive in- 
terference channels - part 11: Detectors,” IEEE 
4-1789 
Trans. on Comm. Theory, vol. 42, no. 21314, pp. 
1698-1711, Feb./March/April 1994. 
[GI I.P. Kirsteins and D.W. Tufts, Methods of 
computer-aided analysis of non-Gaussian noise 
and application to robust adaptive detection: 
Part 2, DTIC report ADA148879, September 
1984. 
[7] T.S. Ferguson, Mathematical Statistics: A Deci- 
sion. Theoretic Approach, Academic Press, New 
York, 1967. 
[8] H.L. Van Trees, Detection, Estimation, and Mod- 
ulation Theory, John Wiley and Sons, 1968. 
[9] R.J. Vaccaro, “A second order perturbation ex- 
pansion for the SVD,” SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Ap- 
pl., 15(2):661-671, April 1994. 
[lo] E. J. Kelly, “An Adaptive Detection Algorithm,” 
IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Sys., 
Vol. AES-23, No. 4, pp. 115-127, Nov. 1986. 
4-1790 
