Writing A Convincing Cost Benefit Analysis to 
Substantiate Autonomic Logistics 
Bob Byer 
Consultant 
206 Whiteoaks Circle 
Bluffion, SC 29910 
rbyer@hargray.com 
Andy Hess 
Lead for Diagnostics and Prognostics 
Propulsion and Power Engineering Dept. 
NAWCAD 
Patuxent River, MD 20670 
hessa.i~,navair.na~..mil 
Leo Fila 
Aerospace Engineer I Ocean Engineer 
CENTRA Technology 
Arlington, VA 22203 
filal@,centrava.com 
Abstract-Autonomic Logistics, the use of computer and 
information technology to automate logistics, is enabled 
by two computer- based technologies, Prognostics and 
Health Management (PHM) and Distributed Information 
Systems (DIS). US military and commercial aviation 
interests are moving forward in development of these 
technologies with the objective of greatly improving the 
efficiency of the support system while making significant 
reductions in operating and support costs. Developments 
to date and associated cost and benefit analysis indicate 
the potential for significant achievement in reaching the 
goals of the program. This paper will discuss how 
autonomic logistics, prognostic health management and a 
supportive distributed information system are integrated 
to provide a great leap forward in the effectiveness of 
aircraft support systems and how cost benefit analyses can 
be used to rationalize the use of these technologies. It 
will also identify problems encountered and lessons 
learned in doing cost benefit analyses for an advanced 
military fighter aircraft system. 
ACRONYMS 
AL - Autonomic Logistics 
CBA - Cost Benefit Analysis 
DARPA - Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
DIS - Distributed Information System 
FMECA - Failure Mode Engineering Criticality Analysis 
LCOM - Logistics Composite Model 
MFHBME - Mean Flight Hours Between Maintenance 
MFHBMR - Mean Flight Hours Between Maintenance 
MTTR - Mean Time To Repair 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
Events 
Removals 
PHM - Prognostics and Health Management 
R&M - Reliability and Maintainability 
WUC - Work Unit Code 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Technology Descriptions 
Prognostics And Health Management 
Distributed Information System 
2. REQUIREMENTS 
Requirements 
Requirements 
3. OVERVIEW OF THE SYSTEM 
Prognostics And Health Management 
Autonomic Logistics 
Distributed Information System 
4. RATIONALIZING AL WITH A COST BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS 
Overview of an Approach to CBA 
Steps in the Process of CBA 
5 .  A DISCUSSION OF PROBLEMS AND LESSONS 
LEARNED IN COST BENEFIT EVALUATIONS OF AL 
ON A NEW FIGHTER AIRCRAFT 
6. CONCLUSION 
7. R E E E N C E S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Three interrelated computer and information system based 
technologies are converging to introduce new levels of 
productivity and economy to the operation and support of 
complex aircraft systems. These include computerized 
logistics support systems, called autonomic logistics, 
6-3095 
prognostic health management and distributed 
information systems. The latter two are enablers of 
autonomic logistics. This paper will describe how these 
systems work together to bring vast productivity 
improvement and reduced operating costs for a tactical 
fighter aircraft. While cost benefit analysis has been used 
to rationalize the expense of developing these systems, 
the process of providing such analyses is not without 
problems. This paper will outline an approach to cost 
benefit analysis for a developmental aircraft and 
enumerate some of those problems and describe how they 
can be handled. 
Technology Descriptions 
A brief description of the relevant technologies and their 
integration follows. We begin with a description of 
requirements. This is followed by an overview of the 
system comprised of Autonomic Logistics (AL) and the 
enabling Prognostic Health Management (PHM) and 
Distributed Information Systems (DIS). 
2. REQUIREMENTS 
Autonomic Logistics Requirements 
Autonomic Logistics (AL) is simply the application of 
automation to locating and ordering repair parts so that 
they are available when needed. The problem becomes 
complex, however, when it recognized the military or 
commercial transport might be anywhere on the globe and 
their primary objectives are aircraft readiness to fly a 
mission or depart on schedule to keep customers happy. 
Keeping support costs low also involves storing no more 
parts at remote locations than are absolutely necessary to 
sustain operations. It also means a number of other 
things; only the right parts should be ordered and a 
minimum of human intervention and concomitant delay 
can be tolerated, and ordered parts must be dispatched to 
the user quickly by the fastest means available. So far no 
great problem is encountered. Software for inventory 
management has been around for a long time and adapted 
to many situations. For example, Boeing routinely does 
parts ordering and delivery around the world in support of 
its 777 customers. Boeing claims it can deliver necessary 
parts anywhere in the world within twenty- four hours of 
receipt of the order. 
Prognostic Health Management Requirements 
Prognostic Health Management (PHM) is the application 
of technology to predicting parts failures and isolating 
failed parts. This problem is complicated, particularly in 
the military situation, because such aircraft are typically 
loaded with complex electronic systems and have 
complex mechanical systems designed to accommodate 
severe environmental strains encountered in performing 
missions. A common difficulty in this situation is the 
proper identification of a failed component. Indeed, 
removal of the wrong part, even in aircraft with built-in 
test capabilities, happens on an all to frequent basis. To 
make matters worse, the maintainers in the process of 
removing a component all too often damage covers and 
doors made of composite materials and bend pins on 
connectors when installing replacement parts. The 
maintainers are therefore part contributors to the problem. 
To minimize these occurrences, a PHM system must be 
designed to support fault detection and isolation that will 
ensure that only failed or failing parts are removed. 
The PHM system, if it is to make a real contribution in 
improving the efficiency of the support system and 
reducing costs, has still another requirement imposed on 
it’s design. It must anticipate a part failure in time to 
remove it before it becomes a problem. Since a 
replacement component sometimes have to be ordered 
from remote locations, or the OEM’s themselves, as much 
time as possible is required to obtain the replacement part 
to minimize downtime. 
In the military application, the part that is expected to fail 
is identified in flight. The information is sent to the 
aircraft’s base of operations where the Autonomic 
Logistics system checks local parts inventory for 
replacement part availability. If not available, a new part 
is automatically ordered, most times even before the 
aircraft returns to base. The PHM system records the 
anticipated and actual part failures and also data that 
describes the environment the aircraft is experiencing at 
the time of the predicted or actual failure: altitude, 
attitude, g loading, speed, ambient temperature and so on. 
These data, later downloaded to the ground based 
distributed information system, will be available for 
analysts and maintainers to help in determination of why 
a part failed or was predicted to fail. 
The PHM system has one other functional requirement. 
When a replacement part has been installed, it must check 
out the system to ensure the corrective action has solved 
the problem. 
Distributed Information System Requirements 
The third element of the Autonomic Logistic, PHM 
system is the Distributed Information System (DIS). Like 
the maintenance data systems, which have been around 
for years, the information system is used to collect 
maintenance data as it happens. Unlike earlier systems, 
however, the newer system is called upon to do much 
more. For example, it works with the maintainers hand- 
held computer to automatically record the identity of parts 
removed, parts added, and time spent on maintenance 
tasks. It also wirelessly receives data from the aircraft 
about predicted and actual component failures as well as 
the data that describes the aircraft’s environment at the 
time of the predicted or actual failure. These data are 
analyzed, along with similar data from the entire fleet, to 
assist in determining the cause of the various failures. 
These data will also be available to all interested parties to 
support component repairs and redesign of components 
6-3096 
exhibiting chronic problems. Thus analysts will have 
fleet data available to support the ongoing effort to 
improve the reliability and maintainability of the airplane. 
An additional function of the distributed information 
systems is to provide digitized maintenance manuals and 
maintenance training materials, accessible at the 
maintainers’ personal computer, whenever needed. 
It is projected Autonomic Logistics and the distributed 
information systems, through automation enabled by 
PHM, will be able to replace much of the bureaucratic 
infrastructure that has evolved over years in the military 
weapons systems logistic and supply systems. 
3. OVERVIEW OF THE SYSTEM 
The description begins with PHM because it is the major 
enabler of the Autonomic Logistic system and the major 
initiator of the support activity. 
Prognostics Health Management 
In the military fighter airplane application, PHM consists 
of area managers, each of which continually monitors a 
portion of the aircraft. Thus we have Area Managers for 
propulsion, structures, utilities & subsystems, vehicle 
management system, and mission systems. Each Area 
Manager embodies reasoners containing artificial 
intelligence and is able to receive signals, by wire or 
radio, from an optimized number of specialized sensors 
distributed throughout the domain of the Area Manager. 
The reasoners, constructed with software, are created 
using such techniques as rule based reasoning, model and 
case based reasoning, neural networks, and fuzzy logic. 
Having its own computing capability, the Area Manager 
automatically analyzes the signals from the sensors to 
determine whether the devices or components being 
monitored are behaving properly, or are exhibiting 
characteristics which lead to a prediction of failure. The 
reasoners are constructed to minimize ambiguities. All of 
the Area Managers provide their output to a single 
processor (Air Vehicle Manager) for further elimination 
of ambiguities and to filter out the information that will be 
provided to the pilot from the information that will be sent 
to the ground for immediate processing. It is important to 
note that the data fusion that takes place in the Air 
Vehicle Manager eliminates the ambiguity of the sensor. 
No longer will alarms be triggered based upon the input 
of a single sensor. All sensor data will be validated in the 
Area Managers and Air Vehicle Manager with other 
sensor data or aircraft parameters in order to verify the 
fault. Data filtering may be accomplished with new 
technology employing coherence analysis that detects 
component performance deviations from normal. Other 
non-critical information will be digitally stored for 
downloading upon landing. Part of what makes this 
Autonomic Logistics 
System functioning begins with the burst of information, 
created by the on-board PHM system, advising the ground 
crews of equipment failure or expected failure at some 
predicted additional flying hours. This information 
supports the immediate repair action by locating the 
necessary repair parts and ordering them from remote 
stocks if not locally available. Autonomic Logistics 
encompasses the automation of parts inventory 
management and parts ordering on a global scale, all done 
automatically unless told otherwise by the system’s 
managers. It is also, working with the DIS, an intelligent 
global network capable of learning from experience. 
Autonomic Logistics is “a knowledge based logistic 
system that identifies and communicates maintenance 
requirements, supply chain management issues, parts 
reliability, and safety and training information in order to 
support and enhance mission execution.” 
Another aspect of PHM is the Off-Board component. The 
Off-Board PHM system acts as a liaison between the On- 
board component and the Distributed Information System 
(DIS). Off board PHM is responsible for isolating those 
faults that were not previously isolated onboard the air 
vehicle. It is also responsible for performing prognostic 
calculations and remaining useful life calculations of 
components. This processed information, along with the 
rest of the information taken ftom the air vehicle is then 
passed along to the DIS to inform the supply chain what it 
has to do to keep the airplane operationally effective. 
Distributed Information System 
The distributed information system is the “backbone of 
Autonomic Logistics”. It is the real time information 
conduit to enable maintenance, training, supply, mission 
planning, and even component or aircraft design 
improvements over the life cycle of the aircraft. The DIS 
will provide data collection and analysis processes to 
account for component trends, maintenance procedure 
refinement, system and subsystem trends and assessments 
of the quality of maintenance training on system 
performance. It will also provide the communications 
facility to support Autonomic Logistics. What separates 
the DIS from legacy systems is the DIS will download 
pertinent maintenance data real time while in flight, and 
automatically update the data warehouse with flight and 
component information after every sortie. 
4. RATIONALIZING AL WITH A COST BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS 
Overview of An Approach to Cost Benefit Analysis 
A classical approach to cost benefit analysis would 
include definition of a desired level of system 
effectiveness, determination of altemative approaches to 
obtaining that level of effectiveness and then comparison 
of costs for each altemative approach. The alternative, 
6-3097 
which does the job at least cost, might be deemed most 
cost effective. Such an approach offers limited 
opportunity in the case of rationalizing PHM on a new 
and complex military aircraft although it has been used to 
a limited extent by an aircraft contractor in examining 
alternatives for different types of sensors within a 
subsystem area. The more practical approach is to define 
a PHM system, which meets the requirements and to then 
estimate the likely costs for design, development and test 
and the recurring costs of installing and maintaining it on 
an operational aircraft. The product of the analysis is 
then extrapolated to provide the annual dollar value of 
costs and benefits for the entire fleet of aircraft and 
estimated over a multi-year period of operations. With 
these estimates of costs and benefits, the ratio of benefits 
to costs can be determined. More importantly, the annual 
dollars streams of costs and benefits can be discounted 
and a net present value determined. System designers 
will be happy with high benefit cost ratios and large 
positive net present values. The latter measure 
particularly indicates the value of making the investment 
because it shows the return on invested dollars 
considering the time value of money. 
PHM has the capability of providing benefits, which in 
the military situation, are not denominated in terms of 
dollars. These include reductions in the rate of incidence 
of major accidents, improvement in the capability to turn 
an aircraft around so that it is ready to fly the next mission 
and reduction in the footprint. Footprint is a measure of 
the weight and space required, in terms of cargo airplane 
loads, to move an entire squadron of aircraft from one 
base of operations to another. The reason a dollar value is 
not placed on the value of accidents avoided is that 
attrition losses are already accounted for when managers 
make budgets for future aircraft procurements. 
Steps in the Process of Cost Beneft Analysis 
Prognostics and Health Management (PHM) is the 
enabler at the heart of Autonomic Logistics and is totally 
in the control of the managers and designers of the 
aircraft. Thus they can influence the design of PHM and 
are responsible for the concomitant economics. 
Autonomic Logistics and to a lesser extent, the 
Distributed Information System, are more global in their 
scope and management of large portions of their design 
and implementation falls to others outside of the control 
of the aircraft development project managers. The cost 
and benefit analysis of these latter two areas thereby adds 
to the complexity of cost and benefit analysis. To simplify 
the discussion, the cost and benefit analysis is described 
herein only for PHM. 
The steps in the process to determine the costs and 
benefits of PHM are described below. 
1- Define A Baseline System without PHM and the 
Aircraft System with PHM 
The initial step is to define a baseline aircraft, which does 
not have the design features, added by PHM. Thus it 
differs from an aircraft with PHM only to the extent that 
the latter aircraft has the unique sensors, wiring and 
computing hardware and software that is added 
specifically to provide PHM functionality. The objective 
is to establish the differences in selected measures of 
PHM effectiveness between aircraft, whose only 
difference is the functionality added by PHM. 
2- Develop Reliability and Maintainability Predictions for 
the Components of the Aircraft 
The baseline aircraft and the aircraft with added PHM are 
further defined by the reliability and maintainability 
characteristics of their component parts. Predictions for 
the characteristics: Mean Flight Hours Between 
Maintenance Events (MFHBME), Mean Flight Hours 
Between Maintenance Removals (MFHBMR), and Mean 
Time To Repair (MTTR) are provided by the aircraft 
reliability engineers. The basic reliability of the aircraft’s 
component parts, with or without PHM, is unchanged. We 
know, however, that legacy aircraft experience high rates 
of removals of components diagnosed as faulty which 
upon further testing are found to be OK. Since an 
effective PHM system will provide accurate diagnosis, the 
rate of unnecessary removals will decline with PHM. The 
major task in the cost and benefit analysis is to determine 
how PHM will impact the supportability of the 
components. This is discussed further below. 
3- Define the Meawres of PHM Effectiveness 
The next step in the process is to define the measures of 
effectiveness we will use to assess whether PJ3M is, or is 
not, doing the job. 
The table below shows some major goals that PHM aims 
to accomplish and how it will impact the particular 
measures of effectiveness, which are defined therein. For 
each one of the indicated benefit measures, the task 
becomes one of determining the difference between the 
aircraft with and without PHM. Estimated costs should 
include the cost of consumables on a flying hour basis, 
and the cost of manpower, training and support equipment 
on a squadron basis. 
4 
6-3098 
Benefit Measures 
manpower 
Reduction in the amount of 
Attributes of the PHM System Which 
Will Impact the Benefit Measures 
Accurate diagnosis of problems by PHM system will reduce the number of 
Reduction in the rates of 
major accidents 
Improvement in the ability 
to turn an aircraft returning 
from a mission so that it is 
ready for another mission 
Reduction in Footprint 
removals of par ts  where no trouble is found in ground testing. 
PHM provides several ways in which direct maintenance manpower will be 
reduced, including: 
PHM provides a capability to predict failures in terms of remaining flying 
hours thereby providing the opportunity to remove the component before it 
can contribute to an accident. 
PHM accurately identifies failed components so they can be quickly 
replaced. 
Fewer people and less support equipment result in fewer cargo aircraft loads 
to move a militarv sauadron to a new base of oaerations. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Fewer removals of parts where no trouble is found with ground testing. 
Less time will be spent on ground inspections because PHM will 
determine whether a problem exists. 
Less time will be spent diagnosing and isolating failure because PHM 
will perform these functions. 
Less time will be spent checking out repair actions because PHM will do 
the checkout when the repair action is complete. 
Since there will be fewer repair actions because of the reduction 
incidents where no trouble is found, there will also be less damage 
inadvertently done by maintainers during removal and replacement 
operations. 
Reduced need for maintainers to set up and use ground test equipment 
because PHM will provide on-board diagnostics, fault isolation and 
checkout, and 
Since PHM will determine the condition of a component, parts 
previously removed on a time interval basis, some components can 
remain on the aircraft until their condition warrants removal. 
These all contribute to reduced MTTRs and ultimately a reduction in the 
number of maintainers required supporting the aircraft. 
With significant reductions in direct manpower, the numbers of indirect 
support staff can also be reduced. 
Since PHM will provide an on-board diagnosis, fault isolation and checkout, 
there is a reduced need for ground support equipment. 
Less direct maintenance manpower means fewer people have to be trained. 
Lighter work loads in some specialty areas provides an opportunity to cross 
train people in more occupational specialties providing more flexibility in 
assignment of maintenance crews and further reducing the numbers of 
0 
0 
people to be trained. 
hour costs or benefits, per aircraft costs or benefits, or per 
squadron costs or benefits. The results of analysis 
provided in these terms are then readily extrapolated to a 
year by year phase-in and phase-out of operational aircraft 
and squadrons using the planned flying hour program 
specified by the user of the aircraft. The end result is year 
by year stream of predicted dollar benefits and offsetting 
costs. These results are then readily assembled into 
4- Metrics Associated with the Measures of Effectiveness 
While the preceding table identifies benefit measures in a 
general way, the specific analysis in each PHM impact 
area must develop benefit and cost estimates in terms that 
are useful to the construct of the cost benefit analysis. 
The results of the analysis must be in terms of per flying 
5 
6-3099 
benefit cost ratios and discounted to derive net present 
values. An acceptable discount factor for the latter 
calculation is available from the web pages maintained by 
the Air Force, Navy and others. 
Since the value of a dollar varies from year to year 
because of inflation, dollar estimates for costs and 
benefits must all be adjusted to reflect a common year that 
becomes a part of the ground rules and assumptions 
underlying the analysis. Other items to be included in the 
ground rules and assumptions are the: aircraft and 
squadron phase-in phase-out schedules mentioned above, 
annual salary and benefit cost of people, training cost 
factors, training pipeline attrition factors, planned annual 
flying hour program, and similar items. 
5- Estimating the Impact of PHM on Reducing the Cost of 
Consumables 
In order to do this, the cost of repair parts on the new 
aircraft for both the baseline and the aircraft with PHM 
need to be determined. Doing so requires the use of 
actual cost data of equivalent items on legacy aircraft. 
The historical cost data exists in the military maintenance 
databases. These databases record all maintenance actions 
on the entire fleet over the life of the aircraft and therefore 
are very large. They are also far from perfect containing 
inaccuracies and anomalies, which need to be addressed. 
The analyst, working with these military maintenance 
databases, therefore has a large task. He or she can 
ultimately, however, derive average historical repair part 
costs, adjusted for inflation to a constant dollar estimate, 
representing the costs to repair or replace specific 
components of the legacy aircraft at some level of detail. 
The military identifies the components of their aircraft by 
work unit codes (WUC). This is the system that attempts 
to standardize component identifications so that 
equivalent components of each different type, model, and 
series of aircraft in the inventory are identified by a 
common designator. It works to some degree, but the 
WUC structure requires care in the task of imputing 
experience on the legacy aircraft to a new aircraft 
currently in the design stage, as each new aircraft is 
unique when compared to its predecessors. 
The process of relating work unit codes on the legacy 
aircraft to equivalent or near equivalent work unit codes 
on the new aircraft is called mapping and requires 
knowledge of both aircraft and some judgment. While 
sometimes tedious, it is nevertheless doable. Once 
completed, the historical cost data from the legacy aircraft 
can be inserted into the databases of reliability and 
maintainability (R&M) parameters organized for the new 
aircraft. The appropriate R&M parameters (MFHBME 
and MFHBR) for the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) are then 
added and a JSF cost estimate and maintenance database 
emerges. The data are then adjusted based on the expected 
new aircraft flying hour programs to develop the annual 
predicted cost of repair or replacement components. The 
R&M factors for the new aircraft with PHM must be 
adjusted based on some analysis, or judgments, to reflect 
PHM’s capability to reduce the number of needless 
removals of components because PHM has greatly 
improved the accuracy of isolating only parts that have 
failed. Having done so, a difference in the cost of repair 
components between the baseline aircraft and aircraft 
with PHM emerges. The same process is used to derive 
estimates for the cost of depot repairs for the new aircraft. 
6- Estimating the Impact of PHM on Reducing 
Maintenance Manpower Costs 
As indicated in the table above, there are numerous ways 
in which time spent by maintainers is impacted by PHM. 
Collectively these result in less time spent inspecting 
aircraft and less time in making repairs. The latter results 
in smaller mean times to repair (MTTRs). The service’s 
maintenance databases provide data hom which MTTRs 
can be derived for legacy aircraft. We can assume, as a 
starting point, that the baseline aircraft will have 
equivalent MTTRs until modified to reflect the 
technology differences of the new fighter and the 
reductions in MTTRs which will accrue because PHM 
reduced the maintainer’s workload. The estimated 
reductions in MTTRs possible because of PHM must be 
made based on some analysis of how much time has 
historically been involved in the various activities cited in 
the table. Regrettably the Service databases do not have 
the level of detail of how maintainers spent their time to 
permit this analysis. Supplemental field studies must be 
conducted to find out in greater detail how maintainers 
spent their time. Thus, they could develop data with 
which to modify legacy data to reflect the benefit that will 
be obtained from instituting PHM and computer 
technology onboard for the purpose of doing diagnostic, 
fault isolation, and checkout of repairs. 
Since staff loading to affect maintenance of military 
aircraft is dependent on a number of interrelated factors, 
the determination of how many people are required to 
maintain a squadron of aircraft is best handled with a 
simulation model. To this end the Department of Defense 
has developed the Logistics Composite Model (LCOM) 
which can be applied to develop answers to direct 
maintenance staffing as well as other important questions. 
LCOM simulates airbase logistics support operations. The 
model also measures sortie generation capability, and 
aircraft supportability. LCOM considers the interactions 
of all support resources (i.e., manpower, spares, support 
equipment, facilities) and is useful for trade studies and 
sensitivities of aircraft logistics performance. The model 
is also useful for manpower determination planning and 
tradeoffs concerning supportability. Input data contains 
failure rates, resources, tasks, aircraft operations, 
maintenance policies, mission types, priorities, and 
tradeoff times. LCOM provides the best analytical process 
for modeling the preflight and post flight logistics tasks 
associated with aircraft missions. 
6 
6-3100 
With the help of LCOM total squadron direct manpower 
requirements can be developed. If it is found that 
significant direct staff reductions are possible, the analysis 
of PHM benefits must then focus on the subject of 
reducing indirect manpower required in the user 
squadrons. No tools are available to support this task. 
One must start with the staffing patterns of legacy 
squadrons, examine what people do and whether those 
positions are necessary when there are significant 
reductions in the numbers of direct maintainers. 
Benefit calculations are based on the direct and indirect 
staffing requirements both with and without PHM. 
Numbers of people are multiplied by readily available 
annual costs for salaries and benefits of maintainers and 
the annual cost savings determined for a squadron. 
7- Estimating the Impact of PHM on Training Costs 
If there are fewer maintenance people required because of 
PHM, fewer people will have to be trained for those 
positions. The military keeps attrition factors and 
consequently has developed factors that define the 
numbers of people which must be in the training pipeline 
to support maintenance organizations of a given size. It 
also has data on the costs to train a person to a given level 
of skill in various occupational specialties. Having 
established the numbers of people required to maintain a 
squadron of the tactical fighter equipped both with and 
without PHM, the difference in the annual costs of 
training people is readily determined. 
8- Estimating the Impact of PHM on the Cost of Support 
Equipment 
PHM will minimize the need for ground support 
equipment that was used in a legacy aircraft squadron to 
support the diagnostics and fault isolation h c t i o n  
because this work will be done by on-board systems. To 
determine the impact of PHM, it is necessary to start with 
the list of support equipment for the legacy aircraft and to 
edit that list to eliminate the items that are no longer 
required. The value of the individual pieces of the 
eliminated equipment, in terms of the base year must be 
developed in some way to determine the squadron 
savings. 
9- Estimating the Non Recurring and Recurring Costs of 
Providing PHM 
Engineering estimates are required for the non-recurring 
engineering associated with the design and testing of new 
PHM applications. So too must the engineers estimate the 
cost of the changes to the on-board computing capabilities 
of the aircraft and the addition of unique sensors that will 
be added to provide PHM functionality. A perhaps, larger 
cost is associated with continuing software maintenance 
on aircraft that become operational. PHM is largely 
implemented in software that must be maintained as the 
knowledge base increases with aircraft uses. ECNs are 
incorporated into the aircraft and new computer 
technology becomes available to improve effectiveness of 
the PHM system. The expected cost of software 
maintenance can be projected based on cost estimating 
relationships built with historical data on legacy systems. 
For all practical purposes, all one needs to know is the 
number of software lines of code and the costs, over time, 
to maintain that software. A factor is developed to apply 
to the estimated numbers of lines of code for the new 
PHM system. 
10- Develop the Cost Benefit Results 
Having developed the costs and benefits in each of the 
identified impact areas in terms of costs or benefits per 
aircraft, per flying hour or per squadron, the remaining 
task is to calculate the impact over the entire fleet of 
aircraft over the planning period. This is done using the 
squadron and aircraft phase-in and phase-out schedule. 
The usual time horizon covered is thirty years. When the 
numbers have been extended, the net present values of the 
dollar streams are discounted using an appropriate interest 
rate. The rate is usually a reflection of the cost of money. 
For Defense Department work, the interest rate to be used 
for discounting in cost benefit analysis is provided by the 
Air Force and other Defense organizations on their 
Internet web pages. The Air Force also provides 
reference materials to define, at a high level, how cost 
benefit analysis should be done. 
In the final analysis we have, in the case of the cost 
benefit analysis of PHM on the fighter aircraft, a large 
positive net present value indicating an excellent return on 
invested dollars. For those accustomed to dealing with 
benefit cost ratios, the extended dollar cost and benefit 
streams also lend themselves to the calculation of these 
measures. 
I I -  Estimating the Impact of PHMs on Non Dollar 
Denominated Benefits 
Sortie Generation CapabiliQ 
LCOM provides information on which to base 
comparisons of sortie generation capability of alternative 
weapon systems. By holding the level of various 
resources constant, the simulation can be exercised to 
determine the time to turn a returning aircraft around so 
that it can be sent on another mission. While PHM offers 
some promise in this area, initial analytical results do not 
indicate significant improvement because the high level 
of reliability of a new aircraft overshadows the benefits 
fiom PHM. 
Reduction in the Incidence of Major Accidents 
PHh4's impact on major accidents focuses primarily on 
the minimization of non-recoverable in flight shutdowns 
of the engine. A Failure Mode Engineering Criticality 
Analysis (FMECA) study of the engine design defines 
where the PHM designers need to focus their attention, 
place sensors and develop reasoners which will anticipate 
failure so flight critical parts can be replaced before an 
7 
6-3101 
accident happens. The reduction in the number of 
accidents emanating from this technology are noted but 
the economic benefit of not having to replace a downed 
aircraft are ignored because attrition has already been 
factored into their aircraft buy plans. Another factor that 
should be noted, but not necessarily quantified is the 
amount of money spent on aircraft accident 
investigations. Fewer accidents will undoubtedly lead to 
fewer investigations; however, with the DIS in place, 
when an accident does occur much of the necessary 
information has already been downloaded which will lead 
to a decreased effort needed to determine the cause. It is 
not out of the realm of possibility that when an aircraft 
fails to return from a mission, the cause of the accident 
has already been diagnosed, isolated and reported to the 
ground station, thus eliminating the need for an 
investigation. 
Reduction in Footprint 
The government has developed automated models to 
estimate the number of cargo aircraft loads required to 
transport a squadron of tactical fighters to a new base of 
operations. The required inputs include the weight and 
dimensions of equipment to be loaded, number of people 
and the required aircraft spares to support an operation for 
a defined period of time. All of these data fall out of other 
analysis indicated above or are readily available. 
Therefore we need only to exercise the model to develop 
an estimate of the savings in cargo aircraft loads. 
5. A DISCUSSION OF PROBLEMS AND 
LESSONS LEARNED IN COST BENEFIT 
EVALUATIONS OFAL ON ANEW FIGHTER 
AIRCRAFT 
Several problems hinder the use of Cost and Benefit 
Analysis to PHM. These include: 
1- Since the developmental fighter aircraft is not yet a 
flying machine that could be used as a flying test bed, 
there is difficulty in determining how effective a 
given PHh4 application might be. Further, each 
application area within a PHM Area Manager is 
likely to be unique thereby requiring different 
software code. Efforts to maximize PHM 
effectiveness rely upon the creation of design and test 
processes which utilize laboratory and computer test 
benches, and as appropriate, seeded fault studies, and 
analysis of the effectiveness of roughly equivalent 
kinds of fault detection and analysis on legacy 
systems. 
2- To the extent that a requirement exists to predict 
failures which necessarily rely upon accumulation of 
historical trend data, the real level of effectiveness of 
a PHM application is not only difficult but probably 
impossible to determine until flying hours are 
accumulated. Even then, each application on an 
aircraft will differ because the stresses and strains 
from usage will differ from one part of the aircraft to 
another. 
3- A problem develops in estimating the value of 
PHM’s ability to predict a component failure. 
Clearly a benefit is derived when a critical part 
failure is predicted and the part is removed before it 
can contribute to an accident. The more difficult 
value to assess, however, is that of knowing a 
component will fail in, say, 10 more hours of flying 
time, Given this warning, the fleet users have the 
opportunity and flexibility of continuing to use the 
aircraft up until just before the time of predicted 
failure, and scheduling the repair action when it is 
more convenient. This clearly has value, but 
estimating a specific dollar amount is difficult and 
impractical. 
Among the lessons learned in doing the cost benefit 
analysis described above are these: 
1- The historical maintenance databases kept by the US 
military are a valuable resource, however they are 
lacking in some areas. They provide much failure 
and maintenance cost data, but can be very difficult 
and time consuming to work with. On a given legacy 
aircraft, the data is organized by seven digit work 
unit code, which essentially defines the aircraft as a 
composite of several thousand parts. Since data for 
at least three years should be reviewed in order to 
develop meaningful average values, much data must 
be studied and organized. One aerospace contractor 
estimated that more than a man-year had been spent 
to organize and debug the database on only one 
legacy aircraft. When completed, they still did not 
have sufficient details about how maintainers spent 
their time to support a thorough analysis of the 
impact of PHM in improving the efficiency of 
maintenance processes. This deficiency should have 
been recognized early on and a one-time study 
organized on a field sample to collect useful field 
data. Since the cost of a person is large, particularly 
over a 30 year period, the assumptions made to 
estimate how PHM will affect direct manpower, in 
the absence of real data, may cause widely different 
results. 
2- While the aircraft is still in the concept development 
stage, the cost and benefit analysis must be 
predicated on assumptions of PHM effectiveness 
with each Area Manager. While significant effort is 
made to minimize design risk by the processes used 
to design the PHM applications, the ultimate test of 
the level of effectiveness will not be available until 
the aircraft flies. Even then it will take some time to 
refine the s o h a r e  reasoners as flight hours are 
accumulated and failure and repair data become 
available. Therefore at some time later on, the cost 
benefit analysis of PHM must be revisited. 
8 
6-3102 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The US Department of Defense is providing leadership in 
the development of autonomic logistics, prognostic health 
management and distributed information systems as a 
means of greatly improving the way things are done to 
support a fighter aircraft. It is “business re-engineering” 
applied to the military organization on an unprecedented 
scale with significant improvements expected in the 
productivity of support organizations and in the systems 
they use. The impacts of implementing these advanced 
applications of computer and information systems 
technologies have been evaluated with cost and benefit 
analysis on a fighter program. Spectacular returns on 
invested dollars are expected. 
The implementation concepts developed for the fighter 
aircraft are readily transported for use on other complex 
weapons systems such as commercial aircraft, ships or 
any mechanical system where maintenance is a priority. 
By the same token they can be used to make productivity 
improvements in operation and support of commercial 
aircraft or other transportation systems 
These technologies are not one-time non-recurring efforts. 
Once developed, they will require continuing 
maintenance and modifications to the software to reflect 
knowledge improvement and changes to the aircraft. In 
analysis done to date, the cost of continuing maintenance 
has been considered and, while significant, does not 
detract from the fundamental engineering economics of 
the technology. 
Several decisions arise when trying to implement a 
AL/PHM/DIS infrastructure. What data to collect, at 
what frequency to collect this data, at what ftequency to 
send the data to the ground station to begin the DIS cycle 
are all problems that must bet tackled. These problems 
are being considered and may result in new technology 
applications wherein large amounts of useful data will be 
sent to ground, perhaps via satellite, which do not cause 
excessive demands on bandwidth. Some techniques that 
could potentially be used employ coherence analysis 
looking at sensor outputs over time while selectively 
screening data so only changes significant to flight or 
mission safety are sent to the ground. The use of this 
technology may one day make flight data recorders 
redundant while providing far more current data about an 
aircraft’s performance than was ever possible with the 
existing flight data recording technology. This may lead 
the way to greater safety in the operation of commercial 
aircraft. 
There is no doubt a great savings to be achieved by 
developing and implementing an effective PHh4 system. 
Not only are the monetary savings great, but the increased 
safety and improved sortie generation rate are non- 
quantifiable benefits that have a huge impact on the fleet 
that are not quantifiable. Unfortunately, PHM is aimed at 
saving a lot of money tomorrow with a minimal 
investment today. With that in mind, it is important to be 
able to illustrate this massive savings potential in the early 
design stages so as to avoid PHM losing support for other 
more current needs. This paper is an attempt at providing 
a guide for doing just that: Write A Convincing Cost 
Benefit Analysis to Substantiate Diagnostics, Prognostics 
and Health Management. 
7. REFERENCES 
[ 11 Discount Rates for Air Force Economic Analyses 
Revised 1 Mar 2000 
http ://www. saffm. hq. af.mil 
[2] OMB Circular A-94 Guidelines and Discount Rates 
for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs 
[Available on-line on the same web page as the document 
referenced above] 
[3] AFI 65-503 Cost and Planning Factors [Available 
on-line on the same web page as the first document 
referenced above] 
Bob Byer is an independent consultant specializing in 
cost effectiveness and cost benefit studies of military 
systems with experience in aircraft programs. His 
aircraft experience, spanning many years, has included 
commercial supersonic and conventional commercial 
transports, Navy and Air Force fighter aircraft and most 
recently the DOD Joint Strike Fighter. He has also 
supported many technology-based companies in business 
planning and analysis of new ventures. 
Andrew Hess has a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering from 
the University of Virginia. He has worked PHM issues 
on numerous aircraft including the A-7E, F-lSE/F, V-22, 
and most recently serves as the PHM lead for the Joint 
Strike Fighter as well as the NAVAWNAWCAD 
Patuxent River Prognostics and Diagnostics Lead. 
Leo Rla is a recent graduate of Virginia Tech with a dual 
major in Aerospace and Ocean Engineering. He currently 
works as a consultant to the Autonomic Logistics 
directorate of the Joint Strike Fighter Program in the 
PHM area. His duties include serving as a PHM liaison 
to DARPA as well as assisting Mr. Hess in his role as 
PHM lead of the JSF. Additionally, he works in the 
Technology Insertion area of the JSF supporting their 
efforts. 
9 
6-3103 
