Science Data Visualization Tools for the 
Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer Ground Data 
S ys tern1 
John R Wright 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
j ~ h n . r . ~ ~ i ~ l i t ~ ~ ~ ~ p l . n a ~ a . ~ o ~  
818-393-2706 
Abstract - The Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) 
instrument seeks to analyze the chemical composition of the 
atmosphere based on the emssion, absorption, and 
transmission of infrared radiation. Meeting the scientific 
objectives requires demanding analysis of the data being 
collected and processed. Visualization tools will assist in the 
understanding of the data and of the effects of the various 
types of processing being performed. 
The TES visualization tools are designed to verify correct 
functioning of the instrument, provide early detection of 
potential problems, and report on the quality and validity of 
the science data for drawing scientific conclusions. 
Visualization displays include the Level ILI tools for 
displaying the end result of all the processing, merged and 
georeferenced for display relative to maps or global images, 
and displays for characterizing the behavior of the science 
processing algorithms and exploring the effects of 
implementation decisions. Displays of interest include plots 
of spectra and profiles, animations showing variations in the 
data along spatial or temporal axes, and results of various 
operations on the data. 
Together, these tools provide a visualization suite for more 
rapidly analyzing the science results of the TES instrument 
and detecting and identifying problems in the instrument or 
processing system. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THE SCIENTIST AND THE ENGINEER 
3. PROCESS MONITORING TOOLS 
4. FAULT ISOLATION TOOLS 
5. SCIENCE ANALYSIS TOOLS 
6. USECASES 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
1 .O INTRODUCTION 
The Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) instrument 
seeks to analyze the chemical composition of the atmosphere 
based on the emssion, absorption, and transmission of 
infrared radiation. Meeting the scientific objectives requires 
demanding analysis of the data being collected and 
processed. Visualization tools will assist in the 
understanding of the data and of the effects of the various 
types of processing being performed. 
The visualization tools for TES may be categorized as 
belonging to one of three areas. The first includes tools for 
monitoring the performance of the data processing modules 
executing within the Production Facility. The second 
includes fault isolation tools that would be used to inspect 
data being processed to identify and classify a problem that 
has shown up in the monitoring tools. The third category is 
science analysis tools that would include visualization of the 
science data products as well as more detailed analysis of 
intermediate products in an experimental environment such 
as the Science Computing Facility (SCF). 
Process monitoring tools may be described as methods for 
verifying the day to day operations of the system in 
processing data over long periods of time. The visualization 
tools examine log files and other metadata describing the 
data within the system and display this information to the 
usedoperator in a meaningful way. Note that there are two 
classes of users viewing this information, the engineers and 
the scientists. The engineers are most concerned that the 
system is operating correctly and doing what it is supposed 
to be doing. The scientists are most concerned that the data 
being collected and processed is valid and usable for 
drawing scientific conclusions. While there is overlap 
between these two domains, different displays will be of 
most interest to each group. Please note that this paper does 
not attempt to describe the various tools for monitoring 
health and functionality of the spacecraft or the instrument 
from the telemetry. Instead it describes how the partially or 
fully processed science data can be visualized in order to 
draw conclusions about the functioning of the instrument. 
Each level of processing provides additional information 
about the instrument that can be used for diagnosing 
possible problems. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
4-1659 
The fault isolation tools may be described as methods for 
presenting more detail about system performance in the 
operating environment. These tools can be used to display 
spectra or interferograms or other types of data to determine 
what the system is doing or why it is not doing what is 
expected. They are more specialized in tracking down the 
activities of the system and examining the effects of the 
system upon the data. These tools will be able to display 
virtually any type of data found within the system and 
perform simple comparison operations. 
The science analysis tools fall into two subcategories. The 
first includes the Level III visualization tools for displaying 
the end result of all the processing, merged, gridded, and 
georeferenced for display relative to maps or global images. 
The second includes the tools for use in the SCF for 
characterizing the behavior of the science processing 
algorithms and exploring the effects of implementation 
decisions. Displays of interest will include plots of spectra 
and profiles, animations showing variations in the data along 
spatial or temporal axes, and results of various operations on 
the data. 
Together, these tools provide a visualization suite for more 
rapidly analyzing the science results of the TES instrument 
and closing the loop back to instrument engineering for 
improved. operations. They draw strongly on the experiences 
of the Multi-angle Imaging Spectral Radiometer (MISR) 
science team at JPL and on the TES science processing 
prototype: system for visualization. 
2.0 THE SCIENTIST AND THE ENGINEER 
The TEE: visualization tools are designed for use by two 
different groups of individuals, the scientists and the 
engineers. These two groups have very different views of the 
system and its functionality. The engineers want to know 
that the system is functioning correctly, that it is collecting 
the right data at the right time, that problems are understood 
and corrected or worked around, and that the instrument 
does what it was designed to do. The scientists want all this 
also but their viewpoint is that the data collected must be 
valid and usable for drawing scientific conclusions. 
The engineers will have a variety of quite powerful tools for 
monitoring spacecraft and instrument health and 
functionality. However, these tools are disconnected from 
the science data processing and analysis that happens once 
the data is on the ground. The results of the science data 
processing can help to alert the operators to potential 
problems and assist in the process of identifying the problem 
and possible solutions. As a simple example, consider the 
effects of heavy cloud cover. Clouds obscure the Earth and 
typically cause failed retrievals for those observations. 
However, clouds are ubiquitous and seeing clouds is normal 
and within operational parameters. While the spacecraft and 
instrument might be able to detect that clouds are present, 
based on the observations, they cannot detect that a problem 
is causing readings that appear to be clouds. However, a 
trend showing that a typical 20% of rebrieval failures due to 
clouds has suddenly jumped to 90% will point to an 
instrument problem immediately. 
Typically, engineers will want to see data visualized relative 
to events affecting the spacecraft and instrument. These 
include time, orbital position and orientation, and spacecraft 
and instrument telemetered events. Failed retrievals for four 
hours after a thruster burn could indicate that the propellant 
cloud is obscuring the instrument and rlaquires four hours to 
sufficiently disperse and may require more than four hours 
for the retrievals to be valid. All telemetry shows a 
completely healthy instrument but the scientists will realize 
immediately that something is wrong. 
The scientists will want to see much of the same data as the 
engineers, and they will also want to see their data relative to 
natural phenomena that could affect the validity of the data. 
This type of visualization will show the correspondences 
between science data and such factors as cloud cover, sun 
glint, and surface temperature, and events such as volcanic 
eruptions. Each of these factors could affect the validity of 
the retriewal results and reduce the value of the scientific 
conclusions. 
3.0 PROCESS MONITORING TOOLS 
The process monitoring tools are the first line of analysis 
and visualization tools for determining the validity and 
quality of the science data. Since the processing of the data 
is highly automated in a batch environment, the monitoring 
tools will rely on flags and notes logged by the individual 
processes during execution. An automated batch process 
will read the logs and generate a variety of diagnostic 
information on performance, trends, error rates, and other 
factors. Statistical analyses of the logged data can be 
performed to identify out-of-range conditions and generate 
alarm messages to direct attention to particular problems. A 
comprehensive list of the data items logged is outside the 
scope of this document but includes successful and failed 
retrievals, number of retrievals attempted per orbit, number 
of iteratilons to converge, variation between initial state and 
fmal staite, etc. As an example, the percentage of failed 
retrievals over various time intervals cim be plotted, both in 
absolute numbers and as a trend plot to identify both short 
term prolblems as well as slower developing problems. 
The process monitoring tools will 1m in two different 
modes, batch and interactive. The batch mode tools will run 
on a regular basis, perhaps hourly or daily, to generate a 
variety of plots for rapid review of ,the previous period's 
performance. The tools may also be run in an interactive 
mode to display information about performance at any time 
as well as to display information collected but not deemed 
critical olr meaningful enough for automatic output. 
4-1660 
4.0 FAULT ISOLATION TOOLS Various controls allow the operator to zoom in and examine 
short timefi-ames or zoom out to rapidly review the data for 
unreasonable values. Alarm limits can be specified for any 
channel, displayed as horizontal red lines, and automatically 
detected and collected in a file for rapid analysis. The alarm 
limit values can be dynamic and change over the life of the 
mission. 
The fault isolation tools are designed to burrow down into 
the data to allow the scientist or engineer to track a problem 
down to its roots. These tools provide access to the data 
products and metadata in the batch processing environment 
in order to trace specific data- items from source to 
destination and locate problems in their processing. 
Another important type of display is the visualization of 
retrieval failure versus geographic position. Once the 
collected data has been geolocated, it can be overlaid on a 
variety of maps and imagery in the correct position and time. 
Figures 2 and 3 shows how data from a partial orbit can be 
overlaid onto a nautical chart fi-om the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to reference against 
such features as coastlines and islands (this example chart 
appears courtesy of BSB Electronic Charts). Figure 2 shows 
a large-scale, low-resolution view of the map of the 
northeastern Pacific Ocean to provide an overall picture. 
Figure 3 shows a zoomed in view of the Aleutian Islands in 
Alaska. 
A useful type of display is plotting science data analysis 
results versus spacecraft telemetry. An example of this is 
shown in Figure 1. This display visualizes what might 
happen when an event such as a thruster firing affects 
retrieval success rates. The vertical green bars in the upper 
section of the display represent a telemetered event or 
reading such as attitude which changes during the firing. The 
middle section of the display represents the count of 
successful retrievals which falls significantly during the 
firing and stays low for more than an hour afterward. The 
bottom section of the display shows the time period that is 
being displayed, in this case about one and one-half hours. 
_ _  4-1661 
Data of this type can also be displayed on a GOES weather 
satellite image for reference to cloud layers as shown in 
figure 4. This example demonstrates how failed retrievals 
can be related to cloud coverage using a subset of the 
sample data from the previous figure. Since GOES imagery 
is captured on regular intervals and at high resolution, it can 
be combined with georeferenced TES data to produce 
animati0n.s showing instrument and data states relative to 
moving cloud and storm patterns. 
5.0 SCIENCE ANALYSIS TOOLS 
The science analysis tools are designed to burrow down into 
the data ixs deeply as a scientist or engineer wishes, make 
changes to the data, and process or reprocess the data within 
the SCF. In particular, these tools provide the capability to 
visualize and change ancillary data as well as standard and 
special data products and metadata to allow experimentation 
with the data processing algorithms. Particular data types are 
appropriate for each level of processing but each data type 
may be visualized within a common visualization 
environment. 
Figure 2 - Retrieval Data Overlaid on N O M  Chart 
5.1 Level 0 
The Level 0 processing for TES involves accepting 
Figure 3 - Zoomed In View of Retrieval Data on 1 NOAA.Chart 
downlink.ed data and packetizing the data appropriately. 
During processing, logs will be generaied that record packet 
rates, various statistics on the packetization process, and 
errors occurring during the process. While the TES ground 
data syslem is not responsible for performing the Level 0 
processing, analysis of the results of the Level 0 processing 
will be made available for visualization within the system. 
Plots of numeric values and trends will be generated in batch 
mode for process monitoring. The science analysis tools will 
be able to display these plots, incoming and packetized data 
streams, and interact with the data to perform regression 
tests on the Level 0 functionality as well as trace data from 
input to CDUtpUt. 
5.2 Level I 
The Level I processing for 'IES involves processing the 
packet sitream into interferograms and metadata, performing 
a Fourier transform of the interferograms into spectra, and 
then performing gain and calibration operations[ 11. 
Processing logs will record information on metadata 
Figure 4 - Retrieval Data Overlaid on GOES Image 4 - 1 6 6 2 
statistics, calibration results, and missing datdpacket errors. 
Visualization tools will plot the numeric and statistical data 
as well as the interferograms and resulting spectra. Figure 5 
shows an example plot of a spectrum. The visualization 
tools will provide the mechanism for examining algorithm 
diagnostics and experimenting with alternative algorithms. 
For example, different filters may be applied to the data and 
the results displayed for comparison to determine optimal 
filter characteristics and functionality. 
5.3 Level II 
The Level 11 processing for TES involves performing 
retrievals on the spectra to generate profiles of various 
constituents within the atmosphere[l]. Processing logs will 
record information on unsuccessful retrievals, statistics on 
iterations for successful retrievals, and a variety of metadata 
describing the characteristics of the Jacobians and other 
intermediate processing data elements. The visualization 
tools will provide the capability to plot and analyze trends of 
logged data, display, compare, and modify spectra and 
profiles, and display and modify the Jacobian matrices. 
Figure 6 shows a displayed Jacobian as an image for the 
entire matrix as well as slices through the matrix in either 
direction. The blue lines on the associated slice displays 
indicate the slice plane values. The slice planes for the 
Jacobian may be animated to rapidly peruse and understand 
the character of the matrix. 
The visualization tools provide a variety of operators that 
may be used to modi@ and compare data. These operators 
include difference and percent difference calculators, 
absolute value and negate operators, and specialized 
addition to the prespecified operators, scientists may create 
their own operators and add them to the list of available 
tools as a plugin. This provides the capability to enhance the 
visualization system beyond the original requirements. 
5.4 Level III 
The Level IU processing for TES involves sampling a time 
period's worth of profile data onto a three-dimensional grid 
for easier access, analysis, and visualization. There is a 
variety of visualization techniques available for 3D gridded 
data. Key visualization tools for TES will include plotting 
the data onto a global map image, taking slices through the 
data in arbitrary directions, and animating slices and views 
frequency ("') 
Spectrum Slce 
- 1 x 1 0 - 7 t  . , s , . , I . , . I . . . I , . -I 
1000 1020 1040 1060 
Frequency (cm-') 
1x10-51 I , 5: ra:ian Figure 6 - Display of Jacobian Matrix with Horizontal and Vertical Slices 
I- 
BX 
6x 
4Y 
ZX 
- Example 
I 
1000 1020 1040 
Frequency(cm-') 
1060 
operators such as black body temperature calculators. In over time, constituent, and location. Figure 7 
Plot of a 
shows 
Spectrum 
a 
I . -  4 - 1 6 6 3  
display of one level of gridded data over a global map with 
continental outlines. The data plotted reflects retrieved 
temperature at a chosen pressure level with higher 
temperatures near the equator. Another useful capability for 
visualizing mesoscale phenomena is isosurface extraction 
using a method such as Marching Cubes [l] or newer 
adaptations [2]. For phenomena such as large volcanic 
plumes, using an isosurface extraction method can provide 
excellent visualization of extent, density, and velocity of 
constituent masses. The orbital characteristics of the TES 
instrument preclude close monitoring of smaller phenomena 
but larger events over several days and hundreds of 
kilometers can be monitored and visualized. 
6.0 USE CASES 
the plots over smaller time intervals show a sudden, drastic 
decline al. a particular time followed by a slow rise back to 
normal levels. The sudden decline would indicate that a 
particular event probably caused the ]problem rather than 
natural conditions such as cloud cover. The next item to 
display would be a plot of successful retrievals compared to 
a display of spacecraft events. In this example, the telemetry 
plots show a small thruster firing for an orbital adjustment. 
The conclusion is that the thruster firing interfered with the 
instrument and data collection. The slow return to normal 
operation would likely indicate that the gas cloud from the 
firing was the culprit rather than attitudinal, electrical, or 
computational problems on board anti that future firings 
should be coordinated with instrument down times to avoid 
data loss. 
Figure 7 - Gridded Temperature Displayed Over 
Continental Outlines (courtesv Charles Thommon - JPL) 
Use cases provide a method to describe the expected 
behavior of a system under particular circumstances. They 
are often used to generate requirements and to tie 
requirements to particular operating aspects of the system 
being designed. The examples described here are included 
to illustrate how the visualization tools might be used to 
detect and identify problems in the instrument or system. 
6.1 Example 1 
In this example, the first thing noticed is that the successful 
retrieval percentage for the past 24 hours is below normal. 
An individual might then examine the trend plot for retrieval 
percentage as well as successful retrieval counts over 
smaller intervals of time. In this example, the trends do not 
show any decline until the time period in question. However, 
6.2 Example 2 
In this example, the first thing noticed is that the successful 
retrieval percentage for the past 24 hoiurs is below normal. 
An individual might then examine the trend plot for retrieval 
percentage as well as successful retrieval counts over 
smaller intervals of time. In this example, the trends do not 
show any decline until the time period i n  question. However, 
the plots over smaller time intervals show a number of 
periods with low retrieval success interspersed with higher 
success rates. The overall rate is not much below normal so 
the likely problem is natural phenomena. The next step 
might be to examine recent GOES satellite imagery and 
compare cloud areas to unsuccessful retrievals. In this 
example, there is a large storm in the Atlantic and multiple 
orbits were affected but the plots show that most of the 
unsucces;sful retrievals were indeed coincident with the 
heavy cloud cover. The indication is that the instrument is 
functioning normally. 
7.0 CONCLUSIONS 
The visualization tools described in this paper are designed 
to assist the engineer and scientist in evaluating the science 
data being returned from the TES instrument and processed 
on the ground. These evaluations can lead to detection and 
identification of problems in the instrument or spacecraft or 
in the processing stream. Of particular importance to the 
scientist is a measure ofthe quality of the data or its validity 
for drawing scientific conclusions. Display of science data 
relative to spacecraft events is crucial for identifying 
instrument problems while display relative to world maps 
and imagery is crucial for determining validity of results. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work described herein was fimded by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration and performed at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the management of the 
California Institute of Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[l] R Beer, H. Worden, and K. Bowman. TES Algorithm 
4-1 664 
Theoretical Basis Documents, Level IB and II, 
http://eospso.gsfc.nasa.gov/atbd/testables. html. 
[2] W. E. Lorenson and H. E. Cline. Marching Cubes: A 
High Resolution 3D Surface Construction Algorithm. 
Computer Graphics, 21(4): 163-169, 1987. 
[3] K. Engel, R Westermann, and T. Ertl. Isosurface 
Extraction Techniques for Web-based Volume 
Visualization. Proceedings of IEEE Visualization '99, pages 
139-146, October, 1999. 
4-1665 
John Wright is the Cognizant Engineer for Visualization for 
the TES instrument at the Jet Propulsion Lab. He has been at 
JPL for six years working on a variety of visualization and 
computer graphics related tasks. Prior to joining JPL, Mr. 
Wright was at Hughes Aircraft Co., working on high 
performance image generation systems for flight simulator 
applications. He holds a B.S. in Chemical Engineering from 
Purdue University and an M.S. in Computer Science fi-om 
Wright Slate University. 
