The Revolution of the Aircraft Engine Ground 
Maintenance Station 
John T. Clinton 
Data Systems I% Solutions (U.S.A.), LLC 
10260 Campus Point Drive WS B-2F 
San Diego, CA 92121 
John.T.Clinton@DS-S.com 
858-826-5995 
Abstract-The Revolution of the Aircraft Engine Ground maintenance practices be adhered to and meticulous records 
Maintenance Station attempts to show how two trends be kept to substantiate their maintenance history. Extended 
ubiquitous to the 21'' Century are having a positive effect on Twin Operations (ETOPS), the flying of two engine aircraft 
engine health management, enabling a proactive approach to on extended over water operations demands absolute 
engine maintenance. Those two trends are: reliability from these power plants. 
(1) Speed of communications 
(2) Access to information 
These two trends are having more of an impact than other 
efforts aimed at improvements to engine health, such as 
algorithm development work in artificial intelligence, neural 
networks etc. The importance of these two trends is 
demonstrated in a few examples, including, as an example, 
an extract from the Canadian Transportation Safety Board 
Report on a mishap involving a DC-10 aircraft. The ability 
to access idormation, which has been correlated from a 
number of sources, is making the transformation of the 
Ground Station into an Engine Data Center. We can now 
forecast engine problems, where in the past, we simply 
reacted to them 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. 
3. THE 80% SOLUTION 
4. TRENDS 
5. CONCLUSION 
THE &VOLUTION OF THE GROUND STATION 
The Ground Station, where traditionally, engine 
performance data was stored for trending and diagnostics 
has benefited from the revolution in the communication 
industry. The communications industry offers us new ways 
to communicate on an almost daily basis. This 
communication revolution enables data to be turned into 
information with increasing speed. This trend of turning 
data into information quickly is paying big benefits to the 
aerospace industry, and especially for those involved with 
data related to Engine Health Management. 
The other trend that is having an impact on our industry is 
the universal access to information, mostly through the 
world wide web. Engine mechanics now have the ability to 
see alarms or alerts generated by software programs that 
monitor engine health, BEFORE the aircraft even lands. 
They have access to all applicable information, including 
the configuration data for the engine, the parts life history 
for all life limited parts, modules and mini-modules. They 
can electronically look at the latest tech manuals, service 
bulletins, airworthiness directives. ..all of which may have a 
significant impact on what is required to inspect and repair 
the engine. All of this information, and more, is available 
via the web, 24x7. 
1. INTRODUCTION The impact of these trends is just being realized. The net 
result is our ability to maintain these complex power plants 
to a Professional degree unheard Ofjust yesterday- 
~ ~ d a ~ ~ ~  complex whine engines are subjected to 
stresses. Military aircraft engines that fly at the edge of the 
envelope in speed, altitude and g-forces, must be 
professionally maintained in order for them to provide 2. THE REVOLUTION OF THE GROUND STATION 
performance, civil aircraft engines The Information Tec~ology revolution has reached the 
~~~h~),~~~~~~~~ gf:2:n:f ~ ~ l ~ t ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  
few years ago. The regulatory authorities demand rigorous 
engine ground station. The real revolution is not in another 
degree of precision in smoothing techniques for algorithm 
intelligence and neural networks but in the speed and 
Order for them to provide Of unheard Of just a development to lessen the data nor artificial 
6-2927 
accessibility of information. This is not meant to imply that 
advances in data scatter techniques are not progressing nor 
welcomed by all involved in the evaluation of the health of 
the modern turbine engine, but rather that there are other 
(2) Access to the information 
Speed 
technological areas which will, and are, providing a more 
rapid return on investment. The advances we see, almost 
daily, in the information and communication technology 
sector is paying big dividends to those involved in 
forecasting the health of the engine. The information is 
being made available in near real time and to a wider 
audience; the airline, the original equipment manufacturer 
(OEM), the leasing company, the repair station, the logistics 
provider, all players that have stakes in the continued health 
of the engine. Our experience is that the rapid analysis and 
correlation of engine data (performance, vibration, oil debris 
etc.) by personnel dedicated to the task, is the key to being 
able to forecast impending failures and consequently 
provide true value to the various stakeholders in engine 
maintenance. 
3. THE 80% SOLUTION 
The Ground Station will expand to include information 
derived from a number of sources and will incorporate data 
fusion / data correlation, data forecasting techniques to give 
a better overall evaluation of the status and health of a given 
engine. 
The Ground Station will provide an 80% solution to 
determine engine health. We believe that today, we still 
need human interface to make qualitative decisions. The 
jury is still out on whether artificial intelligence techniques 
will ever completely replace the human interface. There will 
always be incidents, which are completely new, incidents 
that we have not programmed into our FMECA analysis. 
In addition to traditional performance data, the Ground 
Station will incorporate time / temperature cycle data, 
vibration data, maintenance data, configuration data, oil 
consumption and oil analysis data, as well as other functions 
like an engine electronic logbook. It will provide 
information on repair and overhaul costs, determine 
overhaul workscopes, track engine modules and components 
through the repair cycle, predict spare parts requirements, 
schedule repair slots at a facility, which has bid 
electronically for the work and all manner of other 
functions. The Ground Station will become the single 
repository for all engine related information. It will become 
the Engine Data Center. 
4. TRENDS 
Two developing trends, which will revolutionize the ability 
to determine the health of an engine, are: 
(1) Speed 
What we are seeing today are commercial airlines 
downloading engine health information while in flight, via 
an Aircraft Communication and Reporting System 
(ACARS) link. The data is transferred to an Engine Data 
Center via ground based or satellite links. The Engine Data 
Center takes a quick look at the data for alarms and alerts. 
Any significant alarms or alerts are provided back to the 
airline, engine OEM or other stakeholders within 3 to 4 
minutes. The significance of the speed of processing cannot 
be underestimated. It can have significant benefits in 
maintenance scheduling, logistics and even safety. The 
automation in this approach will also significantly reduce 
manpower costs normally associated with data collection. It 
may be impractical however to retrofit certain aircraft with 
ACARS equipment. A military fighter aircraft, for example, 
may not be able to use ACARS transmission equipment due 
to weight, space and detectability issues. They therefore 
may not be able to take full advantage of this trend in speed. 
However, the data, once obtained by the ground 
maintenance personnel can be quickly analyzed at the 
Engine Data Center given the ability to transfer data quickly 
via e-mail, LAN or other protocol. Any legacy aircraft, with 
the ability to be retrofitted with an ACARS link, will be able 
to take full advantage of the speed trend. 
Those aircraft that are in the planning or Engineering, 
Manufacturing and Development (EMD) cycle can 
incorporate all the necessary equipment to take advantage of 
this trend as they enter service. They will have the 
equipment but who will quickly analyze the data? The quick 
transfer of data from the aircraft to a ground station is only 
!h of the speed trend. The other half involves the speed of 
the analysis of the data. In the military arena, experienced 
maintenance personnel are in short supply and overtasked. 
Although the military has been downsized by 30% since the 
end of the cold war, the number of operational deployments 
have increased by 300%. The typical maintainer is tasked 
with supporting more than one type aircraft and engine. 
Although the new Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) plans to rely 
upon Autonomic Logistics and a Joint Distributed 
Information System (JDIS) for information distribution, this 
assumes the human interface with those systems will not be 
necessary to provide accurate, timely diagnostics and 
prognostics. Can autonomics provide the complete answer 
to engine health diagnosis and prognosis? Should this 
system work, it will presage a new era for those aircraft that 
come along post JSF. However, if human intervention for 
data analysis is required, the movement of that data to an 
Engine Data Center, must be rapid, in order to take 
advantage of the superior engine condition sensor packages 
incorporated into aircraft like the JSF. 
Of data from the engine; 
Of analysis of the data 
Ply  speed to analyze the data is important. An example 
where speed in data analysis could have made a difference 
6-2928 
Table 1. Guidelines on Parameter Trend Analysis 
EGT up-shift more than 1O"C, but less than 
20°C 
Check for indication of bird strike or FOD at Inlet 
and Exhaust. 
Check Last Stage LPT Blades. 
Place engine On-Watch for next three flights. If 
average shift is greater than +20"C, perform 
troubleshooting listed below. 
EGT up-shift more than 20°C I 
follows in an incident relating to a Canadian Airline DC-10. 
Reference [ 13. 
"Canadian Airlines International Flight 17 was on a 
scheduled flight from Vancouver International 
Airport to Taipei, Taiwan. During the take-off on 
runway 26 and approximately two seconds after the 
V1 call, the crew heard a loud bang and felt an 
airframe shudder and considerable vibration, later 
attributed to an engine stall. The captain called for 
and initiated a rejected take-off. The aircraft could 
not be stopped on the runway, and the nose-wheel 
gear collapsed as the aircraft rolled through the soft 
ground beyond the end of the runway. The aircraft 
came to rest in a nose-down attitude approximately 
400 feet off the declared end of the runway. Six 
passengers were slightly injured during the 
emergency evacuation of the aircraft. 
An engine condition monitoring program was 
developed to track engine health, with the aim of 
providing an opportunity for early fault detection. 
Company X promulgates the guidelines for engine 
parameter trend monitoring in its Operations 
Engineering Bulletin and Customer Service Rep 
Tips. Adherence to Company X's trend-monitoring 
guidelines is not mandatory, and the Company 
advises each operator to establish its own reporting 
and analysis procedures, and alert levels for 
parameter shifts. Company X does not specify 
urgency or how much time should be taken to 
complete the analysis of the trend data. 
Table 1 represents guidelines on parameter trend 
analysis as specified by Company X Rep Tips: 
Company X Rep Tips states that a rise in EGT 
accompanied by a rise in fuel flow and engine core 
speed (N2) can be an indication of high-pressure 
compressor damage. 
CAI adopted Company X's engine monitoring 
program and integrated it into the operation of the 
DC-10 fleet by monitoring cruise data. Generally, 
Perform troubleshooting before next flight. 
readings are taken and entered on an "Instrument 
Readings DC-10" form by the flight crews every 
three hours, or once per flight for shorter flights. 
When the aircraft lands at a base that has access to 
the CMAh4R (American Airlines Corporation) 
mainframe computer in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the data 
from the completed forms are entered into the 
computer. Once every 24 hours, the mainframe 
computer processes the data using the Company X 
Engine Performance Trending computer program. 
The output is then sent to CAI's computers in 
Vancouver, where it is analyzed by the power plant 
maintenance group. At CAI, it takes somewhere 
between two and a half to four days from the time 
the readings are taken in the aircraft until the 
results are analyzed and can be acted upon. 
The number 1 engine monitoring records produced 
on 19 October 1995, the morning of the 
occurrence, were based on data up to and including 
flights on 16 October 1995. This printout indicated 
that, starting on 14 October 1995, the number 1 
engine EGT had drifted upward by 9 degrees 
toward the baseline over the last three entries. 
Records indicate that a similar drift was 
experienced around 25 September 1995; however, 
on that occasion, the EGT subsequently dropped 
back to normal. Consequently, the increase in EGT 
recorded in this 19 October 1995 printout was 
viewed at CAI as normal variation or scatter. 
The data for 17 and 18 October 1995, analyzed 
after the occurrence, indicated that the upward 
trend of the EGT on engine number 1 had reached 
27 degrees, and that the high EGT was 
accompanied by increases in fuel flow and engine 
core speed (N2). For this magnitude of shift in 
engine parameters, Company X recommends an 
immediate borescopic inspection of the high- 
pressure compressor and low-pressure turbine. (See 
Table 1). In addition, CAI's DC-10 Flyaway 
Manual specifies a borescopic inspection of the 
high-pressure compressor in the event of abnormal 
6-2929 
EGT and engineering performance trend increase. 
Discussions with the engineering and maintenance 
personnel at CAI revealed that engine trend 
monitoring has been used since the mid 1980s and 
has been instrumental in identifying engine 
problems. Prior to this occurrence, CAI had not 
correlated a trend shift with an impending engine 
failure. 
CAI's trend monitoring program for its DC-10 
engines met the specifications of Company X's 
guidelines. These guidelines, in allowing each 
operator to establish its own procedures, did not 
specify how much time should be taken to 
complete the analysis of the trend data. The 
procedures used by CAI were not fast enough to 
have the information on the previous day's flight 
available for analysis by the power plant 
engineering group before the occurrence aircraft 
took off. 
Had CAI's maintenance personnel known that the 
trend of the EGT of engine number 1 had reached 
27 degrees and that there was a corresponding 
upward trend on the fuel flow and engine core 
speed (N2), a borescopic inspection of the engine 
probably would have been done. An inspection 
would most likely have discovered the damage to 
the high-pressure compressor section, so that 
appropriate maintenance could have been 
performed prior to the flight. 
CAI's trend monitoring of its DC-10 engines 
indicated that there was a problem with engine 
number 1, but the process used to analyze the trend 
data was not timely enough to result in the required 
maintenance action being taken before the flight. 
The manufacturer's trend monitoring guidelines do 
not specify urgency or how much time should be 
taken to complete the analysis of the trend data. 
Since the occurrence, CAI has taken steps to 
enhance the timeliness of its processing of engine 
trend monitoring data. In March 1996, CAI 
completed a program, begun before the occurrence, 
of equipping all of its DC-10 aircraft with an 
Aircraft Communications and Reporting System 
(ACARS), which can relay the flight data to 
ground stations. The new procedures will require 
flight crews, using ACARS, to transmit engine 
readings to the ground station at the time that they 
are recorded. This new system will provide a near 
real-time acquisition, processing, and evaluation of 
the engine trend monitoring data. 
Following the accident, the Transportation Safety 
Board (TSB) forwarded a Safety Advisory to 
Transport Canada (TC) suggesting that other users 
of engine trend monitoring systems be advised of 
the safety benefits associated with timely analysis 
of engine data". 
The Data Systems & Solutions Experience 
Detection of impending failure modes associated with any 
number of engine related parts I components is now 
possible. Engine Health Monitoring (EHM) has 
demonstrated impending failures in these systems: 
HPT system deterioration 
Compressor deterioration 
Fuel nozzle coking 
ECS bleed leakage 
Faulty bleed valves 
VTVG scheduling errors 
Bearing distress 
FOD 
Sensor errors 
Case Study #I-Sometimes, component failures can be 
benign in terms of normal engine operation but can prevent 
an aircraft engine achieving its maximum rating in extreme 
conditions. The most common example of this is when a 
component failure has caused the temperature margin of an 
engine to fall below zero. This means that the engine would 
be capable of achieving its maximum rated thrust most of 
the time but could be unable to takeoff to return from a very 
hot location. This could mean that the aircraft would have to 
offtoad passengers or, in extreme circumstances, would 
need a remote from base engine change. 
The following graph, (Fig.1) produced from the Data 
Systems & Solutions COMPASS NavigatorTM program, 
shows a sudden, large loss of temperature margin on one 
engine. The second graph, (Fig.2) shows that the high 
pressure shaft speed margin has also decreased. The health 
monitoring engineer noted these performance changes and, 
based on previous experience, was able to identFfy that the 
cause was fractured bleed tubes causing leakage. A visual 
inspection failed to find evidence of the fractures and the 
engine was removed shortly afterwards due to a suspected 
HP compressor surge, likely to be a result of the leakage. 
The EHh4 service team now easily recognizes this type of 
failure. 
6-2930 
A sudden, large loss of temperature margin is shown on this trend plot 
(x axis - datehime; y axis - temperature margin degrees Celsius) 
Smoothed Word Case ITT Margn 
Figure 1. Temperature Margin 
The high pressure shaft speed margin has also decreased. 
(x axis - Date / Time; y axis - % RPM) 
Smoothed Worst Case HP Speed Margin 
'01 
Figure 2. HP Shaft Speed Margin 
6-2931 
Case Study #2-The EHM engineer noticed the unusual rise 
in vibration on both engines. 
Usually, anomalies in vibration trends affect only one 
engine. Here the high vibration points showed an unusual 
relation with low pressure shaft rotational speed. 
The airline was notified of the unusual trend and advised to 
check whether there had been a dual engine bird strike or a 
maintenance activity applied to both engines. 
In this case the airline did not action the recommended 
maintenance quickly enough 
Four days later passengers complained of "tactile vibration." 
The aircraft was delayed for over an hour while a fan trim 
balance to correct the vibration was carried out. 
Low pressure (fan) shaft vibration trend 
(x axis - Date / Time; y axis - Slope values) 
While an hour does not seem much, the costs of such a 
delay can be substantial 
Lost Revenue - Passengers may miss connections and be 
placed on connecting flights with different airlines, or 
choose to 'jump ship' to a competitor's flight 
Operating Costs - extra airport charges, catering and airline 
staff costs and passengers hotel accommodation 
Passenger Loyalty - Ultimately, dissatisfied customers may 
choose never to fly with that airline again 
A recent study by Rolls-Royce estimated disruption costs 
for a 200-seat airliner at: 
$5,000 per hour of delay 
$30,000 for a cancellation 
$40,000 for an away from base engine removal 
im oothed LP Shaft Vibration (TO) 
"Compressed" 
data points 
Engine 1 data - smoothed 
and unsmoothed 
, I 
0 I I I I I I I ,-I I I I I 1  I I I I i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I j I I I I 
Figure 3. LP (Fan) Shaft Vibration 
6-2932 
Case Study #3-More recently, a pilot’s report of a sudden 
change in turbine temperature on a similar engine resulted in 
a call to the EHM service team for advice 
Within minutes, an EHM engineer was able to review the 
data and identify the problem with the engine 
The faulty part was quickly identified and changed, 
certainly avoiding a long and costly delay, and perhaps a 
cancellation and engine removal. 
Our experience has been that the two largest cost drivers 
are: 
(1) The huge cost associated with an engine failure, 
especially a catastrophic engine failure, and 
(2) The cost of unplanned removals. 
For commercial operators, the cost of delays and 
cancellations (D’s & C’s) also figures prominently in the 
cost drivers. Our business model is partly based upon our 
ability to forecast conditions that effect these drivers. 
Therefore, petting the data quickly is vital, as is analyzing 
the data. The quality of the data is certainly a factor and it is 
important to have ongoing efforts to aid in data reduction 
methods to discriminate data scatter, sensor error and engine 
anomalies. 
In addition to the typical performance data, we must 
correlate other types of data, when available, in order to get 
a more thorough picture of the health of the engine. 
One data source that is paying dividends is the examination 
of oil debris from the magnetic chip detectors or filters. 
Using scanning electron microscope / energy dispersive X- 
ray (SEM / EDX) technology, one military customer has 
eliminated catastrophic bearing failures, while prior to using 
SEM / EDX, it had experienced 5 such failures annually. 
They also reduced the number of premature engine 
rejections by 50%. Again, we see these as the two biggest 
cost drivers. For the military customer, in addition to cost 
savings, operational availability is improved significantly. 
One of the real advantages of using this SEM / EDX 
technology, is that it is portable and operable near the flight 
line environment, contributing to the meed of the analysis. 
Where previously oil debris samples were sent to a lab 
which could take from 7-30 days to get results, the debris 
samples analyzed by SEM / EDX are done in 20 minutes. 
This fits nicely into a business model that takes advantage 
of technological solutions that incorporate the functionality 
of speed. 
understand. Although the SEM / EDX provides complete 
chemical and morphological analysis, that data is not 
necessarily what the operator desires. He wants to know if 
he can still operate the engine safely. Can he complete the 
mission or keep it in revenue producing operation. 
The data from the SEM / EDX can be electronically 
transferred for correlation and trending with the other SEM / 
EDX operators throughout the world flying the same 
equipment. Instead of each operator maintaining the trends 
on his own engines, we now get a more complete picture of 
the entire fleet through this Engine Data Center. This fleet 
wide experience leverages the data value. 
The user can also correlate the SEM / EDX data with engine 
performance data through s o h a r e  interfaces between the 
SEM / EDX data and the performance data resident in the 
Engine Data Center. 
In some instances, as previously cited, near real time data 
acquisition is accomplished via the ACARS downlink. In 
other instances, where ACARS equipment is not an 
available, new off aircraft, hardware solutions enable the 
data to be downloaded via a ruggedized handheld PC 
(pictured below) once the aircraft lands. The unit 
incorporates a cell phone module whereby the data is 
transferred automatically to the Engine Data Center 
completion of the download. 
Figure 4. Pocket PC Computing Device 
We now have the ability of operating a laboratory piece of 
equipment, not by a laboratory scientist but by maintenance 
personnel at or very near the flight line. The software 
incorporated into the SEM / EDX allows for ease of 
operation as well as, providing a risk analysis that is easy to 
6-2933 
The following figure depicts a typical aircraft operator’s 
data flow chart. The process is slow, unreliable and requires 
manual processing of the data. 
download process 
(ISP) by means of the integral cell-phone module 
without manual intervention 
attachments to other stakeholders 
purpose 
(4) automatic link to a local internet service provider 
(5) FTP transfer of data to the Engine Data Center 
(6) pre-set e-mail address capability for e-mail data as 
(7) security features prohibiting use for any other 
By employing this direct cell-phone FTP link, the potential 
for delay in the transmission of the downloaded data files to 
the Engine Health Center is greatly reduced. A further 
benefit of the FTP data transfer is that the user will receive 
direct confirmation that the download was conducted 
successfully. Removal of the necessity for the intermediate 
stages of data manipulation and forwarding (Figure 6) 
reduces the maintainer’s workload and the level of the skill 
required. This system is viewed as an interim system that 
will provide great benefits but is not the optimum solution 
for a true near real time system available via ACARS. Figure 5. Data Acquisition - Typical 
However, for many reasons, such as cost and / or the 
practical solution. 
The the improved data ‘Ow using new inability to retrofit due to design limitations, it is a very technology and processes. 
Figure 6. Data Acquisition - Improved 
By incorporating new communications technology and 
shortening the process, the data now becomes meaningful, 
allowing the opportunity to forecast impending failures. 
Since our business model centers on providing predictive 
support, timely data is critical. In some cases, airline 
operators were hindered in providing that data by both 
hardware and process limitations. It has become incumbent 
upon us to offer a total solution, for us to add value to their 
data. 
This type system is especially relevant to operators that 
cannot convert to an ACARS system. It provides: 
(1) a single user input to initiate a download, 
(2) the creation of unique files identified by aircraft, 
(3) a status display indicating progress of the 
date, time, 
Access 
Perhaps the bigger trend however is access to the 
information. The business model for our company involves 
the gathering of the engine data, adding value to the data by 
being the Application Service Provider (ASP) and the 
proactive predictive analyzer of the data and finally, 
providing the information to authorized personnel via the 
web. 
For military air forces, Virtual Private Networks (VPN) 
with encryption technology are one route for passing data in 
a more secure environment. 
The web, in addition to revolutionizing almost every aspect 
of information management, is revolutionizing how this new 
Engine Data Center will provide engine information to the 
stakeholders. The Engine Data Center will allow the 
performance engineer, the maintainer, the engine OEM, the 
airline logistics personnel and others with appropriate access 
credentials, to call up their particular area of interest. Each 
specialist will be able to gain more from the data through 
the powerfid integration of the various data sources. The 
information will be available 24x7 regardless of time zones. 
As in other e-commerce solutions, it is important not to 
burden the engine customer with capital expenditures for 
customized suites of IT equipment. The Engine Data Center 
is a hosted application provided by an Application Service 
Provider (ASP). The customer simply logs on to the web. 
In addition to the engine diagnostics / prognostics capability 
resident on the Engine Data Center, other functions are 
included, to provide one stop shopping for engine related 
6-2934 
data. Electronic technical publications are hosted on the 
EDC, allowing for 24 hour access but also allowing for one 
time updating of the publications. Where in the past the 
update process was exceptionally slow, sometimes taking up 
to six months, now it is exceptionally fast. 
The new Engine Data Center will also host all information 
regarding engine configuration management. Life limited 
parts, modules will be tracked and updated. Airworthiness 
Directives, Service Bulletins compliance will be 
immediately available. Reports such as Engine Utilization 
and Configuration History, Module Utilization and 
Configuration History, LLP Utilization and Configuration 
History “back to birth,” Engine Inventory Check, ETOPS 
Compliance Check, Routine Maintenance Records, Shop 
Visit History, will all be immediately available. In short, 
those with the proper permissions will be able to access the 
Engine Electronic Logbook. Now, the maintenance 
technician will have all applicable data available on every 
part of every engine in the fleet even for transient aircraft 
undergoing unplanned maintenance away from its home 
base. 
On board systems certainly have their place, especially 
when they can provide warning to the pilot of impending 
failures, but Engine Data Centers will become the overall 
repository of long term trending, diagnostics and 
prognostics and Electronic Logbook data. The processing 
power of today’s computers make the Data Center ideal for 
gathering data from multiple sources to facilitate diagnostics 
and prognostics, to do engine configurations management, 
to archive enormous amounts of engine related data 
(maintenance, repair / overhaul, events, life history) and to 
data mine the data. The data fusion / data correlation 
capabilities built into the hosted applications will provide a 
more complete picture of every aspect of engine health and 
performance and provide access to the worldwide operator, 
military or civil. 
5 .  CONCLUSION 
The Information Age, with the explosive growth in 
computer and communications technology has enabled a 
revolution in what we used to call the Ground Station. The 
Ground Station of old was singular in purpose, offered 
limited information, used up a company’s computer 
resources and required an expert to utilize and interpret the 
data. Today’s maintenance professionals are stressed with 
meeting operational requirements. Turning data into useful 
diagnostic / prognostic information may require more 
resources and time than they have available. 
The Engine Data Center of today is multi-functional. It 
provides diagnostic information obtained from many 
sources, offers a prognostic capability, can be linked to 
electronic tech manuals, maintenance information, repair 
and overhaul information and provides all relevant engine 
logbook data. It is accessed via the web, freeing up a 
company’s computer resources, is intuitive to navigate 
through, and supported by personnel dedicated to making 
the informational meaningful. It is available to all the 
stakeholders 24x7, providing secure data to those who have 
the requisite permissions. It can provide the data encrypted 
and via a VPN for users requiring additional security. 
The Application Service Provider (ASP) will provide the 
tools and the information for today’s engine professionals to 
make informed decisions, based upon accurate and timely 
information. These ASPS will do it because they recognize 
that if you can not add value to the data and do it in a timely 
manner (Speed), using a vehicle like the ubiquitous world 
wide web (Access), their business model will fail. Speed 
and access of data, has enabled the diagnostic ground station 
to become the prognostic Engine Data Center. 
References 
[ 11 Canadian Transportation Safety 
Board Report Number A95H0015. 
John Clinton is the Director of 
Business Development for Data 
Systems h Solutions, a joint 
venture between Rolls-Royce and 
SAIC. This new company has been formed to combine Rolls- 
Royce ’s renowned turbine engine engineering expertise with 
SAIC ’s world class systems integration expertise, providing 
predictive services to commercial and military aviation. He 
is a retired Colonel in the US. Marines, having spent 29 
years on active duty as a Naval Aviator. He was qual$ed in 
both fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft. He served as the 
Aircrdt Maintenance Ojyicer for four dyerent squadrons 
and as the Aircraft Safety Ojyicer for both the 3d and 4th 
Marine Aircraft Wings. He has investigated a number of 
aircraft mishaps, including the investigation and recovery of 
a new model aircraft that crashed in over 1600 feet of 
water. He is a graduate of St. Francis College, and courses 
in Aviation Safety Pom the Naval Postgraduate School, 
Monterey, California. 
6-2935 
