Flight Mishap Prevention for UAVs 
Richard D. Colgren 
Lockheed Martin Aeronautics CompanyLJniversity of Phoenix 
1011 Lockheed Way 
Palmdale, CA 93599-2526 
Richard.Colgren@lmco.com 
Timothy L. Johnson 
General Electric Corporate Research and Development 
GE Corporate R&D, K15C3OA, P.O. Box 8 
Schenectady, NY 12301 
Timothy. Johnson@crd.ge.com 
Abstract- For Uninhabited Air Vehicles (UAVs) to achieve 
operational levels of flight safety comparable to those of 
piloted aircraft, it is important to replicate the critical skills 
and predictive capabilities of the pilot to ensure proper flight 
mode selection and prioritization of tasking. Each 
individual combination of modes must be able to 
accommodate both predetermined as well as unanticipated 
causes of uncertainty. The system must adapt to these 
changes based on sensory inputs, as well as be robust 
against uncertainties that have not been sensed or directly 
measured by the system. The purpose of Technologies for 
Reliable Autonomous Control (TRAC), a joint Lockheed 
Martin Aeronautics Company/General Electric/Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory mission management architecture, is 
to autonomously accomplish this complex mission and 
subsystem management task. To do this, it is desirable to 
provide “outer-loop” compensation for larger sources of 
disturbances that may require corrective maneuvers, mode 
switching, or changes to the command inputs to the flight 
control system. Flight Envelope Protection is one such 
feature. Based on our analysis of recent UAV data [l], 
emergency procedures account for about 26% of mishaps, 
while errors in operating procedures account for about 10% 
of mishaps. Thus, Flight Envelope Protection could prevent 
up to about 36% of mishaps. While there are many points 
of similarity between UAV Flight Envelope Protection 
(FEP) and FEP for manned aircraft, a number of new issues 
arise in the UAV case. Hence, this is not straightforward 
extension of existing techniques. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. ROBUST INNER-LOOP C NTROL 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
2. GUIDANCE WITH ENVELOPE PROTECTION 
4. INTEGRATION OF GUIDANCE &CONTROL 
6. APPENDIX: FEP ANALYSIS 
7. REFERENCES 
8. BIOGRAPHIES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A primary goal of the TRAC architecture is to provide 
autonomy while assuring vehicle safety. This goal can be 
achieved by extending the proven “inner-loop, outer-loop” 
design strategy beyond the flight control loop into the 
guidance and mission management loops. At the same time, 
this strategy provides a natural context for a multi-layered 
approach to error handling. Short-term errors are handled 
by inner-loop limit protection logic and/or robust design, 
while outer-loop errors are corrected as part of the outer- 
loop error handling logic [2, 31. This approach has been 
used successfully in hierarchical control applications. In 
this approach, an error is handled at the lowest (and fastest) 
level where it is possible to resolve the source of the 
difficulty. For best results, the inner flight control loop and 
the outer guidance protection loop must be designed to 
operate concurrently and in coordination. The focus of this 
paper is on one functional requirement of UAV mishap 
prevention, namely Flight Envelope Protection, where these 
concepts can be explored in detail. 
The goal of Flight Envelope Protection algorithms is to 
detect, override, and/or correct mission commands that 
would otherwise cause the flight envelope to be exceeded. 
It serves as a “last line of defense” against flight mishaps of 
UAV’s. It also serves as a means for enhancing mission 
autonomy by reducing mishap rates. 
Figure 1 provides one view of the TRAC architecture, 
showing the inner and outer-loop features. Flight Envelope 
Protection may be viewed as an augmentation of the 
Guidance and Navigation Systems. Flight Envelope 
Protection for manned aircraft has been addressed by 
Rodgers [4]. For UAVs, researchers at the Georgia Institute 
of Technology [5] have addressed certain limit protection 
problems for rotorcraft, while Tomlin, et a1 [6] have 
addressed flight envelope protection as it relates to 
interoperability of UAVs and manned aircraft in a 
controlled airspace environment. 
“0-7803-6599-2/01/$10,00 0 2001 IEEE 
2-647 
Figure 1: TRAC GNC Architecture 
The new element in this paper is the integrated approach to 
flight envelope protection. It is based on an inner-loop, 
outer-loop design approach, and the specific means of 
defining the flight envelope in such a way that the problem 
can be partitioned in accordance with this strategy. The 
benefit, in terms of UAV mishap prevention, is not limited 
to collision avoidance. It may also include the avoidance of 
incorrect operation due to inadequate approximation of 
vehicle dynamic properties during mission planning, or the 
vehicle-to-vehicle variation of operating envelope due to 
manufacturing or load (center of gravity) variations in the 
vehicle, or improper terrain approximation, et cetera. These 
sohare-induced errors are expected to become more 
evident as UAV software is used to replace piloted 
operation. 
To understand the design separation described in the 
following sections, the top chain of subsystems in Figure 1 
may be qualitatively associated with a double-integrator. 
Where the control system represents the inner acceleration 
loop, the guidance system is associated primarily with the 
velocity loop, and the navigation system is associated with 
the position loop. The control system is designed using 
robust controls to implement actuation (acceleration) limits, 
while the guidance and navigation loops together are 
augmented by Flight Envelope Protection system (not 
shown separately in this figure) to jointly limit velocity and 
position consistent with the mission, flight mode, and 
operating envelope. By its nature, the Flight Envelope 
represents worst-case assumptions on the actuator motions 
for each condition (guidance mode) of steady flight. Thus, 
it is not necessary to schedule FEP action with respect to 
actuator motion. The concept of the operating envelope by 
its very nature assumes the existence of flight modes 
consisting of steady motion on some sub-manifold of the 
full vehicle 12-degree of freedom (position x velocity) state 
space [7] of the vehicle. The guidance, navigation and 
control system logic serves to dynamically stabilize these 
flight modes. Hence, we may view the Flight Envelope 
Protection problem as adding coordinated limit protection to 
the NavigatiodGuidance subsystem. The important 
problem of transition fiom one guidance mode to another 
2-648 
(during which the operating envelope may be viewed as 
“undefined”) is not considered in detail in this paper. The 
means of regulating the effects of such transitions, once the 
current flight mode has been selected, is considered. 
In Section 2, envelope protection is defined and addressed at 
the “outer-loop” level of the guidance and navigation 
systems. In Section 3, the robust control design of the 
inner-loops is addressed. In Section 4, the issues of 
integrating inner and outer-loop strategies are described and 
are partially resolved. The concluding section places flight 
envelope protection in the larger context of mishap 
prevention. 
2. GUIDANCE WITH ENVELOPE PROTECTION 
Flight envelope protection (FEP) may be reduced to four 
phases or subtasks: 
- Initialization 
- Detection 
- Correction 
- Monitoring and Termination 
For a particular envelope exceedance event, these phases 
may occur in sequence, as they are described here. In 
general it may be necessary to concurrently but 
asynchronously monitor and correct several potential 
sources of envelope violation in various phases of 
resolution. 
Initialization 
The function of initialization is to set the starting values for 
the flight envelope parameters for the current aircraft and 
mission. Nominally, this process would be executed once at 
the beginning of a mission, but might in the future be run at 
an adaptation interval during which vehicle parameters 
(mass, altitude, temperature, wind) change significantly. 
Initialization itself requires that several prior operations be 
completed: 
(a) Aircraft geometry, aerodynamic parameters, and 
(b)the extreme limits of the mission (latitude, longitude, 
(c)the guidance and control system modes should be 
(d)using data fiom (a)-(c), the operating envelope of the 
(e) a means of approximating the operating envelope, 
control limits must be known or estimated; 
altitude, and weather parameters) should be known; 
known; 
aircraft (for each guidance mode) should be computed; and 
suitable for near real-time computation, must be applied. 
Often, steps (a)-(d) are completed off-line, and frequently 
during the design and performance assessment of the 
aircraft (and propulsion system). The nature of these 
calculations is described further in the Appendix. The result 
of these calculations is often a set of points which are 
known to lie on the flight envelope, or a set of analytic 
curves defining half-spaces whose intersection constitutes 
the operating envelope. For instance, for steady 
longitudinal flight at constant speed, the V-N and V-H 
diagrams are common representations of the Flight 
Envelope. In step (e) it may be necessary to further simplify 
the description of the operating envelope boundary (e.g., by 
spline approximation methods) in order to support the real- 
time envelope calculations that are required in this 
approach. All of these calculations should be completed 
prior to the initiation of the mission. 
Detection 
At each time when the FEP algorithm is computed, the 
position and velocity of the vehicle will be assumed to be 
measured. These values will define an operating point 
which is a point in 12-space. As usual, effects such as 
actuator dynamics, or propulsion system variables may 
augment the dimension of the state space. The detection 
system must determine (a) whether the vehicle is 
sufficiently close to steady state operation that FEP may be 
applied; (b) whether the current state is within the operating 
envelope, and (c) whether the projected state at or prior to 
the next sampling time can be expected to exceed operating 
limits. The result of these calculations is a determination of 
(a) whether to activate the FEP algorithm; (b) whether to 
compute a corrective strategy to return the vehicle from 
outside the envelope to inside it; or (c) whether to compute a 
proactive strategy which will maintain the vehicle within the 
envelope based on an impending violation of the flight 
envelope. The detection stage will also produce as a by- 
product information such as which face@) of the flight 
envelope have been violated, the minimum distance fiom 
the nearest face of the flight envelope and/or the minimum 
time to exit or re-enter the flight envelope. 
Correction 
When no threat of exceeding the flight envelope is detected, 
the normal guidance and navigation system actions are 
applied, and no corrective actions are generated. When the 
current operating point is detected to be outside the 
operating envelope, the next planned mission command is 
modified so that the path of the operating point over time 
will return rapidly to the flight envelope. This guidance 
command must (in an appropriate vector space) reflect the 
projection of the next mission command onto the normal to 
the flight envelope at the point of closest re-entry. The 
effect of such an action might be to limit the planned change 
in speed or altitude. When the current operating point is 
within the flight envelope, but is expected to exceed it after 
issuance of the next command action, then the command is 
modified by computing a guidance command that projects 
the expected operating point movement along the normal to 
the flight envelope at the point of closest approach, bringing 
it to a point which is a safe distance within the boundary of 
the envelope. The operating point motion is corrected to 
move along the nearest surface of the operating envelope, 
and just inside of it. 
2-649  
Monitoring and Termination 
Several considerations may further modify the 
implementation of the above corrections. The nature of the 
algorithm must be such that repeated application of the 
policy (e.g., with a constant command action) will be self- 
consistent, and is capable of returning the flight toward the 
original mission, or to a closest approach to it. For instance, 
a speed restriction in one segment might be matched with a 
higher subsequent speed in order to rejoin the mission plan. 
The strategy must reflect the likelihood that segments of a 
mission may commonly, and deliberately, lie near the limits 
of the flight envelope. The strategy must reflect that, as the 
operating point rides along one surface of the operating 
envelope (akin to sliding mode behavior), it is likely to 
eventually strike another, and the algorithm must at that 
time allow continued motion of the operating point along 
the new surface and/or the intersection of the two surfaces. 
Clearly, when commanded changes are too large, the 
authority of control surfaces will be exceeded; in such cases, 
the algorithm must be sufficiently sophisticated to relax and 
return to the flight envelope more gradually at a slower rate. 
The foregoing strategy does not explicitly exploit maneuver 
generation. For instance, in the short term, one may think of 
the mission specifcation as including a guidance mode 
setting, which is not changed by the algorithm. Finally, the 
algorithm presumes that commands that initially violate the 
flight envelope will trigger re-planning at the mission level, 
and this will eventually cause a correction of future mission 
commands to the system (and these in turn may include 
maneuvers that involve changes in guidance modes). 
Further discussion and analysis of these issues may be 
found in the Appendix. 
Dynamic Inversion in the Time Domain 
The dynamic inversion method considered in here is 
documented in [S, 9, lo], and has been applied to the F-117 
and F-16. Only a summary of the key design steps is 
provided here. The moment command variables LCV, 
MCV, and NCV represent the variables to be controlled in 
the roll, pitch, and yaw axes respectively. They are a blend 
of various sensed signals. A five-step process is then used 
to implement a dynamic inversion controller. 
The detectiodcorrection logic is applied periodically at a 
rate that is characteristic of guidance and navigation actions. 
The nature of the logic (subject to the above considerations) 
is such that actions that actually or potentially violate the 
flight envelope result in corrections that return flight to 
within the envelope, at which time no further corrective 
actions will be applied (since this is part of the corrective 
algorithm itself). The primary parameters for the algorithm 
are: (1) the rate at which updates occur, (2) the degree of 
accuracy of the approximation of the flight envelope, (3) the 
rate of return to the flight envelope when a potential or 
actual violation is detected; and, (4) how close the operating 
point is permitted to approach the boundary. 
3. ROBUST INNER-LOOP CONTROL 
In this section, two dynamic inversion methods for inner- 
loop control design will be reviewed. These methods are 
examples of control design approaches that are appropriate 
for inner-loop design, under the assumption that outer-loop 
control has been designed for envelope protection or similar 
purposes. The design integration of the inner and outer- 
loops is considered in the following section. 
- SteD 1: Choose a blend of variables to construct the 
controlled variables. In a manned aircraft these are chosen 
to provide adequate handling qualities. For example, the 
choice of MCV must reflect the pilot's control desires. Pure 
n, was initially, for instance used to emulate the g command 
nature of the classically designed F-117A control laws. 
Later a C' MCV was used to provide a natural change in 
control priority from rotation to translation as airspeed 
increased. Note that the open loop responses of the 
controlled variables must have no right half plane zeros. 
- Step 2: The aircraft model is defined. The key component 
in this step is the development of a simplified aerodynamic 
model that can be run in real time. This least squares model 
can be written as Ck = ck(a, M) q. Here Ck is the vector of 
least squares aerodynamic coefficients, Ck is the vector of 
aerodynamic coefficients in the complete aerodynamic 
database and is a nonlinear function of angle of attack (a) 
and Mach number (M). Finally, h = [l, p, bp/2V, c q/2V, 
br/2V, Sa, 6,, &IT is the vector of independent variables. 
These variables are the sideslip angle, the scaled roll, pitch, 
and yaw rates, and the roll, pitch, and yaw control surface 
deflections. 
- 
- Step 3: Next the desired characteristics of the controlled 
variable pdes are specified. Ideally, the dynamic inversion 
portion of the control law, along with open loop aircraft 
dynamics, produces an integration. The desired dynamics 
are Vdes = b[  fCvcmd - v + 4.1 where z = b(Vcmd - V )  . 
The two standard cases are proportional feedback (f,=l, 
<=O) and proportional plus integral feedback (fc=0.5, 
fi=0.25). 
- Step 4: Here forces and moments corresponding to 
undesired aerodynamic, gravitational, and/or inertial 
contributions are modeled as functions of the measured state 
variables. Opposing forces and moments are then 
commanded to negate the undesired contributions. In the 
simple case of the linearized aircraft roll axis model the 
dynamic equation is p =  Lpp+L,06,. Inverting this 
dynamic equation for the control input yields 
6, =-[p-Lpp] .  In the general case, the nonlinear 
equations of motion are f = F(u, x) z f(x) + g(x)u. Here x 
is the vector of state variables and U is the vector of control 
1 
LJa 
2-650 
surfaces. The time derivative of the vector of the control 
variables is 
= a ( x ) +  b(x)u. The dynamic part of the control law is 
written in terms of the desired control variables as 
. dV dV dV 
x )  + v = - 2 = - f( 
d x d x  
zg$y 
LWD 
1 . dV du vdes - - - f (x )  = b(x)-'[Td"" -a(x)] .  
m u  
ROEUPRIGHT _ _  ROLL UPRIFE ECTOR 3 BANK 
ROLL SECTOR UPTIGHT 3 I , ,  I J .  .7. Y R q  UPRIGHT 
-1iO '-135 . ' -90  ' ' 7 ' 9'0 ' 155 ' is0 R m  
I I 
(1) 
Step 5:  In the final step the handling qualities are tuned 
using precompensation. For example, stick and rudder 
pedal gains and shapes are defined. In the case of the F- 
117A, one maneuver utilizes the Pilot Activated Automatic 
Recovery System (PAARS). This automatic maneuver 
exercises the control design in high pitch and roll attitude 
situations through large ranges of coupled attitude changes. 
PAARS provides an all-attitude recovery capability to 
protect against pilot disorientation due to sensorldisplay 
failure, pilot vertigo induced by the lack of external visual 
cues at night, and/or pilot distraction due to high workload. 
PAARS generates commands to the Flight Management 
System (outer-loop/autopilot), which in turn generates 
commands to the Flight Control System (inner-loop) in a 
way very similar to a Flight Envelope Protection system. 
The recovery commands that PAARS generates emulate the 
commands from a fully lucid pilot in the same flight 
situation. This allows the pilot to regain control of the 
vehicle at any time when helshe regains orientation. 
PAARS utilizes a sector scheme that divides the attitude 
envelope into seven operating regions. This scheme is 
shown in Figure 2. For (unpiloted) UAV applications, 
conformity with a human pilot's actions is no longer 
necessary, but the flight envelope constraints are imposed 
instead, to retain integrity of the vehicle. 
I <gz-r6UcL) AND ZERO ROLL RATE I +NZ (PULL) AND ZERO ROLL-RATEI 
Pilot Model 
The F-117A simulation contains a simple nonlinear pilot 
model. In the pitch axis there are n, or angle of attack (a) 
command models that use a lead-lag followed by a 
Proportional and Integrator (PI) filter to generate zero 
steady state error. The roll axis model is more complex, 
with different modes depending on whether a full stick 
command is required. For small bank angle errors (and 
lower roll rates) a bank angle is held with damping provided 
by roll rate feedback. When the A command is large it goes 
to a full stick input, computing the time to ease back on the 
stick command to acquire the desired bank angle. In the 
yaw axis during approach to a landing the pilot model 
achieves a sideslip or a constant lateral-directional flight. 
This model is used with the roll axis pilot model. The 
power lever is commanded open loop (i.e. in the 
acceleration portion of the pull and roll maneuver). 
SECT R 5 
-NZ ?PUSH) 
AND 
ROLL UPRIGHT 
In the UAV context, the dynamics of the desired inner-loop 
system response are not necessarily determined based on 
handling qualities considerations, but on the desire to 
provide predictable dynamic transitions between operating 
points. One approach, which has been used to achieve 
predictable transition responses in this broader context, is a 
combination of frequency domain inversion, H, Control, 
and simplicial stability analysis [ 111. 
SE TOR 
-NZ ?PUSH? 
AND 
SECTOR 4 
+NZ (PULL) -45 -- 
AND 
ROLL UPRIGHT ROLL UPRIGHT ROLL UPRIGHT 
+ N ~ ~ C ~ F ~ E L ~ Z  
AND 
Frequency Domain Inversion, H,  Control, and Simplicial 
Stability Analysis 
An H, controller for a nonlinear system using the describing 
function based approach of [12, 13, 14, 151 was developed 
I3 "I'UK 
Y
PITCH ATTITUDE (DEG) 
NOSE UP 
I SECTOR 7 : +NZ (P ULL) AND ZERO ROLL RATE - . 
SECTOR 6 
+NZ (P L ) 
SECTOR 1 
+NZ (PULL& 
ROLL INVERTED ROLL INVERTED 
SECTOR 6 
  
Figure 2: PAARS Recovery Versus Attitudes 
2-651 
in [ l l ,  161. The nonlinearities are modeled using the 
describing function approach. Stability analysis is 
conducted using simplicial algorithms. The method has 
been demonstrated by designing H, controllers for an 
unstable system driven by a Bang-Bang actuator. The final 
example covered the roll axis autopilot for a cruise missile 
controlled using a Bang-Bang actuator with dead zone. The 
practicality of the method was highlighted by implementing 
the closed-loop system. It was noted that the system 
remained stable for any possible combination of actual and 
measured amplitude of the aileron command de .  
m 
I 
I 
I Describing 
I Function 
U I { D F ~  
Documented in [12, 13, 14, 151 is a nonlinear H, control 
procedure that uses the describing function approach. In 
this paper the example used in demonstrating this design 
methodology is the directional control system for the low 
altitudehigh subsonic cruise missile shown in Figure 3. 
Lateral control to support bank-to-turn maneuvers is 
achieved through differential deflection of a fwll span 
trailing edge elevon. In accomplishing this function the 
surface is used as a classical aileron. 
I m z  
I 
I 
I 
I 
PL1”b) I 
I Y 
Figure 3. Cruise Missile Three View 
The controller is generated using the nonlinear H, optimal 
control procedure of [13]. The describing function model is 
introduced into the controller using the loop-shifting process 
as shown in Figures 4 and 5. 
Plant P(s) 
r----------- 1 
I 
I 1 ’  , z  V 
1 Actuator Limit I 
Nonlinear Controller 
I I Describing Linear I 
Controller I I Function I 
- U -  
L- - - --- - - J 
Nonlinear Controller K(s,a) 
Figure 5: Loop-Shifting Procedure 
The final step in the design process is the determination of 
the stability domain. This is accomplished using 
computational geometry via a simplicial algorithm [16, 171. 
The multi-dimensional stability space is subdivided into 
simplexes. The relevant loop properties at the vertices of 
the simplexes are denoted by labels, which are used to 
determine if a transition region is contained within these 
simplexes. If the space is three-dimensional, tetrahedra are 
used. If the space is two-dimensional, triangles are used. 
The two-dimensional space is defined by the amplitude a 
and fiequency o. The space is subdivided into triangular 
subregions whose corners are labeled with either a “O”, a 
“l”, or a “2”. The transition region lies within triangles 
having a different label on each corner (in other words, 
within completely labeled triangles). These completely 
labeled triangles can be further subdivided until as fine a 
grid as desired is generated. As discussed in [16, 171, this is 
possible since within each completely labeled simplex there 
is guaranteed to be at least one completely labeled simplex 
at the finer resolution level. This is due to a property of the 
labeling function called Sperner properness. Sperner 
properness, which is intimately related to the “edge check,” 
is guaranteed under some conditions of the triangulation 
[W. 
Figure 6 can be viewed as a three-dimensional stability 
robustness plot. The x-axis is the actual signal amplitude 
a 1, and the y-axis is the measured signal amplitude a 2 .  
The vertical axis is the frequency in radians per second. 
The line along the intersection of the O’s, 1’s and 2’s regions 
serves the same purpose as the -l+j 0 location does for a 
family of Nyquist curves of the loop function LCjo). 
Figure 4: Missile Closed Loop System 
2-652 
Figure 6. Stability Transition Curve 
4. INTEGRATION OF GUIDANCE AND CONTROL 
The Flight Envelope Protection scheme described in Section 
2 is based on the sustainable (quasi) steady state flight 
modes of the vehicle. These correspond closely to the 
guidance system modes of the vehicle (e.g., flight at steady 
altitude, speed, steady climb, steady dive, banked turn, 
unbanked turn, et cetera). In a real-time context, it is not 
practical today to support dynamic extensions of the flight 
envelope, although [ 5 ]  have shown that the flight envelope 
as traditionally defined may exceed the stabilizable set of 
operating points of an aircraft. The FEP system as 
described, operates to override the guidance andor 
navigation system commands into the control system, and is 
based on flight envelope descriptions expressed as sub- 
manifolds of the operating envelope that are suitable for 
each steady maneuver condition. Dynamic inversion 
(whether designed in the time domain or frequency domain) 
provides a natural means of assuring that actuator limits are 
also respected, while (through fkequency response shaping) 
assuring a smooth transition from one flight condition to 
another. For instance, a monotonic transient response (poles 
below 45 degree line on a root locus) can assure smooth 
transition between one operating point and another in the 
operating envelope (implies limits to the excursion from a 
straight line between two operating points). In this way, the 
inner-loop system can be co-designed with the outer-loop 
system to assure full envelope performance of a UAV Flight 
Envelope protection system. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
A strategy for reduction of UAV mishap rates through flight 
envelope protection has been presented. Assessment of 
UAV data indicates that up to 36% of UAV mishaps might 
have been avoided had FEP been employed. The strategy 
consists of outer-loop flight envelope protection (FEP) 
logic, co-designed with inner-loop controls. Dynamic 
Inversion methods for inner-loop design have properties that 
mesh nicely with the requirements of outer-loop FEP 
design, and allow these two types of systems to be co- 
designed. 
6. APPENDIX: FEP ANALYSIS 
The flight envelope (a particular example of an operating 
envelope for aircraft) is an engineering concept that, while 
used for many years, has to the best of our knowledge not 
been defined with mathematical rigor. Only when this has 
been achieved will it be possible to test assertions 
concerning flight within the envelope for a particular 
aircraft, or even to rigorously verify that a given operating 
point is in fact within the flight envelope. This appendix 
presents an overview of how the envelope might be 
rigorously defined, in the spirit of highlighting, rather than 
resolving, the open issues. Two widely accepted examples 
of the flight envelope are the V-H (velocity-altitude), and V- 
N (velocity, normal force) diagrams, and we show how 
these can be related to the more general theory of trim 
trajectories, as discussed for example on page 99 of [6]. 
Consider the dynamics of an (rigid, winged) aircraft 
expressed in general differential equation form 
i = f ( x ,  U), t E [O, 00) 
(2) 
We consider inputs u(t) E U c R" , t E [O, 00) and states 
x ( t ) ~ X c  R". The set of trim trajectories are the 
solutions x(-) for constant inputs 
u(t) = U,U E U,t E [(),CO), and such that there exist 
locally stabilizing control laws 
Us ( t )  U + 6u(x(t)), Us ( t )  E U 
(3) 
for which the corresponding stabilized solution, after an 
appropriate initial transient converges to a function 
xs (e) E QP(X)  , where QP(X)  is the space of quasi- 
periodic functions taking values in X . Asymptotically, 
there must be a (minimal) period n and an order of 
2-653 
derivative k, , such that for all k 2 k, , x‘~’(.) is (almost) 
periodic of period n . Note that for the minimal such value 
of k, , some elements of the derivative of the state may be 
zero or constant, since these functions are by definition also 
periodic. Generically, as the constant value U varies over 
the input set U, qualitatively different types of trajectories of 
the state will occur. These are characterized by 
discontinuous changes in k, , II ,  and the subspace of X 
upon which the quasiperiodic behavior occurs. For some 
values, U, no locally stabilizing control law may exist. (The 
choice of locally stabilizing control, 6 , is assumed to affect 
the above changes only parametrically). These 
discontinuous changes induce a (flight mode) partition, 
designated p on the input (and correspondingly) state 
space. Define a class of projections 
g , ( u , S ) : Q P  + Y , , Y ,  c R “  
(4) 
such that 
gpx, G Y ,  
( 5 )  
captures those components of the state that become 
asymptotically constant, for given values of the steady 
input, stabilizing feedback law, and partition parameter 
(flight mode). As U varies within one partition of U, y,  
varies within Y,. The envelope of the locus of points 
traced out by y,, designated by 
Ep G { Y ,  E Y , l U € U , ) ,  
(6)  
and is termed the flight envelope for flight mode /l . For 
future reference, the boundarv of the flight envelope is 
designated as dEp . The over-bar denotes set closure in the 
foregoing. Note that although individual points in the flight 
envelope can be associated with specific values of the 
steady state control settings, this is not necessarily a one-to- 
one mapping (even for a given flight mode), and the 
envelope is traditionally plotted as a subset of the state 
space, or in a (subset) of variables that is a transformation of 
it. 
The above definition of the flight envelope, which reflects 
the natural control and aerodynamic limits, does not reflect 
additional aircraft design constraints that may be 
independent of the flight condition. Such constraints are 
usually expressible in the form 
h(x,u) 2 0, h : X x  U + R’ 
(7) 
where 1 is the number of constraints. To map these into the 
flight envelope, it is necessary to take the set 
X, {xl h(x,u) 2 0,u E U,} 
(8) 
and consider its intersection with E, as defined above. 
The approach to the flight envelope via the trim trajectories 
is considered to be conceptually more general than the 
traditional engineering approach to the flight envelope, 
because it considers points which are non-stabilizable, and 
defmes the set of flight modes via an induced partition 
rather than as an ad hoc proposition. The traditional 
engineering approach to the flight envelope is to postulate 
the flight mode and flight envelope coordinate system; 
various methods are then used to determine the envelope 
(e.g., &om test data or from dynamic models). One method 
is to test a point postulated to be in the flight envelope by 
inverting (a subset of) the steady state equations to find a 
corresponding (trim) control, and then verifying that this 
point can be stabilized. 
The application of the above analysis to the aerodynamics of 
a winged aircraft are considered next. Usually, certain 
assumptions are made to simplify the analysis, such as: 
Constant (sea level static) pressure and temperature 
Constant fuel loading and center of gravity location 
No variation of gravity with altitude 
0 
0 
0 Nowind 
0 Flat earth 
Some of the traditional flight modes that arise from the 
preceding analysis are: 
Steady forward flight at constant speed and altitude 
0 Steady longitudinally symmetric climb or descent 
0 Unbanked and banked (coordinated) turns at 
constant speed or rates 
0 Vertical rolls 
0 Spiral mode flight (combination of the above 
modes) 
Each of these modes is accompanied by a family of trim 
trajectories. The modes correspond closely, but not exactly 
to standard guidance/autopilot modes of winged aircraft. 
Guidance/autopilot modes may be viewed as 
implementations of locally stabilizing controls, although in 
fact they are often designed with additional handling quality 
and limit protection considerations in mind. In the aircraft 
design process, it is normally the intent that the flight 
envelope reflect motions of which the aircraft is “inherently 
capable,” and not merely human factors preferences, 
although these constraints can be added if necessary (e.g., 
blackout g limits of fighter pilots). 
To relate, say, longitudinal motion at constant speed and 
altitude to the mathematical definition above, note that in 
this mode, the positional states of altitude and horizontal 
position are nominally constant, while forward velocity is 
constant, but forward position increases linearly with time. 
The lateral rates are all identically zero. Only the forward 
speed and altitude are plotted on the V-H plot. The upper 
limit on altitude may be related to minimum ambient 
pressure for which cabin pressure limits are maintainable, 
while the upper speed boundary (in different segments) may 
2-654 
reflect both engine operating limits and structural limits of 
the airframe (static bending, or possibly wing flutter 
boundaries). 
The above definition is capable of reflecting the conditions 
of the V-N plot as well, although this case is more complex. 
The maximum normal g-limit is usually experienced in a 
vertical roll, which is one of the flight conditions indicated 
above. Forward speed is (approximately) constant in such a 
maneuver, providing one axis of the plot. Normally, the 
other axis is plotted in units of g’s (vertical acceleration), 
rather than (for instance) pitch rate. This is a case where the 
mapping gp above can be used to map the flight envelope 
into a different and more conventional set of coordinates 
(note that vertical acceleration can be related to x and U via 
the state equation). The maximum g-limit is normally 
established by the wing root-bending limit, which is a 
constraint that can be expressed via the function h in the 
definition. Note that in this case, other variables, such as 
altitude, are periodic as functions of time. 
7. REFERENCES 
[ l ]  Colgren, Richard D., Gulati, Sandeep, and Koneck, 
Robert “Technologies for Reliable Autonomous Control 
(TRAC),” IASTED CA’99, The International Association of 
Science and Technology for Development, CONTROL 
AND APPLICATIONS CONFERENCE, Banff, CANADA, 
26 July 1999. 
[2] Schaefer, Pete, Colgren, Richard D., Abbott, Rich, et al, 
“Technologies for Reliable Autonomous Control (TRAC) of 
UAVs,” 19th DASC, Philadelphia, PN, October 2000. 
[3] Johnson, T., Koneck, R, and Bush, S., “Improving UAV 
Mission Success Rate through S o h a r e  Enabled Control 
Design,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2000. 
[4] Rogers, Ron, “Pilot Authority and Aircraft Protections,” 
Cockpit (ISSN 0742-1508), p. 4-27, March 1999. 
[5] Horn, Joe, Calise, Anthony J., and Prasad, J. V. R, 
“Flight Envelope Limiting Systems Using Neural 
Networks,” Proceedings of the AIAA Atmospheric Flight 
Mechanics Conference and Exhibit, Boston, MA, Aug. 10- 
12, 1998, Collection of Technical Papers (A98-37204 10- 
OS) ,  Reston, VA, American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, 1998, p. 741-751. 
[6] Tomlin, Claire, Lygeros, John, and Sastry, Shankar, 
“Aerodynamic Envelope Protection Using Hybrid Control,” 
Proceedings of the 1998 American Control Conference, 
Philadelphia, PA, pp. 1793-1796. 
[SI Colgren, Richard, and Enns, Dale, “Dynamic Inversion 
Applied to the F-l17A,” Proceedings of the Modeling and 
Simulation Technologies Conference, New Orleans, LA, 
191 “Dynamic Inversion Based Flight Control Laws for the 
HARV,” Honeywell Systems and Research Center, 
Minneapolis, MN, 3 March 1992. 
August, 1997, pp. 275-284. 
[lo] “Application of Multivariable Control Theory to 
Aircraft Control Laws - Final Report: Multivariable Control 
Design Guidelines,” WL-TR-96-3099, Flight Dynamics 
Directorate, Wright Laboratory, OH, May 1996. 
[ l l ]  Colgren, Richard, and Jonckheere, Edmond, “H, 
Control of a Class of Nonlinear Systems Using Describing 
Functions and Simplicial Algorithms,” IEEE Transactions 
on Automatic Control, Volume 42, Number 5 ,  May 1998, 
pp. 707-720. 
[12] Colgren, Richard, and Jonckheere, Edmond, “H, 
Control of Nonlinear Systems Using Describing Functions 
and Simplicial Algorithms,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
Conference on Decision and Control, Tucson, AR, Volume 
1, December 16-18, 1992, pp. 957-964. 
[13] Colgren, R. D., “H, Control of Nonlinear Systems 
Using Describing Functions and Simplicial Algorithms,” 
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering - 
Systems, University of Southern California, May 1993. 
[14] Colgren, R D., “Simplicial Stability Analysis of an 
Unstable Plant with Adaptive Perturbation Control,” 
Proceedings of the EEE Regional Conference on Aerospace 
Control Systems, Thousand Oaks, CA, 25-27 May 1993, pp. 
416-420. 
1151 Colgren, R. D., Jonckheere, Edmond, and Cheng, Chih- 
Yung, “H, Optimal Control of a Simple Nonlinear System 
Analyzed using Simplicial Algorithms,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE Regional Conference on Aerospace Control Systems, 
Thousand Oaks, CA, 25-27 May 1993, pp. 41 1-415. 
[16] Doup, Timothy M., “Simplicial Algorithms on the 
Simplotope,” Lecture Notes in Economics and 
Mathematical Systems - Number 3 18, Springer-Verlag, 
New York, New York, 1988. 
[17] Todd, Michael J., “The Computation of Fixed Points 
and Applications,” Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, 
1976. 
[ 181 Jonckheere, Edmond, “Algebraic and Differential 
Topology of Robust Stability,” Oxford Press, New York, 
New York, 1997. 
[7] Stevens, B. L., and Lewis, F. L., “AircraR Control and 
Simulation,” J. Wiley & Sons, New York, New York, 1992. 
2-655  
8. BIOGRAPHIES 
Dr. Richard Colgren is a flight controls senior staff engineer 
at the Lockheed Martin Skunk Works in Palmdale, 
California. He is Flight Control Systems Lead for RECEE 
and Advanced Programs. He earned his B.S.A.A. at the 
University of Washington and his M.S.E.E. at the 
University of Southern California. He completed his Ph.D. 
in Electrical Engineering - Systems, at the University of 
Southern California. Previously he was IPT Lead for 
Specialist Support on the DarkStar UAV (Tier III-). He was 
also IPT Lead for the Vehicle Management System on the 
Uninhabited Combat Air Vehicle (UCAV), and was lead 
flight controls engineer on the U-2s. Dr. Colgren was also 
the lead flight controls engineer on the Air Force MCT 
(Multivariable Control Theory) project. He has served as 
project engineedprincipal investigator on independent 
research and development projects including Technologies 
for Reliable Autonomous Control (TRAC), development of 
the Lockheed flight controls workstation, and on the state 
reduction of structural dynamic models for control systems 
design. Previous work includes feasibility studies and 
preliminary/advanced design for flight control system 
concepts such as the CRV and HL-20 mini-shuttle, 
RockwellLockheed A-X proposal, F-22, F-l17A, B-2, F- 
20, and other classified projects. Work on UAV 
(Uninhabited Air Vehicle) projects includes Tier rr‘, Tier 
III-, and Tier III, micro-UAVs, the Wraith RPV (Remotely 
Piloted Vehicle) and other classified projects. Dr. Colgren 
is a past chairman of the Integrated Controls Subcommittee 
of the Lockheed Corporate Task Force. He is a Senior 
Member of the Institute for Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers and the Control Systems Society, for which he 
has conducted several paper and article reviews. He also 
organized the first session on simplicial algorithms for the 
IEEE Regional Conference on Aerospace Controls. Dr. 
Colgren is an ABET/EAC (Accreditation Board for 
Engineering and Technology, Inc.) aeronautical engineering 
evaluator. 
Dr. Johnson received the Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science from MIT in 1972. He then joined 
the MIT faculty, performing research in the area of control 
of systems governed by partial differential equations, large 
space structures, and hybrid controls until 1980. During 
this period he was awarded the American Automatic 
Control Council’s Donald P. Eckman award and was named 
Edgerton Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering at 
MIT. In 1980, he joined Bolt Beranek and Newman (BBN) 
as a Senior Scientist and pursued applied research in man- 
machine systems, robotics, and automated systems. 
Among other projects, he led the US National Bureau of 
Standards (later NIST) Hierarchical Control Systems 
emulation, which operated the Automated Manufacturing 
Research Facility. In 1984, Dr. Johnson joined GE 
Corporate Research and Development where he has 
subsequently held several technical and management 
positions. Among other projects, he was involved in the 
development of GE Aircraft Engine’s BEACON system 
which automatically generates engine control software for 
all GE commercial engines, the GE-1 Satellite (currently a 
Lockheed-Martin product), GE’s Profile Dishwasher and 
Clothes Washer, and an upgrade of NBC’s Skypath system 
for distribution of video to its 217 affiliate stations. Dr. 
Johnson has held several professional positions, including 
Vice President of Technical Activities of the IEEE Control 
Systems Society, and Finance Chair of the 1996 WAC 
Congress. He was recognized as a Distinguished Member 
of the IEEE Control Systems Society in 1995. 
2-656 
