Aeronautical Satellite Assisted Process for 
Information Exchange through Network Technology 
(Aero-SAPIENT) Project: The Initial Trials 
Michael J. Zernic* 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland Ohio 44135-3191 
mzernic@mc nmu. zov 
2 16-433-5286 
Lawrence C. Freudinger 
NASA Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California 93523-0273 
l.freudinzer@dfic. nasa. pov 
66 1-276-3542 
A. Terry Morris 
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia 23681-2199 
a. t. morris:@lasc. nasa.,aov 
757-864-6682 
Abstract-The current National Air Space WAS) 
infrastructure is becoming saturated with increased air travel 
and NASA is leading many technology activities that 
address aviation system capacity and safety concerns. The 
insertion of communication and networking technologies 
into the NAS promises greater connectivity, interactivity, 
and more effective decision making. The infrastructure will 
be enhanced to handle more traffic, provide safer operations, 
enable innovative flight operations services, and enable new 
cabin services. One such NASA activity is the Aeronautical 
- Satellite Assisted Process for Information Exchange through 
- Networking Technology (Aero-SAPIENT) project. This 
project includes the design of sub-system prototypes and the 
investigation of satellite-based data sharing, information 
integrity and security in a multi-protocol environment. This 
paper describes the technical objectives of the initial flight 
technology demonstration including the network and 
satellite communication technologies, as well as the 
utilization of various applications. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. PROJECT OVERVIEW 
3. SATELLITE cOh4MUNICATION TECHNOLOGY 
4. NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 
5. APPLICATIONS 
6. GROUNDTESTING 
7. AIRBORNETESTING 
8. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The United States decided in 1996 that an order-of- 
magnitude reduction in aircraft accident rates over a 20-yr 
period is required to keep the global aviation system 
efficient, safe, and affordable. This challenge is difficult, 
given that most of the aircraft expected to be flying in 2016 
already exist. To exacerbate the anticipated aging fleet and 
fleet retrofit problems, the volume of air trflic may triple 
over the same period. 
The role of NASA in the aviation safety challenge is to close 
technology gaps and lower the risk of adopting promising 
technologies. Wireless network links to aircraft, system- 
wide and vehicle-specific health monitoring, and scalable 
infrastructure for data management are important 
components that must be adopted, adapted, or if necessary 
invented. The need for high-integrity wireless broadband 
network communications has been identified as one of the 
major technical barriers to providing an order of magnitude 
increase in aviation system capacity and safety.* New cost- 
'This paper is a declared work of the U. S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Use of trade names 
or names of manufacturers in this document does not constitute an official endorsement of such products or manufacturers, either 
e-xpressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
3-1375 
effective solutions are envisioned that will use these 
trustworthy links to handle more traffk, provide safer 
operations, enable innovative flight operations services, and 
enable new cabin services. Data sources will be integrated 
into a massively decentralized decision-making environment 
that helps to identify and address risk-increasing events 
before those events cascade into accidents. The data-sharing 
infrastructure is a common denominator that will make 
large-scale system integration affordable and manageable 
over time. 
While the use of wireless digital network links amongst 
aircraft and between aircraft and ground promise improved 
performance of airspace management and fleet operations, 
the insertion of network technology carries with it additional 
risks which must be clearly understood. Unauthorized data 
access, corruption or interruption of high priority data links, 
and insertion of false information are among these risk 
factors. Security and integrity of information faces new 
obstacles that must be understood and mitigated as early as 
possible. Thus, it is important to design networking 
solutions that increase, rather than decrease, safety. This 
paper discusses the AeroSAPENT project objectives, the 
data link and network technologies, applications, and 
specific objectives of the upcoming experiment. 
2. PROJECT OVERVIEW 
A primary objective of the AeroSAPIENT project is to 
demonstrate safety critical and non-critical data transmitted 
over a shared digital communications link between the 
aircraft and the ground. Although one aircraft and a 
particular data link is used, network protocols and 
addressing effectively make the on-board aircraft local area 
network appear as a node on the terrestrial NASA network. 
In addition, Internet connectivity and data sharing to other 
NASA research centers provides a simple yet effective 
environment for investigating security ramifications of 
aircraft connectivity. This concept is illustrated in Figure 1. 
NASA's Airborne Laboratory (tail number 817, Douglas 
DC-8-72 Aircraft Serial Number 46082) was chosen as a 
test platform. This aircraft is representative of older 
passenger transport aircraft and is used primarily to conduct 
research activities in atmospheric and space sciences, 
climatology, earth resources, and aeronautics. With a 
utilization load of 350 to 500 annual flight hours by a 
continuously changing spectrum of scientists and eingineers, 
the laboratory provides good opportunity for "piggyback" 
experiments (those that do not need to control flight plans) 
and provides immediate feedback ftom potential users of the 
link technologies. 
A 
Satellite 
Phased Arrays 7 
I 
!E! 
RBNB Se 
Figure 1 - Aero-SAPIENT Networking Concept 
3. SATELLITE COMMUNICATIC)N TECHNOLOGY 
Wireless communications, especially networks that employ 
satellite communications, are highl:y suited for remote 
locations and mobility. Aeronautical applications and 
services exploit the use of satellite co~inmunications because 
of its multi-faceted mobile characteristics. 
Trends in aeronautical comtunications indicate 
characteristics of bi-directionality, more bandwidth than 
Very H[igh Frequency (VHF) terrestrial based wireless 
methods; can provide, and data dominant applications, as 
shown in Figure 2. However, the ability of current 
commercial satellite services to provide the required 
reliability, integrity, availability, and security for safety 
critical communications remains to be adequately ~ roven .~  
This is especially true as demand for in-flight services rises 
using i% mixture of the Internatlional Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) endorsed applications based upon 
Aeronautical Telecommunication Network (ATN) standards 
and commercially available applications based upon Internet 
Protocol (IP) standards. 
3-1376 
Voice 
NonJfHF 
f 
Data 
Figure 2 - Aeronautical Communication Trends 
One key element of such a robust communications 
architecture is the antenna system. During the 199O’s, 
, NASA has conducted several bi-directional aeronautic 
communication experiments using a variety of very small 
and robust antenna systems in the Ka-band (26.5 - 40 Ghz) 
utilizing the Advanced Communications Technology 
Satellite (ACTS). The Ka-band offers outstanding promise 
for accommodating aeronautical communications 
characterized by larger available bandwidth, higher data 
rates, and the potential for corresponding user equipment to 
be smaller and perhaps simpler than conventional wireless 
equipment.435 For example, several types of Ka-band mobile 
terminals have been developed for experimental evaluation 
and bi-directional data rates of up to 2Mbps have been 
achieved using a single 16 inch by 4 inch Ka-band slotted 
wave guide antenna during a multi-node network technology 
demonstration involving an oil exploration vessel in the Gulf 
of Mexico.6 
However, because a significant portion of the commercial 
satellite services will remain to be in the Ku-band (12 - 18 
Ghz) even as the Ka broadband satellite services become 
available, Ku-band antenna technology has matured to 
enable robust communications to mobile platforms such as 
aircraft. NASA and Boeing have contributed to the 
development of Ku-band phased array technology for flat 
receive and transmit antennas which are more conformal to 
the physical airframe and use electronic steering in lieu of 
mechanical mechanisms for better response to directional 
changes. Further, Boeing is introducing a service called 
Connexion by BoeingSM which will utilize this antenna 
technology to provide bi-directional high data rate, multi- 
channel connectivity between the ground and aircraft. A 
significant portion of the service rollout is expected to be 
complete by 2005 with a data throughput capability of 5 
Mega bits per second (Mbps) received onto the aircraft and 
1.5 Mbps transmitted from the aircraftt. 
The antenna system used in the initial Aero-SAPIENT 
ground static tests and forthcoming airborne mobile test 
scenarios is an initial prototype of the Connexion by 
BoeingSM system. For comparison, the receive antenna 
used measures 40 inches by 58 inches allowing up to 2 
Mbps onto the vehicle and the transmit antenna measures 
28 inches by 15 inches allowing up to 256 kilo bits per 
second from the vehicle. Figure 3 shows the prototype 
antennas on the roof of the van that is used by aeronautical 
communication projects at GRC. 
Figure 3 - Prototype Ku-band Phased Array Antennas 
3-1377 
4. NETWORKING TECHNOLOGY 
In order to accommodate a multi-protocol, bi-directional 
data sharing environment over a single robust satellite 
communication channel, a routing function was pursued. 
This routing function was developed through software 
configuration changes to a Sun Ultra 10 workstation. This 
router hosted Ethernet interfaces to provide connectivity to 
either the ground or mobile air Local Area Network (LAN) 
and HSSI interface cards to provide access to other possible 
routers within the Wide Area Network (WAN). This 
configuration is designed to route ATN and other 
commodity protocol applications simultaneously. Future 
test scenarios will enable the router to choose various 
terrestrial wireless VHF and satellite channels within the 
WAN. 
The augmentation of network link layer connectivity to 
facilitate remote data access and collaborative information 
exchange with an aircraft is being explored using a 
middleware utility called Ring Buffered Network Bus 
("). 
The RBNE3 is a 100% Java middleware data server that 
functions as a virtual network for arbitrary channels of 
information. Incoming data are stored in random access 
memory and optionally on disk for seamless transition 
between archived and most-current-value information. 
Multiple RBNBTM servers can communicate with each other 
to scale performance locally or across wide area networks. 
The "3 software serves as an intermediary between data 
sources and destinations. RBNB was originally invented to 
support measurement networks and distributed signal 
processing during aircraft fight test operations and is 
available commercially under ihe name RBNJ3 
DataTurbineTM (Creare, Inc., Hanover, New Hampshire)*. 
Applicalions use the RBNB network as the destination or 
source of real-time and recorded information.' In short, the 
RBNB is a tool to move any data into any display or 
algorithm anywhere on a network. Figure 4 illustrates the 
RBNB c.oncept. 
A number of features were matured or added to support 
AeroSAPENT. One feature that was added is the ability to 
dynamically prioritize individual data streams. Stream 
prioritization will be a necessary component of quality of 
service [(QoS) management schemes. For the aircraft data 
link application for example, low rate or intermittent high 
priority data such as cockpit commurucations may need to 
share the wireless WAN link with high rate but otherwise 
low priority data like passenger video ieleconferencing. 
Another feature added to RBNB for AeroSAPIENT is data 
stream metric calculations. These calculations enable 
observaiiion of QoS parameters as a function of time for 
individual streams, which can be mare insightful fiom an 
application perspective than traditional link layer metrics. 
Specific metrics that are available include logical data 
frames and socket bytes and their rates, to/f?om memory 
cache and to/fiom disk. 
Two examples of metrics are shown i n  Figure 5 and Figure 
6. In Figure 5 ,  time histories of fiame: rate for two identical 
synthesized data streams are shown during a modification of 
stream priority. This particular configuration is a laboratory 
measurement over standard wired Ethemet. As can be seen 
near the: midpoint, swapping the priority of the two streams 
is reflected in the data flow by a corre,sponding modification 
of frame rate. If the two channels had equal priority, they 
would lhave roughly equal frame rates. The variability 
observable in both figures is related to a QoS parameter 
commonly referred to as jitter. 
Figure 4 - Ring Buffered Network Bus (RBNB) Concept 
See UIU, http://rbnb.creare.cm 
3-1378 
.. . . 
I 200 Yln Sec 120 p k  
Figure 5 - Time histories of channel metric (Kftameshec) 
illustrating effect of dynamic channel prioritization 
Figure 6 - Time history of channel metic 
illustrating variable throughput (Kbyteshec) over 
wireless Ethernet with poor RF signal reception 
Figure 6 is a laboratory measurement of effective throughput 
in bytes per second through a commercial IEEE 802.1 1 b 
wireless LAN. This particular test intentionally moves the 
roaming node (a laptop computer) at the edge of reception. 
This plot clearly indicates the difficulty one might have in 
creating high integrity or in guaranteeing QoS over wireless 
networks. Data rates vary between zero and the desired 
nominal rate (325 Kbytedsec). 
In addition to focusing on performance over the satellite 
link, it is recognized that future data sharing environments 
will be distributed and over multiple networks serving many 
user groups in, a heterogeneous computing environment. 
Comprehensive solutions for managing security and integrity 
while enabling collaborative data exchange are not yet 
available although the Internet communities are making 
progress. Security, like eflciency, can be and should be 
applied in depth or in multiple layers. 
AeroSAPIENT implements and explores facets of the 
network security problem through judicious use of 
application layer security, network firewalls, and virtual 
private network (VPN) technologies. The RBNE3 servers 
and associated hardware distributed across the country 
enable much of this. A simplified layout of the distributed 
RBNB server network and firewall layout has been shown in 
Figure 1. The terrestrial server nodes are referred to as 
remote site nodes. In general, firewalls implement host and 
network perimeter protection and in some paths standard 
encryption VPN services, while the RBNB application 
environment enables additional authentication and 
encryption capabilities for hosts and users. 
5. APPLICATIONS 
In the future, real-time interactive applications between the 
crew on the flight deck and the corresponding ground 
personnel and other systems are envisioned to alleviate the 
capacity and safety concerns associated with the currently 
saturated National Airspace System (NAS). Applications 
useful to the flight operations will provide weather 
information, air traftic management tools, enroute planning, 
electronic flight bags, enhanced navigation aides, 
surveillance detection and avoidance, and other situational 
awareness tools. 
Due to increased available features and convenience for the 
pilot, electronic flight bags are becoming more prevalent. 
Items which may constitute such an electronic flight bag are 
personal electronic devices brought onboard such as laptops, 
rather than fixed equipment of the flight deck. These 
devices enable application to assist in flight management 
and decision making that are not currently part of that 
3-1379 
particular aircraft. Use of such applications can increase 
safety of flight through more informative, faster, and more 
accurate information retrieval as well as reducing the pilot's 
workload during preflight, inflight, and postflight 
operations.' 
Business and leisure passengers will also benefit from new 
cabin services such as a selection of live television 
broadcasts, destination planning, access to email, voice over 
the internet, and other internet applications. To support this 
passenger interest in connectivity, it has been determined 
that 48% of air travelers in the United States are business 
travelers of which 70% carry a laptop onboard and 83% 
carry cellular phones. Regarding the general U. S. 
population, there are over 100 million internet users (over 
300 million worldwide) who frequently send email, surf the 
World Wide Web, check weather updates, visit online 
companies and products, and read news and other popular 
media content.v 
Thus, the demand for interactive applications is known for 
both flight deck and cabin services. However, by the nature 
of these services, the content of information can be 
classified as safety critical or non-safety critical. Although 
this information can co-exist within the same wireless data 
link and thereby reduce the qyantity of data links and 
systems, there is the recognition for the utmost in providing 
information integrity. In addition, security measures for 
safety critical information is paramount. One approach to 
address this is to utilize Aeronautical Telecommunication 
Network (ATN) protocol for safety critical information and 
commodity protocols such as TCP/IF' for other applications. 
The investigation of satellite-based data sharing, information 
integrity, and security in a multi-protocol network 
environment is the premise for the Aero-SAPIENT project. 
Several classes of applications were targeted for 
implementation and demonstration of data sharing: between 
the aircraft and the terrestrial network. However, it should 
be emphasized that Aero-SAPIENT is not tzrgeted at 
aviation safety application development. An array of 
relevant data sources was considered useful for providing a 
more realistic view of the data sharing potential of 
broadband data links. 
Controller-Pilot Data Link Communication (CPDL,C) 
The CPDLC application provides standard coded text 
messaging between the cockpit and ground controllers. The 
intent is to increase safety by consolidating and decreasing 
routine voice communications, thereby increasing the 
efficiency of both pilots and ground controllers. Other 
benefits are alleviation of frequency congestion, improved 
weather deviation, and reduction of input errors. 
Implementation of CPDLC, however, will involve new 
satellite communication systems, new or modified flight 
deck systems, new pilot, dispatcher, and controller 
procedures and knowledge, and new aircraft maintenance 
procedures. Although CPDLC is designed as an ATN 
applicatiion, it is possible to operate over either ATN or IP 
networks which may ease its global im~plementation.~ 
Bi-directional Weather Data 
Bad weather results in increased separation between aircraft 
and can drastically reduce air traf'fic system capacity. 
Bringing weather data into the aircraft improves situational 
awareness in the cockpit while sending weather data to the 
ground augments the system-wide monitoring goals. 
NEXMD and CATMET information and simple http web 
sources provide weather data into the aircraft, while 
experimental Lidar and aircraft vibration measurements feed 
turbulence information to the ground. 
Digital Voice and Multimedia 
High bandwidth data links add vidue for interactivity 
between network nodes, including aircraft. The 
corresponding pedormance for unidirectional and 
interactive multimedia will be eva1uate:d. 
Vehicle Health Monitoring 
Network access to vehicle-specific information such as on- 
board dlata recorders, engine health monitoring, position, 
and navigation information enables consideration of 
numeroils risk-mitigating solutions. The DC-8 does not 
have a digital flight data recorder, but similar data is 
available via an on-board data syst,em that supports the 
science missions. Wireless sensors are also available that 
represent emerging technology likely to be used on future 
aircraft for health monitoring. Live feeds from on-board 
data sources to the ground can ef'fectively demonstrate 
access t'o vehicle health and status data. 
6. GROUNDTEBTS 
In preparation for a future technology flight demonstration, a 
siglllficmt ground test was performed in mid-June 2000 
involving NASA DFRC, GRC, and ARC. This test utilized 
a NASA equipped van as a simulated aircraft and employed 
the feaitures of the advanced Ku satellite capability, the 
RBNB network, and the multi-protocol capability in a 
3-1380 
distributed network between the three NASA Centers. In 
assessing the comprehensive network codiguration, 
represented in Figure 7, several things were noteworthy: 
Satellite communications are viable for this type of network 
architecture - Although previous independent transmit and 
independent receive tests had been performed, 
circumstances beyond our control did not allow 
simultaneous bi-directional connectivity, nor mobility. 
Therefore, the van received the satellite transmission, but 
was hard-wired back into the network representing 
transmission off of the simulated aircraft. 
The multi-protocol router can route - Data traffic was routed 
to the van via satellite at 1.5 Mbps and fiom the van 
terrestrially at 128 kbps, and bi-directional connectivity was 
established between the van at GRC and ARC. 
The prototype ATN application is ready - The ATN 
application Controller-Pilot Data Link Connection (CPDLC) 
as a prototype was used as the commercial version was not 
yet available. The CPDLC air-side was installed on the 
GRC van workstation and the ground-side was installed at 
ARC. 
while conducting plotting, chat, and administrative 
management tasks. Also, digital audio and video streams 
(e.g., the weather channel) and compressed 
NEXRADKATMET weather map data packets were routed 
through the network to the satcom gateway on the ground. 
Metrics for one of these runs is shown if Figure 8. The left 
column of fig. 5 shows socket rate in kbyteshec of audio 
(top), video (middle), and a synthesized data source 
(bottom). The right column displays the corresponding 
cumulative number of bytes transferred over the socket as a 
function of time. These data were pushed from NASA 
Dryden through the remote site node at NASA Glenn before 
arriving at the satcom gateway. 
The audio and video were captured multicast packets from a 
commercially available video-over-IP solution. The metrics 
for the data stream in the bottom row represent 1000 32 bit 
parameters per second. Bursthess or large variation in the 
video stream rate is not indicative of network congestion but 
instead is a reflection of the compression scheme used. 
However, the few large peaks (and several smaller ones) in 
the socket rate metric that correlate across all three streams 
are the effect of network congestion. The buffering service 
provided by the RBNB enables the data to "catch up" in a 
best effort fashion to the realtime feed without loss of data. 
The RBNB network performed - synthesized data traffic 
sustained 32 kbps to the van and 3.2 kbps fkom the van 
-Mobile LAN ( A A n  Van = 
SATCOM 
Gateway 
Chat Text 
Sources: 
Digital Audio 
Digital Video 
Simulated Data (e.g.lOOO sps) 
ARNAV Weather Map Data 
Chat Text 
Figure 7 - Ground Test Configuation 
3-1381 
operating conditions designed to exercise the link quality 
with the satellite. 
Figure 8 - Performance metrics for audio, video, and 
synthesized data arriving at satellite ground station from 
NASA Dryden 
Figure 9 shows the flight rack of equipment for the mobile 
terminal which consists of the antenna system controller, up 
and down converters, L3 and CL701 m.odems, PC and Sparc 
workstatlions and monitors, spectrum analyzer, power meter, 
analog ‘Tv receiver, Thunderbolt GPS (used as clock 
reference for intermediate frequency (IF) conversion and 
workstations time server function), IP phone, and 
uninterruiptible power supply. 
The AeroSAPIENT experiment is scheduled to fly as one of 
five secondary payloads on the DC-8 during the “ARM- 
FIRE Water Vapor Experiment” (AFWEX) deployment in 
November and December 2000. AFWEX is a collaborative 
Figure 9 - Flight rack at GRC just prior to shipment to 
IIFRC for integration aboard NASA’s DC-8 
effort between the Department of Energy and NASA and is 
comprised of four experiments dedicated to the 
measurement of water vapor at the Southern Great Plains 
Cloud and Radiation Testbed (CART) site in Oklahoma. A 
total of I10 flight hours will be under direct control of the 
AeroSAPIENT test team. Otherwise, the experiment flies in 
piggyback mode, collecting data as opportunities arise. 
The nominal AFWEX flight profile is to have the DC-8 fly 
upwind, downwind, and crosswind patterns with straight and 
level legs centered over the CART site. Straight and level 
legs will usually be at 25,000 and 41,000 feet altitude, and 
there will also be spiraling maneuvers from 1000 feet up to 
altitude for in-situ water vapor profiling measurements. 
During transit flights measurements will typically be cruise 
conditions. Aero-SAPIENT maneuvers will expand the 
measured operating conditions to include maneuvers and 
After integration of the antenna system and the mobile 
terminal, the respective sub-networks and comprehensive 
network will be functionally tested. Tests will be performed 
while the: plane is stationary outside the hangar and powered 
with its ARINC 429 databus active to complement the series 
of airborne testing. Altitude and position of the aircraft will 
be‘fed to the antenna pointing sub-system and recorded from 
the ARTNC 429 databus at a 0.1 Hz rate. The receive 
antenna parameters to be recorded are azimuth and elevation 
pointing angles, polarization, strength of signal, and energy 
per bit aiver noise density E D o .  The performance of the 
transmit antenna will be determined by the paranieters of the 
receive antenna as the transmit is slaved to the receive 
antenna. The satellite link quality willl be recorded via Bit 
Error Rate (BER) measurements at both the aircraft and the 
ground locations. 
3-1382 
The ATN and IP application suite will be subsequently 
tested. This suite includes the CPDLC application, telnet, 
web browsing, digital video, and voice over IF’. Evaluation 
of the network, protocols, and applications will be 
subsequently made using standard network statistical tools 
such as ping, ttcp, traceroute, and tcpdump. In addition, the 
RBNB network will be used with synthesized data streams 
to collect extended throughput metrics across a variety of 
flight maneuvers. These measurements include validation of 
prioritized stream management through the satellite. Thus, 
the various applications and datatypes will be moved to and 
fiom the terrestrial “El network and collaborative data 
exchange will be explored. This phase of testing simulates 
practical scenarios in which data flows between the aircraft 
and multiple remote terrestrial sites. Simple access to live 
sensor data and aircraft status fiom desktops will be 
demonstrated. security features as implemented be 
evaluated. 
Figure 11 - Transmit antenna being installed in an “eyeball” 
fairing to utilize an existing port on the DC-8 
Proposed flight profiles include simple latitude, longitude, 
and concentric circular patterns to determine the range of 
8. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
performance of the antenna system and corresponding 
effects of the network performance. Additional flight 
profiles are proposed that are compounded by various 
common aircraft rolls and banking angles. 
Future fleets of aircraft will communicate with each other 
and with terrestrial infixstructure via digital networks. 
Trustworthy wireless link technologies and software 
infi-astructure to manage the constant flow of data and its 
transformation into safety-relevant knowledge are critical to 
It is expected that a summary of these initial airbome test providing the desired order of magnitude increase in 
configurations, results, lessons learned, and forthcoming capacity and safety of the air transportation system. 
activities will be discussed during the presentation of this 
paper. Tests conducted through early December 2000 have 
achieved 256 kbps transmitted from the plane and 2.180 
Mbps onto the plane while in flight. All antenna system, 
network, and application objectives were successfully 
accomplished. Figures 10 and 11 depict the antennas being 
installed on the DC-8. 
In a broad sense, network technology is going to have a 
significant impact on the world of data acquisition. Making 
or obtaining access to measurements today is expensive and 
labor intensive. Evolving data acquisition toward a “node 
on a network” paradigm enables construction of solutions 
that scale in a more cost effective and scaleable manner. In 
this context, NASA intends to leverage the explosive growth 
of the telecommunications industry through its impressive 
technological advancements and potential new commercial 
satellite systems, specifically through the development, test, 
integration, demonstration, and infusion of emerging 
communication and networking technologies. lo 
While network paradigms promise innovation and increased 
productivity, security and integrity of the network become 
fundamental factors in the safety equation. The Aero- 
SAPIENT experiments are modest steps toward getting data 
flowing so that trustworthy information management 
architectures will evolve in concert with technology. 
Acknowledgements 
Figure 10 - Receive antenna being installed on the DC-8 
The AeroSAPlENT project was conceived and funded by 
NASA’s IT Base Research Program, managed at Ames 
3-1383 
Research Center. The Ku-band satellite network system was 
funded by NASA’s Advanced Air Transportation 
Technologies (AATT) Program, Advanced Communications 
for Air Tr‘raffic Management (AC/ATM) project managed at 
Glenn Research Center. 
References 
[‘IHuettner, Charles. H., Toward a Safer 21”’ Centuly: 
Aviation Safety Research Baseline and Future 
Challmnges, NASA NP-1997-1223l-HQ, 1996. 
‘*]Donohue, George L., “Investing in Air Transportation 
Research”, Aerospace America, vol. 38, No. 9, September 
2000, p.28 
[3JKerczewski, Robert J., Gerald J. Chomos, James H. 
Griner, Steven W. Mainger, and Konstatutinos S. 
Martzaklis, “A Hybrid Satellite-Terrestrial Approach to 
Aeronautical Communications Networks”, Proceedings of 
I the 18th AIAA Intemational Communications Satellite 
Systems Conference, Oakland, CA, April 10-14,2000, pp. 
892-900. 
[41Gedney, Richard T., Ronald J. Schertler, and Frank 
Gargione, The Advanced Communications Technology 
Satellite - An Insider’s Account of the Emergence of 
Interactive Broadband Technology in Space, Chapter 4: 
User Trials, SciTech Publishing, Inc., 2000. 
[51Zernic, Michael J., and Robert A. Bauer, “The Role of the 
ACTS Experiments Program in the Preparation of Future 
Systems”, Proceedings of the l p  AIAA Intwnational 
Communications Satellite Systems Conference, Oakland, 
CA, April 10-14,2000, pp- 470-480. 
[61Salpultas, Agis, “A New Way to Search for Oil, Via 
Satellite”, The New York Times, Business Section, April 
8, 1996, pp. C1, C5. 
[’]Miller, Matthew J., Lawrence C. Freudinger, Ian A. 
Brown, and William R Bascbnagel, “On-Line Test and 
Measurement in a Distributed Collaborative 
Environment”, Proceedings of the 1 6Ih Intemational 
Modo1 Analysis Conference, vol. 2, Feb. 1998, pp. 
1313--1319. 
‘*]Trotter-Cox, Anita, “Electronic Flight Bag - Trslnsitioning 
to a Paperless Environment Requires More Than 
Technology”, Professional Pilot Magazine, March 2000, 
httu ://wwv. aviationm~uals.com/articles/article!;6 .html 
[91Trotter-Cox, Anita, “Controller-Pilot Datalink 
Communication (CPDLC) - A Key Component of the 
Global CNS/ATM Strategy”, Professional Pilot 
Magazine, September 1999, 
httr,:/i.u~~~.a\:iatio1una~inals.cotn/articles/article4.html 
[‘‘IVrots’os, Pete A., James M. Budinper, Kul Bhasin, and 
Denise S. Ponchak, “Partnering io  Change the Way 
NASA and the Nation Communicate Through Space”, 
Proceedings of the 6Ih Ka-Band Utilization Conference, 
May 3’1 -June 2,2000, pp. 133-138 
Michael‘ J.  Zernic began his career at 
NASA Glenn Research Center at Lewis 
Field lformerly Lewis Research 
Center) in Cleveland, Ohio in 1983 
and holds a B.S. in Mechanical 
Engineering from the University gf 
Dayton and a M S .  in Industrial 
Engineering >om Cleveland State 
University. He currently advocates, 
develop..r, and manages innovative 
experiments to be conducted within the scope of NASA 
Glenn Research Center’s Space Communication Program, 
including Aero-SAPIENT Mr. 2‘emic has managed 
experiments using the Advanced Communications 
Technology Satellite (ACTS) and was the Mission 
Operations Manager for the electric power system of 
NASA’s Space Station Program. Mr. Zemic is the recipient 
of numerous awards including Government Computer News 
(1996), Space Technology Hall of Fame (1997), and the 
University of Dayton School of Engineering Alumni Award 
of Excer‘lence (1 998). 
Lawrence C. Freudinger has beav 
employed since 1982 at NASA Dryden 
Flight Research Center, Edwards, 
California as a member of the 
technical stafland as technical lead in 
experimental structural dynamic::. 
Larry received the B.S. degree in 
aeronautical and astronauticd 
engineering from the University crf 
Illinois at Champaign- Urbana (1 9861, 
and the MS. degree in mechanical engineering from the 
University of Cincinnati (1990). He has co-developed the 
patent-pending Ring Buflered Network Bus (XBNB) which 
earned an Honorable Mention for 1!199 NASA Sofhyare of 
the Year. Lany has also served as a member of the AlAA 
Structural Dynamics Technical Committee and managed 
Lhyden ’s Small Business Innovatiion Research (SBIR) 
Program. His research interests include spatial filtering, 
time-space signal processing, on-line estimation, complex 
adaptive systems, and distributed wired cmd wireless 
measurement networks. 
3-1384 
