Test Results of F/A-lS Autoland Trials for Aircraft 
Carrier Operations 
Greg Johnson 
Bruce Peterson 
Jeff Taylor 
Raytheon, Navigation &Landing Systems 
4750 Wiley Post Way #130 
Salt Lake City, UT 841 16 
801-257-6900 
Abstract-Raytheon and the US. Navy conducted Aircraft 
Carrier precision approach trials using the F/A-18 as the test 
platform. These trials are part of the Navy Joint Precision and 
Landing System (PALS) effort to demonstrate Global 
Positioning System (GPS) technology for aircraft carrier 
precision approach. The team achieved the historic milestone 
of the first l l l y  coupled approach and landing to the ground 
in an F/A- 18 using a GPS-based navigation solution. 
These trials used a Raytheon Navigation and Landing System 
developed test bed, Rockwell-Collins 24-channel Enhanced 
Miniature Airborne GPS Receiver (EMAGR), and U.S. Navy 
aircraft integration. The Raytheon test bed was know 
previously as the Signature Managed Air Traffic Control, 
Approach, and Landing System (SMATCALS). It performs a 
Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) function for aircraft at 
range, air traffic control for up to 100 aircraft within 200 nmi 
of the ship, and Precision Approach and Landing (PAL) for 
up to 4 aircraft within 20 nmi of the ship. The airbome and 
ship segments consist of a two-way low probability of 
intercept (LPI) data link, navigation processors, and relative 
navigation sofhvare based on carrier phase tracking 
technology. The Navy integration platform for the F/A-18, 
known as the Naval Avionics Platform Integration Emulator 
(NAPE), consists of the a i r d  control and pilot interfaces. 
This paper' shows data and ealysis that measures andor 
models accuracy of the test bed and GPS measurements. This 
is done in two phases. The first phase demonstrates the 
performance of the existing test bed as performed real-time 
using ship and airbome platforms. The second phase shows 
post processed analysis of measurement data and a proposed 
relative navigation solution. 
Because the ship environment is unique to the precision 
landing technology, special considerations must be made to 
monitor integrity and to model continuity. These special 
considerations include ship flexure, RF interference, ship 
blockage, pseudorange multipath, carrier phase multipath, and 
ship dynamics. 
During testing GPS data was collected at five sites on the ship 
and inertial data was collected at two sites. These sites were 
LCDR Chris McCarthy 
Camer Suitability, Bldg 1641 
2 1947 Nickles Rd 
Patuxent River, MD 20670 
301-342-1283 
distributed so that the ship effects can be readily observed and 
ship attitude can be determined to a high degree of accuracy. 
Also, because of the dynamic nature of the ship as opposed to 
a fixed runway, this paper presents special analyses to show 
blockage in a relative azimuth sense. 
The test and analysis results show that GPS technology 
provides the quality needed to perform relative precision 
approaches in an aircraft carrier environment. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. m O D U C T I O N  
2. TEST PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 
3. SENSOR PERFORMANCE 
4. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
5. CONCLUSION 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
8. BIOGRAPHIES 
7. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Shipboard Relative Global Positioning System (SRGPS) 
supports requirements similar in nature to those defined in 
Local Area Augmentation System (LAAS) such as accuracy, 
integrity, continuity, and availability. SRGPS has additional 
requirements due to the military nature of the system such as 
prevention of intentional jamming, use of both L1 and L2 
frequencies, and operation in remote locations. Even more 
requirements are levied due to shipboard operations such as 
higher accuracy and movement of the landing platform. 
The movement of the landing platform is the main conceptual 
difference between a shipboard system and a fixed-base 
system. The requirements account for this movement in the 
relative GPS architecture of the system through the inclusion 
of deck motion compensation (DMC) and heading 
stabilization. These requirements are still in development. In 
fact, this test effort helps to deiine the end-state requirements 
of the system. For M e r  discussion on requirements, see 
Requirements for GPS-Based Aircraft Carrier Precision 
Approach and Landing'. 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 2001 IEEE 
3-1283 
2. TEST PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 
Technical Team 
The technical team was composed primarily of Raytheon and 
Navy personnel, along with support contractors from both 
organizations. The responsibilities of each organization were 
as follows: 
Ravtheon NLS 
1) Navigation solution design and implementation 
2) LPI data link design and implementation 
3) DMC/Stab shipboard implementation 
4) Shipboard user interfaceidisplays implementation 
5 )  Navigation solution post-processing of data 
NAVAM 
system, performs heading stabilization filtering at 20 Hi, and 
uplinks this stabilized heading at 5 Hz. The ship also receives 
range and velocity data from the airbamme in order to weight 
the staldized heading information in algorithms. The 
airborne system receives the ship GPS and heading data and 
performs the necessary calculations to provide the guidance 
and control for a successful approach and landing. The 
airborne system first calculates an RKCPT solution fiom the 
shipboard GPS antenna to the airborne GPS antenna. With 
this accurate position vector, the airbome system then 
calculates a high-rate tailhook-to-touchdown point relative 
position vector by accounting for lever arms and integrating 
with inertial data. The airborne system also compensates for 
deck motion, and provides the necessaxy inputs for the F/A- 
18 flight controls to accomplish a siuccessful autocoupled 
approaclh and landing. 
Shipboard Installation--For shore based flight testing, the 
shipboard system of Figure 2 was installed in a van. The van, 
in effect, took the place of the aircraft carrier. During flight 
testing, it was parked along side the imway. Stabilization 
jacks provided stability since movements of personnel in the 
van and of the wind could make more abrupt movements than 
would bi: experienced in a shipboard installed system. 
GFE equipment (EMAGRs and CAINS ll) 
provision 
DMC/Stab design and aircraft implementation 
Inertial blending implementation 
Data Link Antenna GPS Antenna Processors/Data  ink 
Aircraft control laws implementation to operate / ,' 
with GPS Inertlal 
Navigatmn 
system 
Aircraft user interface/displays provision 
Aircraft integration 
Towed Generator 
\ 
Stabdizafion Jacks Power Supply/Anplifier 
Figure 2 Shipboard Installation 
Aircraft Installation-The Airbome System was installed in 
an FiA-18. Figure 3 identifies the locations of various 
components on the a i r d .  
. - .  
ShipljodrdS+tcim- 
' 
. .  
I . _ . . . .  ~ ~ = . s ~ .  . . . . . 
Pallet Ct~nfiguation-The airborne pall et identified in Figure 
3 is shown in close-up in Figure 4. 
Figure 1 SRGPS Test Bed Diagram 
Test Bed Contguration 
Figure 1 shows the SRGPS test bed block diagram. The 
Shipboard System receives measurements fiom the EMAGR, 
calculates widelane measurements, and sends the widelane 
measurements via the data link to Airbome System. The 
shipboard system also processes data for DMC. The 
shipboard system receives inertial data fiom the: inertial 
3-1284 
Airbome Pallet Data Llnk flight, which returns the aircraft system functions to the 
normal production aircraft avionics. 
Lab Testing 
The first phase of testing consisted of vewing the system 
performance in a laboratory environment. This was bench- 
top testing where the system was operated using a GPS 
Talhook satellite simulator and RF cables for the data link 
transmissions. MATLAB simulations were performed for 
Arresting Cable Data Link Antmm 
Figure 3 Aircraft Installation 
Targa Dnves 
NovAtd 
EMAGR 
1553 Buses SRGPS ATR Box 
RF Connect” 
NAPE 
Travel~~g Wave Tube 
Figure 4 Pallet Configuration 
much of the GPS processing, deck motion compensation, 
heading stability, and flight controls processing. Most of this 
test effort consisted of component level testing (i.e. GPS 
receiver, inertial navigation system, data link, etc.). 
Van Testing 
Initial ground testing was performed fkom January to April 
2000. This ground testing was performed with the SRGPS 
system components installed in two separate vans to allow the 
system performance to be evaluated with relative motion 
between the ground station and the aircraft system. The 
ground station hardware was installed in a 24-foot cargo van 
(Figure 2). This van, towing a trailer-mounted generator, was 
used as the mobile ground station for the duration of the 
shore-based testing. The SRGPS aircraft system was 
temporarily installed in a nine-passenger van. Due to the 
nature of van testing, some limitations were encountered. 
These issues included difficulty maintaining data link line-of- 
sight, GPS blockages, GPS multipath, and difficulty 
achieving representative aircraft dyna&&s (i.e. speed). With 
the successful completion of these ground van tests, the 
aircraft system (Figure 4) was removed from this van and 
installed in the test aircraft for additional testing. 
NAprE--The was modified to accept the NAPE 
system to support the testing of the prototype integration of 
the SRGPS system. NAPE is’an extremely flexible and 
capable avionics integration tool, performing the following 
functions for SRGPS testing: 
Allows cockpit control of the SRGPS aircraft 
equipment via the Up-Front Control (UFC) and the 
Right Digital Display Indicator (RDDI) 
Calculates SRGPS-based position stabilization and 
flight guidance for driving the Automatic Carrier 
Landing System (ACLS) “fly to” needles, or 
“tadpole,” on the F/A-18 Head-Up Display (HUD) 
Calculates SRGPS-based position stabilization and 
outer-loop commands for conducting coupled 
approaches via the ACLS command paths of the 
flight control computer (FCC) 
Displays equipment status to the pilot via the HUD 
and RDDI 
Collects and records airborne instrumentation data 
Ground testing of the SRGPS airborne system installed in the 
F/A-18 was performed fkom April 27 - May 1,2000 to verify 
satisfactory functioning of the integrated SRGPSlNAPIE 
system prior to flight test. This phase consisted of tests in 
which the ship system was installed in the cargo van, and 
included data link checks with the van driving both toward 
and away from the a i r d .  With the success of these system- 
installed ground tests, the aircraft was cleared for flight test. 
Flight Testing 
The test team’s game plan for the initial shore-based flight 
testing was to focus on the landing phase of the SRGPS 
system prior to testing the system robustness using up and 
away maneuvers. The shore-based landing phase goal was an 
SRGPS coupled approach to touchdown (Mode I). The three 
modes of approach and landing are defined in Figure 5. 
The NAPE system is a powerfid systems flight test tool 
because it allows both major and minor changes to the 
cockpit displays and fight control laws to be made quickly 
(usually less than two hours), without re-writing a complete 
operational fight program (OFP) for the F/A-18. For safety, 
the pilot can disconnect the NAPE system at any time in 
3-1285 
Mode I approach - the pilot couples the aircraft to the system 
(traditionally ACLS) commands, which automatically flies 
the approach to touchdown. 
Mode IA approach - Mode I coupled approach to 200 ft AGL, 
then pilot takes over to manually fly the approach to 
touchdown. 
Mode II approach - the pilot manually flies the ,gpidance 
commands to touchdown. 
Figure 5 Aircraft Carrier Precision Approaches 
Buildup-Although auto-coupled approach and landing to the 
deck was the ultimate goal of the shore-based flight testing 
phase, the shore-based SRGPS Mode I was itself a buildup 
toward SRGPS Mode I landings at the ship. Buildup to the 
shore-based Mode I included Mode II, Mode IA, and elevated 
touchdown point (ETDP) Mode I approaches 
During all shore-based test flights, the van was positioned 
abeam the intended touchdown point at the approach end of 
runway 32, and approximately 210 ft fiom runway centerline. 
This position gave good data link line-of-sight fiom the van 
to the air~xaft for all approaches. Additionally, all approaches 
were flown to flared landings during the shore-based tests to 
reduce the risk of damaging any of the prototype SRGPS 
system components while performing normal carrier 
landings. 
At-Sea Data Collection 
In addition to shore-based flight testing, data was collected at 
sea on the USS Enterprise (CVN-65) in both Febnlary and 
August of 2000. This data included 
4) S-band spectrum data 
5) UHF spectrum data 
This collected data was used to compile the sensor 
performance results presented in this paper. 
3. SENSOR PERFORMANCE 
The GPS measurements are the basis for the performance of 
the system. There are two primary cornponents of the sensor 
performance evaluated in this paper. These are niultipath and 
SV outage. 
Data Collection Sites 
There were 5 data collection sites on the ship. These sites are 
described in the following sections and are called: Port 
Yardarm, Starboard Yardarm, LSO Platform, SPN-41 
elevation platform, and 'bellknap tower. Figure 6 shows all 
the locations. 
Figure 6 GPS Antenna Locations 
The starboard yardarm antenna is located on the uppermost 
yardarm on the ship on the port side ol'the mast. It is about 
10 meters away fiom main mast. The port yardarm antenna is 
located 5 meters to port away fiom that. Figure 7 shows these 
locations. 
1) 
2) Shipboard inertial data 
3) GPS spectrum data 
Raw GPS data using multiple receivers, ant.ennas, 
and locations 
3-1286 
Yardarm Antennas Yardarm (Port) Antenna 
I Yardarm (Starboard) Antenn 
09- 
08- 
Figure 7 Yardarm Locations 
'i -L 1 Mdhpath' 100 S'econd 'Smoother 
A21 L2 Mulbpath 100 Second Smoother - 
\ L 1 Mulhpath 10 Mmute Divergence- 
!< Free Smoother 
The LSO antenna is located on a 2 meter tower close to the 
Landing Signal Officer (LSO) Platform. The LSO is the 
officer that helps to guide the incoming aircraft to a 
successful approach and landing. This is the antenna that is 
located closest to the approach of the a i r d .  Figure 8 shows 
the LSO antenna placement. 
LSO Platform Antenna 
i 
Bellknap T o w  Antenna 
Figure 10 Bellknap Tower GPS Antenna Location 
Smoothed Pseudorange Multipath 
Smoothed Multipath Error is the residual error after the 
smoothed pseudorange (PR) is compared to raw carrier phase 
(CP), while compensating for ionosphere and integer 
ambiguity. Although this error's primary component is PR 
multipath, the error also included PR noise. 
For the following data sets, 24 hours of raw GPS data was 
collected at each of the data sites. Smoothed PRs were 
generated using three different types of filters. The first is the 
100 second time constant smoother as defined in the LAAS 
Specification'. The 100 second smoother was performed on 
both L1 and L2. Also, divergence ftee smoothing3 using 10 
minute and 30 minute time constants were also employed on 
L1. These data were then placed into 5 degree elevation angle 
bins and plotted against the LAAS A2, B2, and C2 accuracy 
designators'. 
Figure 8 LSO Platform GPS Antenna Location 
Figure 9 SPN-41 Platform GPS Antenna Location 
The SPN-41 platform GPS antenna is located on a 5 meter 
tower close the elevation element of a navigation aid radar 
known and the SPN-41. This antenna placement is the 
closest to the touchdown point. Figure 9 shows the location 
of the SPN-41 antenna. 
The bellknap GPS antenna location is on a 4 meter tower 
located between the forward and aft of the flight deck, on the 
Starboard side. Figure 10 shows this location. 
Figure 11 Multipath Accuracy for Port Yardarm 
For the port yardarm location, the multipath accuracy plot is 
shown in Figure 1 1. Note the accuracy generally follows the 
shape of the standard accuracy curve, that of being high at the 
higher elevation angles, and decreasing when the elevation 
angle goes high. However, the accuracy did not meet the B2 
specification that is required for a Mode IA approach. 
3-1287 
The SFN-41 location has a unique type of multipath 
distribution. The largest multipath is at the higher elevation 
angles. This is probably due to a reflection off of the SNP-41 
antenna that is located about 10 feet from the GPS; antenna. 
See Figwe 12. 
1.8 
1 6 -  
1 4 -  
Multipath for the SPN Location 
- 
2 r  - I E -  
1.2 
E 1 -  
0.8 
0 6  
0 4  
0 2  
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
OL ' 
0 1 0  20 33 40 50 60 70 80 
Elevation Angle 
Figure 12 Multipath Accuracy for SPN-41 Location 
1 1 4  
1 
J 
O O l -  lb  zb 3b 40 il m 70 sb 90 
Elevation Angle 
Figure 13 Multipath for Bellknap Tower Location 
The bellknap tower location had the best rnultipath 
performance (Figure 13). However, there was a hump around 
20 degrees. To further analyze the cause of this hump, the 
multipath performance with respect azimuth must be 
observed. This azimuth observation is usually done in fixed 
based location by placing the multipath accuracy data in 
elevation-azimuth bins. However, since the ship ch3mges its 
orientation relative to the satellites, conventional azimuth 
relative to true north cannot be used. This analysis will 
implement a "relative azimuth", or the azimuth relative to the 
heading of the ship. 
the error is located in the 180 and 330 relative azimuth bins. 
This corresponds to a signal bounce along the length of the 
flight deck. Although not shown, this is also true for the 
azimuth bins in the 25 and 35 degree elevation angle bins. 
Elevation h a l e  = 30 
1 2  
1  
0 8  
E 0 6  
x 
04 
0 2  
n 
Y -  
O 50 100-  150 200 250 300 350- 400 
Azimuth 
Figure 14 Relative Azimuth Bins for Bellknap Tower 
Satellite Outage 
Satellite outage is the primary indicator of system availability 
and continuity. There are three primsuy sources of outage 
aboard an aircraft carrier: blockage, RF interference, and 
simply the GPS receiver not tracking, a given SV for an 
undetemhed reason. This section shows selected data from 
the dif€erent antenna locations that {indicate blockage or 
interference. 
SV blockage is caused by ship super structure or aircraft in 
the path between an SV and the antenna. For example, the 
antenna located at the LSO platform is low enough for parked 
aircraft to block low elevation SVs. All other antennas that 
are not effected by aircrafl could be effected by ship 
superstructure blockage. 
Figure 15 shows the blockage of the port yardarm antenna. 
Note that the preponderance of the outage occurs on the 
relative !3o0 azimuth or to the right of the antenna. This 
corresponds to the mast of the ship. The other outages are 
caused bjy the receiver randomly not tracking SVs. 
The interference plot (right side of Figure 15) shows that no 
SV outages are correlated in time, thus the probability of 
interference causing outage is low. Interference is evident 
when several or all SVs experience outage at the same time. 
In Figure 14, most of the azimuth bins for 30 degrees are 
above the B2 accuracy spec. However, the preponderance of 
3-1288 
Figure 15 Satellite Outage for Port Yardarm 
Phase Multipath 
Phase multipath cannot be determined in the same method as 
Pseudorange multipath. One method is to compare 
measurements of carrier phase data collected at two known 
antenna locations, the LAAS B calculation. However, the 
antenna locations on a ship are constantly moving with 
respect to a fvred baseline. Thus, further processing is 
required to calculate the true vector between the antenna 
locations. 
This analysis of this paper only differences the true 
magnitude of the vector fiom the magnitude of a fixed 
widelane solution. This is a solution error that is subject to 
SV geometry so an SV-by-SV phase multipath calculation 
cannot be made. 
However, an indication of multipath error can be made by 
dividing the magnitude error by the geometric dilution of 
precision (GDOP). This error can then be compared to a set 
of data that was collected at a fixed base location. Figure 16 
shows the magnitude error for both at sea and a fixed base 
location. The data collected at sea is noisier than one 
expected for carrier phase data. This noise is probably due to 
the vibration andor ship flexure of the towers on which they 
are mounted. 
Green = Fixed Base, Black = Ship 
0.08, > I I I I I I , , , 
0.04 O.O6I  1 t i  
0 02 
2 0  
-0 02 
-0 04 
f 
0 06 
o m 1000 ism 21100 2 m  3000 3500 moo 4500 5000 -0.08' " " " " ' I 
Seconds 
Figure 16 Phase Error of Ship and Fixed Base Locations 
4. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
The accuracy of the navigation solution provides the basis for 
the performance of the approach. All guidance quality 
indicators, continuity, integrity, and availability are based on 
accuracy. This section shows accuracy plots for real-time 
shore based tests, and post-processed solution using data 
collected on the U.S.S Enterprise and a small aircraft making 
approaches to the. Enterprise. 
Shore Based Flight Test Data 
Raytheon and the Navy conducted several tests on the shore 
using the F/A-18 to prepare the system for an at-sea test. 
During these series of tests, the team accomplished an historic 
milestone: the first ever auto-coupled approach and landing 
(Mode I) of an aircraft to the ground using GPS technology. 
This occurred on June 21, 2000. The test that day had eight 
approaches: the first an elevated Mode I, the second a Mode 
IA, and the rest successful Mode I approaches. This paper 
shows the accuracy plots for the Mode IA and the first Mode 
I. 
Each plot shows the navigation sensor error as well as the 
altitude and the number of SVs used in the fixed solution. 
Also a solution flag indicates whether the solution has a 
floating solution (flag = -1) or has fixed ambiguity solutions 
(flag = -2). Figure 17 and Figure 18 show the Mode IA and 
Mode I approaches respectively. 
The algorithm's Kalman filter was manually reset during the 
approaches (at 65 sec in Figure 17, and at 20 sec in Figure 
18). The float solution begins to converge while the algorithm 
searches for the correct fixed ambiguity. The correct fixed 
ambiguity was selected in the first plot at 142 sec. In the 
second plot, an incorrect ambiguity was selected at 92 sec, 
followed by a correct ambiguity selection at 115 sec. On both 
approaches, the correct ambiguity was held all the way 
3-1289 
through touchdown. The navigation error after correct fixing 
holds in the 10 cm range, an excellent result. 
4 t  
Figure 17 Approach 1, Elevated Mode I 
1 
0 150 xa 
se" 
Figure 19 Ground Trace and Aircraft Altitude 
Posttion Error 
-2 
0 500 loo0 1500 2000 ;500 3ooo 3500 
Seconds 
-'.i 
3 I 
Figure 20 Navigation Sensor Error 
Figure 19 Ground Trace and Aircraft Altitude shows the 
ground trace of the aircraft and altitude plot of the trajectory. 
During this period, the aircraft made three approaches 
Figure 18 The First Mode I Approach 
Post-Processed At-Sea Data 
Data mi collected on the USS Enterprise and on a Piper 
Cheyenne aircraft on August 2, 2000. This data \vas then 
analyzed 0-e using a MATLAB based post processing 
solution. The GPS data was collected using Rockwell- 
Collins data collection program known as BBCOM. GPS 
data wa+ also collected on the ship using an Ashtech 2-12 
Receiver and a NovAtel Beeline receiver in the air. This Z- 
12 and NovAtel data was then post-processed using the Graf- 
Mov program and provides the "truth" reference for the test. 
Figure 20 Navigation Sensor Error shows the navigation 
sensor error of the post-processed navigation solution 
compared to truth. The red, blue, and :geen lines denote the 
north, east, and vertical components of the error. Note the 
outages in navigation sensor error. This is due to the truth 
system not being able to maintain 21 fixed carrier phase 
solution throughout an approach. The light black line, 
representing the fixed flag, indicatels the ability of the 
navigation solution to maintain a fixed carrier phase solution. 
The heavy black and magenta lines in the plot, representing 
altitude and heading respectively, show the location of the 
aircraft diuring the approach. 
The plots, demonstrate that the measured accuracy meets the 
accuracy specification of a Mode I approach. 
3-1290 
5. CONCLUSION 
This paper shows the unique problems associated with 
aircraft carrier precision approach and landing. The multipath 
and blockage data show that antenna sighting is vital to the 
success of the program. Also, the phase data shows that 
vibration and ship flexure of the GPS antennas must also be 
considered. Accuracy, being a key component in the success 
of a precision landing system, is better than 3 cm RMS error. 
This meets the accuracy specification for SRGPS Mode I 
operations. 
The F/A-18 shore based testing proved to be a resounding 
success. The first autocoupled landing to deck in an F/A-18 
using GPS technology was demonstrated. This set the stage 
for trials at-sea, where Mode I landing to deck can also be 
demonstrated. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was accomplished under contract to the US. 
Naval Air Systems Command, Code PMA-213 as part of the 
Joint Precision Approach and Landing System (JPALS)  
program. 
7. REFERENCES 
[ 13 Greg Johnson and Ian Gallimore, "Requirements for GPS- 
Based Aircraft Carrier Precision Approach and Landing", 
Institute of Navigation GPS-98 Proceedings, September 
1998. 
[2] US Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation 
Administration. "Local Area Augmentation System Ground 
Facility Specification, Version 4.6", March 29, 1999 
[3] Patrick Y. Hwang, et al., "Enhanced Differential GPS 
Carrier-Smoothed Code Processing Using Dual-Frequency 
Measurements", Navigation: Joumal of The Institute of 
Navigation, Summer 1999. 
[4] RTCA, Incorporated, "Minimum Aviation System 
Performance Standard for the Local Area Augmentation 
System (LAAS)", (RTCA/DO-245). Washington, DC: 
RTCA, Incorporated, 1998. 
8. BIOGRAPHIES 
Greg Johnson is a Systems Engineer at Raytheon, 
Navigation and Landing Systems in Salt Lake City, UT. He 
is currently developing high precision applications for GPS, 
including precision landing and velocity measuring systems. 
He has been involved in GPS development and testing since 
1985 as a test manager, analyst, integration engineer, and 
nautical surveyor. Mr. Johnson received his BSEE fiom 
Brigham Young University in 1984 and his MSEE fiom the 
Air Force Institute of Technology in 1990. Mr. Johnson 
holds two GPS related patents. 
Bruce Peterson received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering 
with a Math minor fiom Utah State University in 1970. He is 
a Senior Principle Systems Engineer for Raytheon Command, 
Control, and Communications Systems, Navigation and 
Landing Systems, located in Salt Lake City, Utah. Most 
recently, he has performed systems engineering work on the 
US Navy sponsored Shipboard Relative GPS (SRGPS) 
project. Previously he has been a program manager, systems 
engineer, and project engineer on numerous projects in the 
space industry and in the nuclear power industry. He has also 
been a faculty member in the Electrical Engineering 
departments of Utah State University, The University of 
Idaho, and The University of New Mexico. 
Jeff Taylor is a Senior Engineer with Raytheon, Navigation 
and Landing Systems in Salt Lake City, Utah. Most recently, 
he was the Raytheon lead test engineer and lead software 
engineer ,on the SRGPS project. He has been involved in 
GPS application development since 1993 primarily as a 
systendsohare designer for GPS-based navigation and 
landing systems. Previously, he has developed software for 
flight controls, strategic defense, signal intelligence, and 
reconnaissance systems. Mr. Taylor received a BSEE degree 
fiom the University of Alabama in Huntsville in 1992. 
LCDR Chris McCarthy is the Chief Test Pilot for the Joint 
Precision Approach and Landing System (JPALS) program. 
He is currently assigned as a test pilot and landing signal 
officer in the Ship Suitability Department of the Naval Strike 
Aircraft Test Squadron at NAS Patuxent River, MD. He has 
been the project officer for the Shipboard Relative GPS 
(SRGPS) project since his graduation fiom the US. Naval 
Test Pilot School in June 1999. LCDR McCarthy received 
his BSAE fiom the University of Florida in 1990 and his 
MSAE fiom the Naval Postgraduate School in 1999. He is 
currently working toward an MBA fiom the University of 
Baltimore. 
3-1291 
