Model-based Predictive Diagnostics for Electrochemical 
Energy Sources' 
James D. Kozlowski, Carl S. Byington, Amulya K. Garga, Matthew J. Watson, Todd A. Hay 
Applied Research Laboratory 
The Pennsylvania State University 
State College, PA 16804-0030 
jdl<l73(ii),,psu.&u 
814-863-3849 
Abstract-The model-based effort described here is focused 
on predictive diagnostics for primary and secondary 
batteries. However, this novel approach can also be applied 
to other electrochemical energy sources such as fuel cells. 
This method is based on accurate parametric modeling of 
the transport mechanisms within the battery. This system 
knowledge was used for the careful development of 
electrochemical and thermal models. These models have 
been used to extract new features to be used in conjunction 
with several traditional measured parameters to assess the 
condition of the battery. The resulting output and any 
usable information available about the battery is then 
evaluated using hybrid automated reasoning schemes 
consisting of neural network and decision theoretic 
methods. The focus of this paper is on the model 
identification and data fusion of the monitored and virtual 
sensor data. The methodology and analysis presented in this 
paper is applicable to mechanical systems where multiple 
sensor types are used for diagnostic assessment. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
MEASUREMENT AND DATA COLLECTION 
MODEL IDENTIFICATION 
FAULT AND END OF LIFE PREDICTION 
CONCLUSIONS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
REFERENCES 
BIOGRAPHIES 
STATE-OF-CHARGE PREDICTION MODELS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Figure 1 shown on the next page is a visual description of 
the model-based approach for battery predictive diagnostics. 
This approach makes use of electrochemical and thermal 
model modules that are linked with coupled parameters. 
The outputs of the models are combined in a data fusion 
architecture that derives observational synergy while 
reducing the false alarm rate. The reasoning system 
provides the outputs described in the bottom of the figure. 
While the arrows showing information flow are unilateral, 
the ability to prognosticate on future condition will require 
the reasoning system to interrogate the models as to how 
different loading conditions effects the remaining useful 
cycles, capacity, etc. Developments are applicable to the 
eventual migration of the diagnosis and health monitoring to 
an electronic chip embedded into the battery (i.e., Intelligent 
Battery Health Monitor). 
For overall performance, the capacity and voltage of a cell 
are the primary specifications required for an application. 
The capacity is defined as the time integral of current 
delivered to a specified load before the terminal voltage 
drops below a predetermined cut-off voltage. 
For primary cells, the rated capacity is not strictly 
determinable but instead represents the statistical properties 
of test data from identical cells. The present condition of a 
cell is described nominally with the state-of-charge (SOC) 
that is defined as the ratio of the remaining capacity and the 
initial or rated capacity. Obviously, in order to assess SOC, 
one must have knowledge of the service history of the cell 
and its nominal capacity. 
Secondary cells are observed to have a capacity that 
deteriorates over the service life of the cells. The term state- 
of-health (SOH) is used to describe the physical condition of 
the battery ranging from external behavior such as loss of 
rated capacity to internal behavior such as severe corrosion. 
The remaining life of the battery (i.e. how many cycles 
remain, usable charge, etc.) is termed the state-of-life 
(SOL), the prognostic metric. Determination of the SOC, 
SOH, and SOL are the primary objectives in the model- 
based approach. 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
6-3149 
Historical Usage (if available) 
Identificafon Tag + 
.................................... 
1 Metasensor Fusion 
Virtual 
8s  Actual 
Sensor 
output 
Optimal Fast Charge Cycle and Rate 
Figure 1. Model-based predictive diagnostics approach 
Model-based Approach 
The general approach to model development is to formulate 
robustly parameterized governing equations for the relevant 
electrochemical phenomena, transport processes and 
conservation of energy. Lumped parameter formulation in 
lieu of a spatially distributed formulation offers greater 
applicability to the broad variety of cell chemistries and 
battery designs. That is, explicit geometry and 
configuration input is not required. The parameters and 
sources of the various transport, state and conservation 
equations are coupled to ensure consistency with 
experimental observations and facilitate system 
classification. The model parameterization is formulated to 
incorporate significant aging mechanisms and pathological 
behavior in order to provide fault diagnostic capability. The 
ability to forecast future battery performance is developed 
by tuning of the system parameters through history 
matching trials. 
Data Fusion Techniques 
One of the core challenges was to develop the appropriate 
signal processing, sensor-level data fusion and automated 
reasoning to support battery diagnostics, charge control, and 
ultimately prognostics of remaining cycles. Multi-sensor 
data fusion techniques that combine data fiom actual and 
virtual sensors provide the potential to improve detection 
performance as well as reduce the number of false alarms 
that occur [l]. 
Automated Reasoning 
The hybrid automated reasoning modules used previously at 
the Applied Research Laboratory (ARL) allow the 
utilization of various reasoning methods and their 
integration via decision-level data fusion. Primarily, three 
automated reasoning techniques are considered: neural 
networks, fuzzy logic, and auto-regressive moving average 
( A m )  models. These outputs can be viewed as three 
estimates of the battery state and optimal charge control 
based on electrochemical and thermal data, as well as 
available usage information. The outputs can be obtained as 
linguistic indications (soon, very soon, etc.) or as numerical 
indications (such as 10-20 more charging cycles or 2-3 
hours capacity based on past usage, etc.). This type of a tool 
is an asset since it utilizes key information from multiple 
estimations for robustness and presents results of the fusion 
assessment, not just a data stream. 
2. mASUREMENT AND DATA COLLECTION 
The first step to developing the model-based diagnostics 
was to establish what were the necessary and available 
observables (i.e. what can we measure and is it enough). To 
6-3150 
do this we needed to understand the physical dynamics of 
the battery. 
I 
The Battery as a System 
species 
A battery is an arrangement of electrochemical cells 
configured to produce a certain terminal voltage and 
discharge capacity. Each cell in the battery is comprised of 
two electrodes where charge transfer reactions occur. The 
anode is the electrode at which an oxidation (0) reaction 
occurs. The cathode is the electrode at which a reduction 
(R) reaction occurs. The electrolyte provides a supply of 
chemical species required to complete the charge transfer 
reactions and a medium through which the species (ions) 
can move between the electrodes. The electrodes are often 
fabricated with an extended surface area such as an array of 
thin plates or sintered powder. The connection of such 
surfaces with the terminals is accomplished through the 
anode and cathode current collectors. The electrodes are 
usually positioned in very close proximity to reduce ionic 
conduction path lengths. A separator is generally placed 
between the electrodes to maintain proper electrode 
separation despite deposition of corrosion products [2]. 
Different combinations of electroactive species produce 
different electrode potentials or voltages. Electrochemical 
reactions that occur at the electrodes can generally be 
reversed by application of a higher potential that reverses 
the current through the cell. In situations where the reverse 
reaction occurs at a lower potential than any collateral 
reaction, a rechargeable or secondary cell can potentially be 
produced. A cell that cannot be recharged because of an 
undesired reaction or an undesirable physical effect of 
cycling on the electrodes is called a primary cell [2]. 
The amount of electrical current that a battery can provide is 
governed by the reaction rates at the electrodes. The four 
processes that control the reaction rates of the electrodes 
are: (1) the mass transfer of the ions into the diffusion layer 
at the electrode surface area, (2) transfer of the electrons at 
the electrode surface, (3) intermediate reaction steps 
resulting fi-om the chemical reaction in the diffusion layer 
and (4) other surface reactions such as adsorption or 
desorption of species. These processes represent the 
physical phenomena that occur in the battery. 
Electrochemical cell processes are affected by a number of 
internal and external variables as shown in Figure 2. 
Changes in the electrode surface, diffusion layer and 
solution are not directly observable without tearing the 
battery cell apart. Other variables such as potential, current 
and temperature are observable and can be used to indirectly 
determine the performance of physical processes. This is 
the basis for choosing a model-based approach. Under these 
constraints, the following types of measurements were 
selected for battery diagnostics: terminal and cell voltages, 
load currents, surface and internal temperatures, electrolyte 
pH, and electrical impedances. 
Electrical varlables External variables 
Current Pressure 
Charge 
I I _ I  
Mass Transfer varlables 
I Diffusion/convection -\- Solution varlablea 
Surface concentration 
Adsorption 1 1 Bulk concentration of electroactive I 
Figure 2. Variables that affect battery cell performance [3] 
Data Sampling 
There were two main issues in the collection of 
measurements for battery diagnostics: how often and at 
what stage of operation. The answer is somewhat subjective 
because applications have variable accessibility for 
measurements. For example, a starter-type battery 
discharges a large portion of its energy in a very short burst 
of time, as compared to a backup computer power system 
that discharges at a much slower rate. These two cases 
require much different sampling intervals of the 
measurement signals. In addition to the application 
constraints, there are four possible modes of operation to 
collect data: 
1. No load or charge applied 
2. No load but on a stand-by charge 
3. During discharging 
4. During charging 
Each of these different modes of operation has advantages 
and disadvantages. For the first two cases, the battery will 
be in a very stable state, but will not reflect dynamic 
characteristics and requires the battery to be removed from 
operation. For the second two cases, the dynamic behavior 
can be better characterized but now measurements are 
subjected to external factors such as change in load and 
temperature. Another concern was to be as non-intrusive as 
possible. Not requiring the battery to be removed for 
diagnostic measurements is an advantage in almost any 
application. 
For the purpose of having as much coverage of operating 
modes to test developed algorithms, test stand data w a s  
collected under the following conditions: 
0 No load, fully charged 
0 Once every minute during discharging 
6-3151 
0 No load, 100% discharged 
0 Once every minute during charging 
In addition, various temperatures and loads were used. 
Sample rates were 10 sample/s for temperatures, 
cellhermina1 voltages, pH, and load current and up to 
200,000 sampleds for impedance related signals. The 
window of data was 10 seconds and each measurement 
signal was saved as an individual file. 
Data was collected on primary lithium and alkaline cells and 
nickel-cadmium and lead-acid secondary batteries under the 
various above-mentioned conditions. To date, there are 
over 200 data sets across the different chemistries and sizes 
of batteries. 
3. MODEL IDENTIFICATION 
Electrochemical Impedance 
Direct measurements of battery or cell condition have 
traditionally been very difficult for practical systems such as 
automotive or aviation batteries. There are, however, a 
variety of indirect measurement techniques that rely on the 
cell's response to a precise manipulation of the load [3], [4], 
[5]. One of the most robust and widely used methods in 
laboratory practice is AC Voltammetry. This technique can 
provide information on electrochemical dynamics of the 
battery through a non-invasive interrogate of the cell. By 
applying a small amplitude excitation to the cell and 
measuring the response, the internal impedance of the cell 
can be determined. The most common choice for the 
excitation waveform is a swept sine wave. The resulting 
impedance intormation relates to governing equations of the 
physical electrochemical processes. See [3], [4], [6] for a 
description of the electrochemical processes such as the 
charge transfer and mass transfer equations. To retrieve the 
electrochemical process information flom the impedance 
data, electrical circuit analogs are used such as the Randles 
circuit (Figure 3), which represent the electrode-electrolyte 
interface processes. 
t Zeffective + 
CDL 
Figure 3. Randles circuit for electrode-electrolyte processes 
The equation for this circuit is given as 
In (I), s = jo (w is frequency in rad/s), & represents the 
electrolyte resistance, 8 represents the charge transfer 
resistance, CDL represents the double layer capacitance, B 
represents the diffusion layer coefficient, and Z, represents 
the Warburg impedance. The double layer capacitance is a 
result of the ions in the electrolyte and the electrons in the 
electrode waiting to participate in the chemical reactions. 
The build up of these charged particles results in a charged 
layer (i.e. capacitance). The Warburg impedance is related 
to the mass transfer into the diffusion layer. 
The general solution of equation (1) in the form of a Nyquist 
plot is shown in Figure 4. 
Frequency 
sz R + 8  
Figure 4. Nyquist plot of cell impedance spectrum based 
upon Randles circuit 
Manifestation of Faults 
The most common types of battery failures include 
passivation, separation, bridging, dry-out, sulfation, 
softening, corrosion and various mechanical failures [2]. 
The Randles circuit has good application not only for 
identifying the SOC independent of cell polarization but 
certain SOH failures. For example, lead-acid batteries tend 
to suffer fiom sulfation, which has shown to be associated 
with an increase in charge transfer resistance. Drying out of 
the electrolyte manifests in the Randles circuit as an 
increase in the ohmic resistance. Corrosion of the electrode 
changes the porosity of the electrode and reduces the slope 
of the linear leg [7]. 
Some Initial Results 
An on-going experimental test schedule is being conducted 
under an Office of Naval Research (ONR) sponsored battery 
project, where lead-acid, nickel-cad", lithium and 
alkaline batteries are being run to failure. During a test, 
6-3152 
battery impedance data is collected in addition to cell and 
terminal voltages, load current and temperatures at various 
locations on the battery, including internal points. 
Figure 5 shows the impedance of a nickel-cadmium battery 
after being partially discharged. Because the positive and 
negative electrodes behave comparably different, a single 
electrode model does not fully capture the electrochemical 
processes. 
3 5  
3 
2 5  
n 
J 0
W - 
v N 
0 5  
E(%) = yz - f ( x , ,  8). (3) 
In (3), yi is the measured impedance data, f is the two- 
electrode impedance model, xi  is frequency that the data was 
taken at, and a = [RQ 0+0- CDL+ CDL- o+ D. IT. 
There are a number of steepest-decent methods for 
nonlinear equations such as recursive least squares (most 
common for impedance modeling) and simplex methods [SI, 
[9]. These methods are only local minima search 
algorithms. In an offline scenario when the impedance data 
can be inspected visually on a Nyquist plot, good initial 
guesses can be made and re-made. However, in an online 
automated identification process, this may not be an option 
and a good initial guess for one data set may not be for the 
next identification. These methods would not be robust and 
provide a false indication of parameters changes. 
Global search methods are also available for model 
identification such as genetic algorithms and simulated 
annealing. However, genetic algorithms do not always find 
the global minima [lo]. Simulated annealing has been 
shown to able to find the global minima but at the cost of 
many more iterations. There are a number of hybrid 
techniques available to address these issues as well [ 1 11. 
1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 
Re [Z] (ohms) x I D  
Figure 5.  Impedance of 4.3 Amp-hour nickel-cadmium 
battery, partially discharged 
A better fit of the impedance data was found using a two- 
electrode, Randles circuit model (Figure 6). 
Figure 6. Two-electrode model with wiring inductance 
The overall impedance equation then becomes 
Identijkation Processing 
One of the major concerns in selecting an identification 
method is robustness in an online system. The objective of 
the identification algorithm is to minimize the error between 
the model and the collected data, 
For our approach, a simulated annealing algorithm was used 
to identify model parameters. Search regions, based on the 
identified parameters from previous impedance 
measurements, were used to minimize processing iterations. 
The model-identified electrolyte resistance of a nickel- 
cadmium battery during discharge is shown in Figure 7, 
which was found using simulated annealing as the minima 
search method. 
0.008 L L  
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
time (min) 
Figure 7. Model-identifed electrolyte resistance of a nickel- 
cadmium battery using simulated annealing 
6-3153 
Thermal Modeling 
During discharge at high rates, thermal effects on cell 
behavior become highly influential. Specifically, the 
coefficients of mass transport, electrochemical kinetics and 
the electrochemical potential are exponential functions of 
temperature. This strong temperature dependence produces 
very strong coupling of thermal processes to 
electrochemical and transport phenomena. Therefore, 
monitoring of thermal effects is needed if identification of 
electrochemical parameters is to be accurate. Nominal heat 
sources include ohmic heating related to bulk migration of 
charged species and secondary charge transfer and chemical 
reactions. Along with these source terms, the conservative 
thermal model includes multi-mode heat loss from an 
intermediate thermal element intended to capture the 
behavior of a measured surface temperature [12]. Equation 
(4) was used to estimate the heat capacity of the bulk 
electrolyte since a change in its capacity to transfer heat 
may lead to indications of health changes. 
Measurement 
Signals Feature Processing 
Equation (4) uses the battery’s volume (Vi), density 
(p), specific heat (c,), and convection heat transfer 
coefficient (have); along with internal (i), surface (s), and 
ambient (a) temperature (T) measurements, to calculate the 
heat generated within the battery per unit volume (9”’). 
Various internal and external temperatures were measured 
to produce the data necessary to validate and fuse the 
thermal model output with the electrochemical model for 
tests where access to these measurements was possible. 
The cross coupling of heat, mass, and chemical species 
diffusion is not addressed by this simple heat generation 
equation. Accurately modeling of this interaction is not the 
purpose of the thermal modeling effort. Rather, this 
estimate is an attempt to better correlate the internal 
processes with observed data during discharge and charge 
events. The joule effect, reversible heat effect, water 
decomposition and internal oxygen cycles can impact the 
measurable heat generation. The mode of operation can 
help determine which component may be contribution to the 
calculated generation [2]. 
Feature Vector SOC, SOH, and 
SOL Estimators Files \ 
/ 
User Interface User Info 
Fuzzy Logic 
( A  
Neural Network 
SOC, SOH, SOL 
Estimation Flles \ 6 
Figure 8. Flow diagram of developed predictive diagnostics processing 
6-3154 
Processing Flow Diagram 
The identification of the model parameter represents the 
first stage of the overall processing strategy. Figure 8 
shows the overall process flow where the model 
identification falls in the feature processing section. A set 
of files known as Feature Vector Files are outputted fiom 
this stage containing calibrated measurement signals 
(voltage (V), current (I), and temperature (T)), calculated 
complex impedance data fiom excitation (Ex) and sensed 
(Sn) current signals, and identified model parameters 
(charge transfer resistance, heat capacity, etc.). 
4. STATE-OF-CHARGE PR DICTION MODELS 
The previous section addressed extracting physically 
meaningful parameters, such as charge transfer resistance, 
so that our prediction of SOC, SOH, and SOL would have 
stronger connection to the internal processes. These virtual 
sensor signals (i.e. identified model parameters) also 
provide the decision processing with a check for bad 
signals. For example, if the double layer capacitance virtual 
sensor signal was 150 farads for a AAA nickel-cadmium 
battery, stored knowledge about this battery size and 
chemistry would reflect that this signal is far above of 
typical ranges even when the cell is deteriorated. 
Referring to Figure 8, this section will focus on the 
developed SOC prediction modeling. Primarily, the neural 
network and ARMA modeling and results will be addressed. 
The work for the fuzzy logic prediction model is currently 
under investigation and results are being analyzed. 
However, this is not nearly as far along in development as 
the neural network and ARMA model SOC prediction. 
Having three separate predictions allows the top-level 
decision fusion processing to compare each of the 
predictions against each other along with knowledge and 
history about the battery system. 
State-o$Charge 
In order to evaluate the SOC of a battery, the following 
definitions were used: 
SOC -- The amount of useful capacity remaining in a 
battery during a discharge. 
0 100% SOC -- Full useful capacity. The capacity of the 
battery at the instant a load is applied. 
0 0% SOC -- No useful capacity remaining. The capacity 
of the battery when it reaches its end-of-discharge 
voltage (EDV), which is usually defined by the 
manufacturer. 
Furthermore, SOC is represented mathematically by the 
following equations: 
Clod -,(Idt 
SOC(t) = x 100 
0 
Ctolal 
A M  Model 
Ctotal = (:
An effective way to predict the SOC of a battery has been 
developed using ARMA model methodology. This model 
has been tested and proven effective on batteries of various 
size and chemistry as well as at different temperatures and 
loading conditions. It is also effective regardless of battery 
type (primary or secondary) and number of cells. The 
model is trained using a Least Squares (LS) fit [ 133 of one 
(or more) complete data set(s) in order to determine the 
influence each model input has on the output. The model 
coefficients are then used to predict SOC based on inputs to 
the trained model. 
* 2 1  is atime delay q+p@ 
Figure 9. ARMA prediction model for SOC 
The choice of using an ARMA model to simulate battery 
performance was made because of its simplicity. ARMA 
models are a very commonly used for system identification 
because they are linear and easy to implement. It was also 
chosen because it is a good complement to the more 
complex models (neural network and fuzzy logic) being 
used. It was further determined that a second order model is 
sufficient to predict SOC. The model (shown in Figure 9) is 
represented by the equation, 
y(t)=a X(t) + b X(t-1) + c, y(t-1) (7) 
with y representing SOC, X representing a vector of model 
inputs, and a, b, and c, representing the model coefficients 
(determined fiom the LS fit during ARMA training). 
6-3155 
Selection of Inputs-The success of any model is obviously 
very dependent on the inputs to the model. Therefore, 
careful consideration was used when selecting the inputs for 
the ARh4A model. The two most obvious choices for a 
battery system are discharge voltage (VD) and current (ID). 
These variables were chosen because they are used to define 
and calculate SOC. They are also the most distinguishable 
characteristics of a battery and are very easy to measure. 
In addition, temperature effects also play an important role 
in the amount of capacity that is available in a battery [2]. 
To demonstrate this, an experiment was performed in which 
a battery was lightly loaded and its parameters were tracked 
over a number of days. The test, which lasted close to four 
days, effectively demonstrated the effects of temperature on 
a battery’s performance. The battery’s potential rose and 
fell in accordance with the natural change in ambient 
temperature occurring throughout the day. Temperature is 
also an important measurement because of heat created by 
the reactions occurring inside the battery during discharge. 
Ideally, an intemal temperature measurement would best 
represent this heat generation. However, since most batteries 
are sealed, this is typically very difficult unless such 
measurement instrumentation was designed into the battery. 
As a result, the model uses the battery’s surface temperature 
(T,) as an input. An ambient temperature measurement does 
not take into account the intemal heat generation of the 
battery, and is therefore weakly correlated to the battery. T,, 
however, is dependent on both the environment and intemal 
heat generation of the battery. 
In addition to voltage, current, and temperature, the 
measured impedance variables previously described are 
used in the model. These variables represent the 
electrochemical processes occurring inside the battery 
during its discharge and are dependent on the amount of 
charge remaining in the battery. The electrolyte resistance 
(h), for example, is representative of the amount of 
electrolyte that is available for reaction. The lower the 
amount of electrolyte, the less available capacity there is 
remaining in the battery. Furthermore, the charge transfer 
resistance (e) represents the amount of plate surface area 
that is available for reaction. This value decreases as the 
SOC decreases. Finally, the double layer capacitance (CDL) 
represents the number of ions that are waiting to react in the 
battery. This value increases as the amount of available 
capacity decreases due in part to the diminishing amount of 
electrolyte and plate surface area. These characteristics 
make impedance measurements a very good indication of 
battery’s SOC. 
The ARMA SOC prediction model therefore became a six 
input, 1 output system with inputs: VD, ID, &, 8, CDL, and 
T,, and output SOC. 
Pre-processing-Model success was also dependent on 
preprocessing of the inputs before being entered into the 
model. To eliminate measurement noise, model inputs were 
first filtered before being entered into the model. A 
Butterworth filter was used to produce a clean signal that 
was smooth and offered little distortion. 
In order to achieve improved model performance, 
preconditioning of the inputs was needed. Preconditioning 
made training of the model more effective by creating inputs 
with consistent behavior, regardless of battery conditions. 
After some initial research, it was determined to take the 
derivative of each input prior to entry into the model. This 
was chosen because all of the model inputs have a similar 
shape when plotted against SOC. Because of this, the time 
rate of change of each was very similar (Figure 10). 
Figure loa. shows the discharge voltage (V,) of eight 
different lithium-(CF), batteries during discharge. As seen, 
they are similar in shape when plotted against SOC. Figure 
10b shows these same eight voltages after taking their first 
derivative with respect to time. As seen, the plots collapse, 
representing a direct relation between VD and SOC. 
V, for Size C Lithium-(CF), Batteries . 1 1 1. 
100 80 60 40 20 0 
SOC Yo 
Figure loa. Discharge Voltage of 8 different lithium-(CF)x 
batteries 
dVddt for Size C Lithium-(CF), Batteries x -3 . . I 
I - Battery9 
: - Battery 11 
n  10 
VI , s “< L 
z 5  
$ 0  
-5 
........ ~ - 1  - Batterv 15 1 
-
100 80 60 40 20 0 
SOC Yo 
Figure lob. Effect of preconditioning model inputs 
Because of the wide range of values of the inputs (e.g., 
Ts=28 and Rn=0.05), normalization of the parameters prior 
to entry into the model was needed. This allowed the model 
coefficients to be similar in size and helped eliminate one 
input from dominating the model. For simplicity, each 
input was normalized with regards to the minimum and 
maximum values of the training set. 
Because of the structure of the ARMA model, the SOC 
from the previous prediction is needed in order to make a 
new SOC prediction. This creates a problem when making 
I 
6-3156 
the first prediction, however, because the initial SOC of the 
battery is unknown. Assuming the battery always begins 
with 100% SOC is not efficient because this value is 
dependent on such things as manufacturing and shelf life. 
Therefore, the longer a battery sits without being used, the 
more charge is lost and its initial SOC is diminished. Also, 
charging efficiency in secondary cells also causes a 
variation in initial battery capacity. Also, a battery may 
have been partially discharged prior to use. As a result, two 
procedures have been developed to account for this loss. 
The first method uses impedance measurements that are 
taken before the load is applied to the battery. There is a 
direct relationship between these “No Load Condition” 
measurements and the amount of capacity (or SOC) that is 
available in the battery. The second procedure uses a neural 
network (described below) to predict the initial capacity of 
the battery, which is then used to calculate the initial SOC 
of the battery. 
Lithium’ 
Lithium’ 
NiCad‘ 
NiCad’ 
Lead-Acid 
Figure 1 1. Training of the Model 
C 1 Primary 2.18 
2/3 A 1 Primary 2.87 
D 1 Secondary 3.17 
C 1 .  Secondary 4.50 
12 Volt 6 Secondary 9.13 
Training of the Model-In order to use the ARMA model to 
make a SOC prediction, it must first be trained (Figure 11). 
This is done by selecting a training set of data from a 
completed cycle. Because the entire set of data is available, 
the endpoint of the cycle is known and the actual SOC of 
the battery at each point can be calculated. The model then 
uses a LS fit to calculate the model coefficients that enable 
the inputs to result in the actual SOC. These model 
Coefficients will then be used for each successive run to 
calculate the SOC. The LS routine uses the equation: 
which the model is retrained after each cycle to be used for 
the prediction of the next cycle. This helps eliminate the 
effects of SOL and the changing impedance of the battery as 
its health diminishes. 
Results- The model has been trained and tested on five 
different kinds of batteries with varying size, chemistry, and 
type: two sizes of primary poly-carbonmonofluoride-lithium 
(C and 213 A), two sizes of secondary nickel-cadmium (C 
and D) and one size of secondary lead-acid (12 volt) battery. 
Initial testing was performed on eight size C and nine 213 A 
poly-carbonmonofluoride-lithium batteries. Because these 
batteries are primary cells, training was done on one battery 
of each size and used to predict the other batteries of the 
same size. As seen in Table 1, the model was very effective 
for this battery chemistry. The average prediction error for 
both sizes is less than 3%. Error! Reference source not 
found. (next page) demonstrates typical model performance 
for these cells. Similar results were obtained for all but one 
of the eight size C batteries that were tested. The poor 
performance on one battery (which was a bad cell) 
demonstrates the need for top-level decision fusion 
combined with multiple prediction models (see Figure 8). 
While the ARMA model was not able to make an accurate 
prediction of this battery (initial SOC of this cell was 
actually close to zero), the decision fusion approach, 
discussed in this paper, will recognize this error and correct 
it based on low discharge current. 
Tests were also performed on nine size C and nine size D 
nickel-cadmium batteries. Similar results were obtained for 
these batteries as well, with average prediction errors less 
than 5% (Table 1). The model used for this chemistry, 
however, was slightly different than described above. 
Optimum model performance was achieved for this 
chemistry when inputs were only filtered and normalized. 
Therefore, the derivative of the inputs was not taken prior to 
model entry. Although, these batteries are secondary cells, 
only a few cycles fi-om each battery were completed. 
Therefore, the recursive training routine previously 
described was not used. Instead, the model was trained on 
one battery (of each size) and tested for all of the other 
batteries of the same size. 
Table 1. Results of ARMA model SOC predictions 
Prediction I Error (%) I I Chemistry I Size I #Cells I 
with CL representing the calculated model coefficients, cp(t) 
representing a vector containing model inputs and output 
feedback, and y(t) representing the known model output 
1131. 
Secondary Cells- Modeling of secondary cells differs from 
modeling of primary cells because of health effects on a 
battery’s SOC. As a battery’s health diminishes, its initial 
SOC and internal impedance decrease. In order to account 
for this, secondary cells use a recursive training routine in 
Final testing was performed on five 12-volt lead-acid starter 
batteries containing six cells each. Because these batteries 
6-3157 
are secondary, the recursive training routine previously 
mentioned was used. Despite the fact that health effects 
make prediction more difficult, the model still was able to 
perform well on this chemistry. As seen in Table 1, average 
prediction error was less than 10%. 
Test Run 11 Error = 3.0778 
., 
0 100 200 300 
Time (min) 
Test Run 16 Error = 2.401 7 
0 I00  200 300 
Time (min) 
Figure 12. ARMA SOC prediction results for size C 
lithium-(CFh batteries 
Neural Networks Model 
Artificial Neural Networks-A neural network, or an 
artificial neural network to be more precise, is a parallel 
distributed processing system. It consists of information 
processing units, called neurons or units, interconnected in a 
specific way through connection weights, to produce a 
desired output in response to its inputs. Such networks, 
inspired by biological neural networks, can be feedfirward 
or recurrent. Feedforward neural networks are usually 
organized into layers of neurons in which signals can only 
propagate from the inputs to the outputs and there is no 
feedback. Most often, the connection weights are restricted 
to connect only the neurons in adjacent layers. Each neuron 
accumulates the weighted sum of its inputs through the 
connection weights and maps it into an output by employing 
a transfer function, called the activation function, which is 
usually nonlinear. An important type of activation function 
is called the threshold function, which produces a binary 
output based on the comparison of the accumulated input of 
the neuron with a threshold or bias. Such neurons are very 
useful in classification tasks. 
Perhaps the most commonly employed activation in neural 
networks is the sigmoid function, sometimes called the 
squashing function since it maps its input into the interval 
[0,1], with its inflection point being located at the threshold 
or the bias. If a neuron has N inputs, xi, and the 
corresponding connection weights, w,, and bias, b, then the 
neuron output is 
1 
1 
Y =  (9) 
The two activation functions are related since the threshold 
function can be seen as the limiting case of the sigmoid 
function when the slope at the threshold value is infinite. 
Sigmoid functions have been shown to have very good 
properties in function approximation. In particular, neural 
networks consisting of two hidden layers of neurons with 
sigmoid activation functions are universal approximators. 
Unlike threshold and sigmoid functions, a radial basis 
function (RBF) is not a monotonic function, i.e., its output 
value gets smaller on either side of the threshold or bias 
value. Typically, RBF neural networks utilize Gaussian 
functions as the activation function and compare the input 
vector with its weights vector. The response of the RBF 
neuron is controlled by the center (weight vector) and a 
spread parameter, S ,  which determines its "radius" or 
support region. 
r 
Unlike algorithms or de-based systems, neural networks 
are trained using prior examples. There are several methods 
used to train neural networks, which can be grouped broadly 
into supervised and unsupervised training methods. 
Supervised training or learning utilizes the inputs and the 
corresponding output values, called target or desired output 
values, and modifies the weights and biases until there is 
sufficient agreement in the networks outputs and the target 
outputs. In unsupervised learning only the inputs are 
provided and the network modifies weights and biases to 
minimize some prescribed error criterion. 
Artificial neural networks have been used successfully in 
both classification and function approximation tasks. One 
type of function approximation task is system identification. 
While neural networks do quite well at modeling linear 
systems, their main strength is the ability to model nonlinear 
systems using examples of input-output pairs. This was the 
basis for choosing neural networks for SOC estimation. 
6-3158 
Neural network SOC estimators were trained for lithium 
batteries of sizes C and 213 A under different loading 
conditions. For each type of battery a subset (typically 3 to 
6) of the available parameter vectors was chosen to be used 
as the model input. Networks were trained to produce either 
a direct prediction of battery SOC or alternatively an 
estimation of initial battery capacity during the first few 
minutes of the run. 
Feed-forward 
[6l 
TimeDelay 
[71 
Direct Battery SOC Prediction with Neural Networks-All 
networks used for battery SOC estimation had one hidden 
layer. The backpropagation gradient decent learning 
algorithm is used which uses the error signal to optimize the 
weights and biases of both network layers. 
0.2% [I41 2.5 % 6.0% [ I l l  
1.5% [I81 5.0 % 7.4% [17] 
0.3% [I41 3.0 % 7.1% [ I l l  
0.8% [I81 4.7% 8.0% [20] 
Figure 13 shows the processing flow for using battery 
measurements and parameters to predict SOC. 
... 
Trained Networlc 
Figure 13. Flow diagram for direct prediction of SOC using 
neural networks 
Selection of Inputs and Preprocessing-Discharge current, 
In, was chosen as input to monitor the effect of the load on 
the battery. In some cases battery discharge voltage, V,, was 
also found to be useful. In addition, among the derived 
parameters & , 0 , and C, were found to be useful for the 
reasons described above. Various combinations of these 
inputs were tried to see their effect on training and testing 
performance. This provided some understanding of the 
relative importance of those inputs for predicting SOC. ID 
was found to be the most important input followed closely 
by b. The inputs were filtered as for the ARMA case to 
obtain smoothed input vectors. Normalization of inputs 
eliminated the large variation in magnitude of the selected 
inputs and allowed smaller networks to provide good 
results. Smaller networks also tend to be better at 
generalization. For time-delay neural networks the selection 
of the number of delays and the length of the delays is 
crucial to the performance of the networks. Both short and 
long delays were tried during different training runs. The 
short delays gave better performance, which indicates that 
the battery SOC does not involve long time-constants. This 
is also evident from the ARMA examples. 
Neural Network Training-Several types of neural networks 
were trained with battery data and extracted impedance 
parameters to directly predict the battery SOC. Different 
training methods were explored, e.g., backpropagation of 
errors with and without momentum, backpropagation of 
errors with and without learning rate adaptation, and 
backpropagation of errors with the Levenburg-Marquadt (L- 
M) method. The L-M method was found to be the best in 
this comparison. The size of the network was also important 
in training. An excessively small network size results in 
inadequate training and larger than necessary network size 
leads to overtraining and poorer generalization. 
Results-The performance of the neural networks was 
found to be quite consistent. The results for size C lithium 
batteries (runs 9-16) and size 213 A lithium batteries (runs 
17-25) are given in Table 2. 
It is noted that battery 11 represents an anomaly when 
compared to the other tested batteries and therefore 
represents a worst-case scenario for this prediction method. 
On the other hand, battery 16 is a representative of average 
prediction results. 
Table 2. Error rates for direct SOC prediction with neural 
networks 
Maximum Average 
Topology Testing 
[Run #I 
[#Hidden 
Neurons] 
~~ 
Networks trained to produce SOC directly provided several 
advantages. Most notable is that no post processing of the 
network output is required. This feature would make 
realization of the network in hardware comparatively less 
complex. Also, the network’s SOC prediction can converge 
to the actual battery SOC as the run progresses. This 
convergence behavior was noted on several of the 
implemented networks. The networks tend to slightly 
underestimate the battery SOC. This is very important since 
6-3159 
in practice this would result in a conservative estimate and 
avoid unscheduled downtime. 
Battery SOC Prediction using Initial Capacity Estimation 
with Neural Networks-Networks were also trained to 
estimate the initial capacity of the battery during the first 
few minutes of the test. The SOC of the battery can then be 
calculated directly by using the cumulative discharge 
current. This method can be used as a powerful tool in 
mission planning. Hypothetical load profiles could be used 
to predict if the battery would survive or fail during given 
mission, thus preventing the high cost and risk of batteries 
failing in the field. Figure 14 shows the flow diagram for 
initial capacity estimation using neural networks. 
Selection of Inputs and Preprocessing-Inputs were 
selected as described above. Selection of training set for the 
RBF networks required more training runs since by design, 
RBFs are limited support networks. Since a single radial 
basis neuron only responds to a small local region of the 
input space, the inputs for this network were first 
normalized to the average value of the training set. Three 
training sets were chosen to cover the range of normalized 
input space. The parameters of battery 13 were the lowest 
in magnitude relative to the other sets, the parameters of 
battery 14 were relatively the highest and the parameters 
from battery 16 were closest to the middle. Such a diverse 
training set helps to promote good network generalization 
for batteries whose parameters lie in the same area of the 
input space. 
... 
Trained Netwow 
T 
Figure 14. Flow diagram for battery initial SOC estimation 
with neural networks 
An important difference between the previous predictors 
and this one is the way SOC is being presented. The battery 
is not assumed to start from 100% SOC. Therefore, when 
presenting the results for this subsection, the battery SOC is 
presented in Ah. It is seen that there is noticeable difference 
between the batteries in their initial capacity. Once a good 
estimate of the initial capacity is obtained, the SOC can be 
predicted by reducing the initial SOC by the accumulated 
discharge current. 
Table 3. Error rates for SOC Prediction based on Initial 
Capacity Estimation with neural networks. 
Network 
Topology 
[#Hidden 
Neurons] c Feed-forward 
Radial Basis 
Error Testing 
Set] 
2.4 % 
3.0 % 
[17 18 201 
0.6% 
[ I3  14 161 
2.3 % 
[17 18 201 
5.7 % 
7.9 % 
4.6 % 
3.4 % 
i13 14 
Maximum 
Testing 
Error 
[Run #] 
9.1 % [II] 
10.4% [23] 
6.8 % [I51 
4.9 % [19] 
Results-The performance of the neural networks was 
found to be better than direct prediction neural networks. 
The results for size C lithium batteries (runs 9-16) and size 
2/3 A lithium batteries (runs 17-25) are given in Table 3. 
Sample prediction results for size C lithium batteries are 
shown in Figure 15 (next page). Especially noteworthy is 
the significantly better performance of the RBF network 
predicting initial SOC on battery 11, as compared to the 
direct SOC predictor. 
SOC Modeling Remarks 
The results are quite impressive since very little training 
data is used to produce the predictors. As more data are 
collected and several runs of each level of initial battery 
SOC become available, the robustness of the predictors is 
likely to improve. The key distinction between the ARMA 
and neural network approaches is that the ARMA model 
assumes an explicit linear form of the predictor, while the 
neural network attempts to discover an implicit (size and 
topology for the) nonlinear model that captures the 
intricacies of the battery dynamics. If the model is of 
adequate degree then the ARMA model should require 
fewer runs than the neural network. However, the neural 
network can better represent nonlinearity and thus, provide 
better generalization in and out of the sample. The neural 
network is also more likely to provide better results if the 
load is changed or is variable. 
The results for the neural network predictors are very good. 
Though the average error is a little higher than for the 
ARMA predictors, there are two important strengths of the 
6-3160 
neural network predictors that outweigh that drawback: (i) 
maximum error on outliers was not significantly larger than 
the average error, and (ii) the network provides a 
conservative prediction, i.e., it does not over-predict the 
SOC. Both of these advantages are very important in 
practical systems where certification and low false alarms 
are not just requirements but can make a difference between 
a system that is actually used or shelved. 
Battery I I, Error: 4.9498 
0 I 0 0  200 300 
Time (min] 
Battery 16, Error: 0.62359 
Tlme (min) 
Figure 15. SOC prediction based on initial SOC estimation 
using RBF neural networks; size C lithium-(CFX batteries 
Of the seventeen lithium (CF), batteries, two were examples 
of outliers that can skew most predictors. For such cases the 
best predictors do not try to get very accurate prediction for 
the outliers but rather attempt to get rough conservative 
estimates that can quickly allow the system to flag them as 
outliers. These are examples of batteries that were faulty in 
some respect. Also, two additional batteries were unable to 
provide the required 2V discharge voltage and thus were 
considered bad. It is the focus of the SOH research to 
identify and assess the severity of existing or impending 
faults in the battery. This topic is presently being researched 
and is discussed briefly later in this paper. The benefit of a 
good initial capacity estimator is a valuable capability not 
only during the operational scenario but also for quality 
control purposes. 
Currently, neural network, ARMA, and fuzzy logic 
predictors are being developed for the nickel-cadmium and 
lead-acid batteries. Further research is also being conducted 
to examine the benefit of using alternative error criteria in 
developing more robust SOC predictors that help the 
operator make improved decisions based on the SOC 
information. 
5 .  FAULT AND END OF LIFE PREDICTION 
For primary batteries, the SOC is also the SOL; once the 
charge is depleted the battery cannot be used again. 
However, for secondary batteries the SOC only represents 
the cycle life and not the life of the battery since it can have 
multiple discharges. 
State-of-Health 
For secondary batteries, the life of the battery is dictated by 
the number of usable cycles. For example, it is common 
practice to remove a battery from service if the discharge 
capacity has reduced to 65% the original capacity [2]. Other 
conditions include short-circuited cells and low terminal 
voltage. Table 4 (next page) shows the most common faults 
that occur in secondary batteries. Each of these possible 
failure mechanisms (dry-out, passivation, etc.) will wear the 
battery at different rates and can occur simultaneously. 
Identifying what faults are occurring and to what degree will 
dictate what SOL prediction model should be used. 
Classification of what faults are occurring in the battery is 
an estimation of the SOH. Much like the SOC approach to 
having three separate, parallel processing methodologies for 
prediction, the SOH estimation processing has three 
different processing branches. 
Table 4. Common fault types for battery cells [2] 
~~ 
Separation 1 LOW capacity Open Circuit 
Bridging I Low Capacity I Shortcircuit 
en Circuit 
Voltage 
Open Circuit 
Charging Voltage 
Grid High Self-Discharge Internal Short 
Corrosion Circuit 
6-3161 
The three-prong approach includes statistical pattern 
recognition using linear discriminant functions, neural 
network based pattern recognition, and fuzzy logic based 
classification [ 141. Furthermore, domain knowledge and 
test data can be used in combination to take advantage of the 
complimentary benefits of implicit and explicit knowledge 
representations, while avoiding their disadvantages [ 151. 
Limited data on the different failure modes is available at 
this time. Since the failures are not seeded, batteries are 
transitioned to failures under controlled operating conditions 
only. Depending on chemistry and design, data collection 
must endure tens to thousands of chargeldischarge cycles to 
acquire a complete set of battery failure data. Therefore, 
much of this work is in early stages; results and further 
detail will not be provided in this paper. 
State-of-life 
Once faults and their severity are identified from the SOH 
processing, the proper SOL prediction model can be 
selected. Figure 16 shows a case where dry-out was 
identified as the dominant SOH condition in a lead-acid 
starter battery and a dry-out trained SOL predictor was used 
to predict the remaining usable cycles. Had a different 
dominant failure mechanism been identified from the SOH 
processing, a different SOL prediction model would have 
been used. 
This SOL prediction assumes the tested battery was run 
under the same operating conditions as the battery the 
training set came from. These SOL results are still very 
preliminary and only presented here to illustrate the 
connection between the SOC, SOH, and SOL processing. 
1 8 0  
1 6 0  
1 4 0  
1 2 0  
1 0 0  
a o  
6 0  
4 0  
2 0  
Decision Fusion Processing 
Data fusion can be used to improve the quality of condition 
assessment and increase the confidence the assessment [ 161, 
[17]. As previously mentioned, the SOC, SOH, and SOL 
processing makes three parallel predictions. This approach 
provides three opinions about the condition of the battery. 
These three predictions are fed into an upper level decision 
processing routine that determines how well the predictors 
did relative to each other, processed sensor data, previous 
history, and knowledge about the battery type. Using this 
information, the decision processing outputs a combined 
prediction of the SOC, SOH, or SOL with a measure of 
confidence. For example, three SOC predictions were fed to 
the decision fusion processing, 85%, 83%, and 30%. The 
decision processing also retrieved the SOC information 
from the previous cycle and battery type information. The 
processing then decides that the two SOC predictions, 85% 
and 83% are more likely to be correct than the other, not 
only because they agree with each other but because the 
previous cycle SOC was more similar to these estimates 
under the current operating conditions. The 30% SOC 
prediction is then de-weighted, a single SOC prediction is 
calculated, and a confidence is assigned to the new SOC 
estimate. 
The decision processing also has access to the sensor signals 
that are fed to the SOC, SOH, and SOL predictors. 
Consider the previous example; a dead sensor signal, may 
have caused the bad 30% SOC prediction. If the other two 
SOC estimators did not use the dead sensors signal, it is 
likely that this is the case and a flag could be raised as a 
result. 
o !  
0 2 0  4 0  6 0  8 0  1 0 0  1 2 0  1 4 0  1 6 0  1 8 0  
P r e s e n t  C y c l e  
Figure 16. ARMA SOL prediction based on dry-out dominated SOH 
6-3162 
As with the SOH estimation processing, much of this 
work is in early stages so results and further detail will 
not be provided in this paper. Referring back to Figure 8, 
the decision fusion represents the final stage of the 
processing and the output of this is then fed to a user 
interface that can display or coordinate the battery 
condition data. 
6 .  CONCLUSIONS 
Condition-based maintenance provides a means for 
improved reliability and extracting more usable life from 
primary and secondary batteries. For primary batteries, 
this represents using the full capacity of the battery before 
they are replaced. For secondary batteries, this represents 
cycling the battery to its true last usable cycle and not a 
conservatively based statistical last cycle. In the case of a 
backup or standby battery, this represents knowledge of 
usage capacity prior to putting the battery online. 
The model-based approach describe in this paper provides 
a framework for predicting SOC, SOH, and SOL. We 
have shown that in addition to measuring voltages, 
current and temperature, measurement of internal 
electrical impedance of the battery ties closely to the 
physical processes that drive capacity and aging. A 
robust identification routine was developed and these 
identified parameters, along with measured signals, were 
used develop and test SOC, SOH, and SOL predictors. 
The developed ARMA and neural network SOC 
prediction models were discussed and results were 
presented showing good performance across different 
chemistries and sizes. Some initial results were present 
from the SOH and SOL prediction development but this 
work is still in early stages. Also, the framework for the 
decision fusion processing was discussed and provides 
additional error checking and performance enhancement. 
Most of the analyzed data was collected on a laboratory 
test stand under controlled conditions. Plans are being 
made to have field data collected so the developed model- 
based predictive diagnostics can be tested on battery 
systems (and other electrochemical energy sources) under 
real-world operating conditions. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The sponsorship of this work by the Office of Naval 
Research and Dr. Phillip Abraham, Code 331, under ONR 
Grant NO00 14-98-1-0795 is gratefully acknowledged. 
8. REFERENCES 
[l] J. A. Stover, D. L. Hall, and R. E. Gibson, “A Fuzzy- 
Logic Architecture for Autonomous Multisensor Data 
Fusion,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, pp. 
403-410, June 1996. 
[2] D. Berndt, Maintenance-Free Batteries, 2”d Edition, 
John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, NY, 1997. 
[3] A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical 
Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New 
York, NY, 1980. 
[4] M. Sluyters-Rehbach and J. H. Sluyther, “Sine Wave 
Methods in the Study of Electrode Processes”, 
Electroanalytic Chemistry, vol. 4, Dekker, NY, 1970. 
[5] J. P. Diard, B. LeGorrec, and C. Montella, “EIS study 
of electrochemical battery discharge on constant load”, 
Journal ofpower Sources, vol. 70, pp. 78-84, 1998. 
[6] J. D. Kozlowski, T. Cawley, and C. S. Byington, 
“Model-Based Predictive Diagnostics for Primary and 
Secondary Batteries: Phase I Report,” Technical 
Memorandum, File No. 99-076, Applied Research 
Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, June 17, 
1999. 
[7] J. A. Bialacki, N. A. Hampson, and E. J. Pearson, 
“The A.C. Impedance of Porous PbOz on a Lead Support 
in Sulfuric Acid,” Surface Technology, vol. 23, pp. 117- 
125,1984. 
[SI Boukamp, B. A., “A Nonlinear Least Squares Fit 
Procedure for Analysis of Immittance Data of 
Electrochemical Systems,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 20, pp. 
31-44, 1986. 
[9] MacDonald, J. R., and L. D. Potter, “A Flexible 
Procedure for Analyzing Impedance Spectroscopy 
Results: Description and Illustrations,” Solid State Ionics, 
vol. 23, pp. 61-79, 1987. 
[lo] Pirlot, M., “General Local Search Methods,” 
European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 92, pp. 
493-511,1996. 
[ll] Jeong, I. K. and J. J. Lee, “Adaptive Simulated 
Genetic Algorithm for System Identification,” 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 9, 
no. 5, pp. 523-532. 1996. 
[12] B. Gebhart, Heat Transfer, 2”d Edition, McGraw- 
Hill, New York, NY, 1971. 
6-3163 
[13] L. Ljung, System Identification, Theory For The 
User, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall PRT, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 1999. 
[ 141 R. Schalkoff, Pattern Recognition, Statistical, 
Structural and Neural Approaches, John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., New York, NY, 1992. 
[ 151 A. K. Garga, “A Hybrid ImplicitExplicit Automated 
Reasoning Approach for Condition-Based Maintenance,” 
Proceedings of the ASNE Intelligent Ships Symposium 11, 
Philadelphia, 25-26 November, 1996. 
[16] Hall, D.L. and J. Llinas, Editors. Handbook of 
Multisensor Data Fusion. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 
May 200 1. 
[ 171 D. L. Hall and A. K. Garga, “Pitfalls in Data Fusion 
(and How to Avoid Them),’’ Proceedings of 2“‘ 
International Conference on Information Fusion 
(FUSION 99), Sunnyvale, CA, 6-9 July 1999. 
9. BIOGRAPHIES 
James D. Kozlowski is a Research 
Assistant at the Applied Research 
Laboratory at the Pennsylvania State 
University. He works in the Condition- 
Based Maintenance Department, where 
his focus has been in predictive 
diagnostics for primary and secondary batteries. His 
interests in this area include data acquisition, system 
identification, data fusion, and automated reasoning 
techniques for condition monitoring. Mr. Kozlowski 
received his BSEE and MSEE from Temple University 
and is a PhD candidate in Electrical Engineering 
department at Penn State University. He is also a member 
of the IEEE and Eta Kappa Nu. 
Carl S.  Byington is a Professional 
Engineer and the Department Head of the 
Condition-Based Maintenance Department 
at the Penn State Applied Research 
Laboratory (ARL). He has extensive 
experience in the design and testing of 
thermal, mechanical and fluid power 
systems. Carl performed high-speed propulsion research 
at the NASA Langley Research Center from 1988 through 
1990. From 1991 to 1995, he worked on the development 
and testing of advanced thermal powerplants for 
underwater vehicle applications at ARL. Since that time, 
he has been involved in the development of predictive 
failure diagnostics technology for machinery, and he 
serves as the modeling thrust leader for a large University 
Research Initiative in machinery prognostics, He is also 
the lead engineer and principal investigator on several 
projects related to sensing, classifying and tracking failure 
modes in mechanical transmissions, engines, and 
electrochemical systems for Navy platforms. His interests 
include failure diagnostics, mechanicayfluid systems 
modeling, system design analysis, and optimization 
methods. Carl received an MS in Aeronautical 
Engineering from the George Washington University and 
his BS in Mechanical Engineering from the University of 
Pennsylvania. He is a member of ASME, ASM, STLE, 
and SAE professional societies. 
Amulya K. Garga is a Research Associate 
at the Applied Research Laboratory at the 
Pennsylvania State University. He was the 
project manager (1997-99) for an ONR 
MURI grant for Integrated Predictive 
Diagnostics research to advance the 
prognostic capability of large machinery of interest to the 
Navy and industry. His current research is focused on 
hybrid and neural approaches to automated reasoning and 
data fusion. His previous research included signal and 
image processing, target tracking, and VLSI systems. He 
holds a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the 
Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Garga was recently 
awarded the E E E  Third Millennium medal. He is a 
member of the IEEE, Eta Kappa Nu, and Sigma Xi 
Research Society. He is currently the Chairman of the 
Central Pennsylvania chapter of the lEEE Signal 
Processing Society. 
Matthew J. Watson is a recent graduate of 
Penn State University with a BS in 
Mechanical Engineering. He is currently 
continuing his undergraduate research 
(predictive diagnostics for primary and 
secondary batteries) at the Applied 
Research Laboratory. His interests there include heat 
transfer, data acquisition, and system identification. He is 
a member of Tau Beta Pi. 
I 
Todd A. Hay is an undergraduate student 
at Penn State University currently pursuing 
his BSEE degree and a minor in 
Mathematics. He is working part-time at 
the Applied Research Lab. Mr. Hay’s 
interests there include pattern recognition 
and neural networks. He enjoys backpacking and 
mountain biking in his free time. 
6-3164 
