PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 67 
A New DCT-Mode Selection Scheme 
for DV Standard 
Hanjong Kim, Member, IEEE 
Absbncf- The digital camcorder system DV, which features 
advanced intraframe DCT-based Video compression, has been 
successfully introduced for the consumer and semkprofessional 
users. In DV standard, DCT-mode can be selected from two 
modes, 1x8~8 DCT-mode and 2x4~8 DCT-mode to improve 
picture quality after bit rate reduction. It is known that the 
2x4~8 DCT-mode is selected in case of the big difference 
between two fields. It iP also proven that the quality of 2x4~8 
DCT-mode is better than that of the 1x8~8 DCT-mode when the 
high motion is involved. This paper focuses on the new DCT- 
mode selection scheme that can improve the picture quality 
compare to the conventional method using a threshold 
optimization method. As a result, both subjective and objective 
quality of the picture is improved as compared with the 
conventional scheme. 
Index Terms-Digital Video @V), DCT, sobel, threshold 
I. INTRODUCTION T he specifications of Consurner-Use Digital VCR [l] are 
mainly based on the conventional image coding 
techniques such as PEG, MPEG and H.261. However, it 
adopted a very different scheme for DCT -mode selection. Two 
E - m o d e s  - 1~8x8 DCTmode and 2x4~8 DCT-mode - can be 
selected to improve picture quality after bit rate reduction. In 
the specifications, the 2x4~8 DCT-mode is chosen in case the 
difference between two fields is big. It means that the 2x4~8 
E - m o d e  can improve the quality of picture with high motion. 
The conventional algorithm uses a threshold optimization 
method that the differences between two fields are calculated 
and compared with the threshold that is decided 
experimentally. In this paper, we propose a new method to 
select a DCT-mode for the DV standard and compare its 
performance with that of the conventional method. By using 
the proposed algorithm, the results of our experiment show a 
better performance than the conventional method. In Section 
2, the two DCT-modes in the DV specifications are briefly 
overviewe d. In Section 3 and Section 4, the conventional and 
proposed methods are explained in detail, respectively. 
Section 5 provides some experimental results and our 
conclusions. 
Hanjong Kim is a senior engineer in DSP system design at the R&D 
Center of STMicroelectronics Asia Pacific Pte Ltd, Singapore 
(telephone: 65-772-8071, e-mail: hanjong.kim@ st.com). 
II. TWOD(;T-MODES 
The Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) has become the most 
popular transform in picture compression, since it has proven 
to be the most efficient transform for energy compaction, 
whereas the implementation can be of limited complexity. In 
the DV standard, we have adopted a block size of 64 samples 
because it provides the best compromise between compression 
efficiency and complexity and robustness. In 1 x 8 ~ 8  DCT-mode, 
DCT operation is defined in (1). 
1 
2 
-(wheh#Oorv#O) 
where P(x, y )  = pixelvalue Cys y) = coeflciehvalue 
(1) 
The local motion in sample blocks leads to complicated data 
structures after DCT transformation [2], [3]. The solution for 
this problem is to split the vertical transform into two filed- 
based transforms of length 4. Therefore, DCT operation in 
2x4~8 DCT-mode is defined in (2), where F int(2ly). 
Hence, f i s t  an 8-point horizontal transform (HDCT) is 
performed yielding intermediate data and subsequently, two 
vertical4-point transforms (VDCT). 
m. "VENTIONAL. ALGORITHM 
In this chapter, we provide simple means for motion 
detection used in the conventional method. The purpose of 
the motion detector is to determine whether the actual block 
contains data structure formed by a local motion component. 
The motion detection is based on vertical high frequency 
IEEE Catalogue No. 01 CH37239 
0-7803-71 01 -I/ 01 / $10.00 0 2001 IEEE. 
206 
PAPER JDENTIFICATION NUMBER: 67 
energy measurement. In other words, we are able to detect 
structures due to motion by using a partial transform - a single 
Hadamard coefficient - in vertical direction. The final motion 
decision is based on a two-step calculation. First, for each 
column the H a b a r d  coefficient is calculated and, secondly, 
the magnitudes of the coefficients obtained are summed and 
compared with a predetermined motion threshold that is 
decided experimentally. If the result of the summation exceeds 
the threshold, 2x4~8 DCT-mode is chosen. 
1 N-1 
=- x(-l)iP(i,j) and Efl!fl > Threshold fi i;o j=O 
where, P(i, j )  = pixel value, N = 8 (blocksize) 
(3) 
N. PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
Threshold optimization has been performed experimentally in 
conventional method. This optimization is not consistent on 
different image sequences. Hence, it is very difficult to choose 
a threshold value that gives consistent quality for any picture 
sequences. For example, a high threshold causes blocks in 
high motion areas to be coded as if there is no motion, which 
results in well-visible blocks owing to increased coding noise 
inside areas with good signal-noise ratio. In addition, 
misdetections occur in the background or on the vertical 
edges. 
To solve these problems, we introduce a simple edge 
detector to detect the local motion. Image edges have already 
been defined as local variations of image intensity. Therefore, 
local image differentiation techniques can produce edge 
detector operators. The image gradient provides u s e l l  
information of local intensity variations and it can be obtained 
by gradient masks. The proposed algorithm uses Sobel edge 
detector masks and it provides good performance that is 
relatively insensitive to noise. Better noise characteristics can 
be achieved by using larger neighborhoods at expense of 
computational work. However, large neighborhoods tend to 
produce thick edges. We use masks of size 3x3, which is 
illustrated in Fig.1, for each 8x8 blocks. After that, the 2 x 4 ~ 8  
m - m o d e  is chosen for the further improvement when any 
pixel in 8x8 blocks is detected as an edge pixel. 
This simple idea can improve the picture quality compared to 
the conventional method. In the next chapter, the experimental 
results will be shown in terms of the peak-signal-to-noise-ratio 
( P s w  
V. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
The simulations are performed with 52560 system (NTSC) 
and 2 test sequences - Mobile Calendar and Stefan - are used 
in our experiments with 720x480 pixels in each hme.  Different 
threshold values for motion change are selected in the 
conventional method. After that, those are compared to the 
results with that of our proposed algorithm. Table. I shows the 
experimental results in terms of peak-signal-to-noise-ratio 
(PSNR). In the Table. I, T50, TI00 and T150 represent the 
conventional methods that use values 50, 100, 150, 
respectively, as motion thresholds. 
Stefan 
(Tennis) I 38.97 1 M.28 1 4-0.22 I M.17 1 +0.27 
11 30.56 I M.02 I 4-0.01 I M.01 I +0.14 
Calendar 
Table. I Experimental results 
Fig. 2 and 3 show the experimental results of two test 
sequences in terms of peak-signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR). 
I I I I I  I I I 
Fig. 1. Sobel edge detector masks 
Fig. 2. PSNR graph of Mobile Calendar 
207 
PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 67 
Fig. 3. PSNR graph of Stefan 
For two of the sequences, it is clear that our proposed 
scheme provides better performance than conventional 
scheme, especially in a slow-motion sequence. Hence, the 
proposed method can be generally applied to any moving 
sequences while the picture quality used by the c.onventiona1 
method depends on the motion threshold. This experiment 
shows a little improvement, however, it can be enhanced more 
in picture quality conjunction with other considerations in 
options in DV standard, such as adaptive bit rate control and 
modified quantizer. 
VL REFERENCES 
HD Digital VCR Conference, Specifications of Consumer-Use 
Digital VCRs, Dec. 1994. 
P.H.N. de With, “Motion-Adaptive Intraframe Transform Coding 
of Video Signals”, Philips Journal of Research, Vol. 44, No. 213, pp. 
P.H.N. de With and A.M.A Rijckaert, “Design Considerations of 
the Video Compression System of the New DV Camcorder 
Standard”, IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 43, No. 4, 
pp. 1160-1170, November 1997. 
345-364, April 1989. 
208 
