'Gamma-Ray Large Area Space Telescope 
(GLAST) Mission 
Scott Lambros 
NASNGoddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, Md. 20771 
scott.lambros@gsfc.nasa.gov 
301-286-01 18 
Abstract--The Gamma-ray Large Area Space 
Telescope (GLAST) mission is a scientific 
spaceflight investigation that measures the 
direction, energy and arrival time of celestial 
gamma rays. It is planned for launch in September 
2005. The scientific applications include 
determining the structure of high-energy 
astrophysical processes such as those found in 
active galactic nuclei, black holes, and supernovae. 
Several other natural phenomena in the universe 
will be investigated. One of the most exciting 
aspects of the GLAST mission is its potential for 
new discovery. 
There are two instruments on the GLAST 
Observatory: the Large Area Telescope (LAT), a 
joint development of NASA and DOE, and the 
GLAST Burst Monitor (GBM). Both instruments 
have international collaborators. 
The spacecraft will be a modified version of an 
existing design. Challenging aspects will be 
handling the large mass and the tight pointing 
knowledge requirements, The launch vehicle, 
ground system elements, and data flow are also 
described. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SCIENCE 
3. INSTRUMENTS 
4. ALTERNATE TECHNOLOGIES 
6. LAUNCH VEHICLE 
8. SCHEDULE 
5. SPACECRAFT 
7. GROUND SYSTEM AND OPERATIONS 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope 
(GLAST) is NASA's next major gamma ray 
mission scheduled for launch in September 2005. 
It is a NASA managed mission with joint 
development with the Department of Energy for 
U. S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
the Large Area Telescope (LAT) instrument, and 
with international participation for both the LAT 
and GLAST Burst Monitor (GBM) instruments. 
The GLAST Observatory will be launched into a 
550 km. circular orbit at 28.5 degrees inclination. 
The design lifetime is 5 years, with a 10-year 
operational goal. 
Science requirements for the mission were 
developed by an international group of scientists 
called the Facility Science Team. Since the two 
instruments were selected in March 2000, a 
Science Working Group (SWG) was formed which 
has refined the science requirements, encapsulated 
in a Science Requirements Document. Included in 
the SWG are four interdisciplinary scientists, also 
selected at the time of instrument selection, who 
perform science analysis to prepare for and utilize 
the GLAST data. 
Since the Earth is protected from gamma rays by 
the atmosphere, a spaceflight mission offers prime 
observation. Because such high energy is required 
to produce gamma rays, they yield much 
information about high-energy engines in the 
universe. In addition, they are specifically suited 
for observation because they do not attenuate in a 
magnetic field; thus they point directly back to 
their source. 
GLAST was rated the highest recommended space 
mission in its class by the National Research 
Council Decade1 Review Committee. 
The major elements comprising the GLAST 
mission are described in this paper. They include 
the two instruments, the spacecraft that provides 
the platform to service the instruments and provide 
communication to the ground, the launch vehicle, 
and the various ground system elements that 
provide the health and safety monitoring of the 
observatory and the processing of the science data 
obtained by the instruments. 
7-3621 
2 SCIENCE 
High-energy gamma rays probe the most energetic 
phenomena occurring in nature, providing insight 
into the mechanisms of particle acceleration in the 
universe. High-energy gamma rays are emitted 
from a diverse population of astrophysical sources. 
Stellar mass objects, in particular neutron stars and 
black holes, the nuclei of active galaxies that likely 
contain super massive black holes, interstellar gas 
in the galaxy that interacts with high-energy 
cosmic rays, the diffuse extragalactic background, 
supernovae that may be sites of cosmic-ray 
acceleration, and gamma-ray bursts are all gamma- 
ray emitters. The sun also produces high-energy 
gamma rays during active periods. Many transient 
sources, from the subsecond time scales of the 
fastest gamma-ray bursts to AGN flares lasting 
days or more, often radiate the bulk of their power 
at gamma ray energies. 
High-energy gamma ray astronomy has undergone 
a blossoming of discovery in recent years. In 
particular, the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment 
Telescope (EGRET) on the Compton Gamma Ray 
Observatory (CGRO) has opened the field to 
detailed studies of several classes of galactic and 
extragalactic objects. GLAST is an evolution of 
the instrumentation used in EGRET, with higher 
sensitivity, energy resolution, and location 
accuracy. GLAST also follows on the heels of the 
Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) 
instrument, also on CGRO, for observing gamma- 
ray bursts. 
Some of the particular science objectives that 
GLAST will address are: 
Examine particle acceleration engines in active 
galactic nuclei jets, pulsars, supernova 
remnants, and solar flares 
Investigate the structure of super-massive 
black holes 
Use gamma rays to probe the optical-UV 
extragalactic background light, yielding 
valuable information from the era of galaxy 
formation 
Generate an extensive source catalog (where 
EGRET discovered 85 AGNs, GLAST expects 
on the order of 10,000) and resolve 
unidentified sources from EGRET 
Probe our understanding and theories 
regarding dark matter. This invisible unknown 
form of matter has been theorized to make up 
80 to 90% of all matter in the universe 
Investigate whether the diffuse gamma-ray 
emission is isotropic or an integrated flux from 
many as yet unresolved sources 
Explore the mysteries of gamma ray bursts: an 
unknown localized phenomenon that generates 
energy brighter than the entire rest of the 
gamma-ray sky for typically on the order of a 
few seconds. 
Discovery! With the significant leaps in 
instrumentation on GLAST, a key objective is 
to uncover what we do not yet know. 
3 INSTRUMENTS 
Two instruments were selected to fly on the 
GLAST mission. The Large Area Telescope 
(LAT) utilizes the bulk of the mission resources. 
The GLAST Burst Monitor (GBM) is a smaller 
instrument, for enhancing the science of the 
mission. 
Large Area Telescope [I] 
Organization. 
The LAT instrument (Figure 1) is a joint 
development with NASA and the Department of 
Energy (DOE). Participants include a large 
collaboration of developers, including several U.S. 
institutions and foreign participants. The Principal 
Investigator is Dr. Peter Michelson at Stanford 
University. Project management is located at the 
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC), a 
DOE facility at Stanford University. Other 
domestic organizations contributing hardware 
include the University of California, Santa Cmz 
(UCSC); the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL); 
and the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). 
Foreign contributors include France, Japan, Italy 
and Sweden. 
The joint development aspect of this instrument is 
consistent with the Cosmic Connections Initiative, 
a planned collaboration among NASA, DOE, and 
NSF. Projects in this initiative are geared toward 
exploiting the synergy of combining particle 
physics with astrophysics. 
7 - 3 6 2 2  
Figure 1 - LAT Instrument Subsystems 
Technical Description. 
The LAT measures the direction, energy and 
arrival time of gamma rays in the energy range of 
20 MeV to 300 GeV. This wide-field-of-view, 
high-energy pair conversion telescope includes the 
same essential elements as EGRET. Compared to 
EGRET, the LAT will have a greatly increased 
effective area (>800cmZ), sensitivity 
cm-’s-’ for energy > 100MeV) , angular resolution 
(< 0.15‘ for energy >lOGeV; < 3.5’ for energy = 
100 MeV),and energy range. 
(< 6 x 
The LAT consists of four subsystems: a silicon- 
strip detector tracker; a hodoscopic cesium iodide 
(CsI) calorimeter; a segmented, plastic scintillator, 
anti-coincidence detector (ACD); and a data 
acquisition subsystem. The instrument consists of 
a modular 4x4 array of towers, each composed of a 
tracker and calorimeter, and their associated 
electronics. The ACD covers the entire array of 
towers. 
Tracker. 
The tracker consists of 19 layers of “trays”, with 
the primary purpose of determining the direction of 
measured gamma rays. Each layer consists of two 
orthogonal layers of silicon strip detectors (for x, y 
positiorl), and a high density layer of converter 
material, e.g., lead. The gamma ray converts in the 
converter material to two particles, which resultant 
paths are measured by the Si detectors. Particles 
will produce more particles as they pass through 
succeeding layers of converter material, resulting 
in a shower of particles through the tracker. 
Software reconstruction of the shower path, from 
the Si detector outputs, yields the direction of the 
gamma ray. 
Calorimeter. 
The calorimeter consists of a segmented array of 
CsI crystals read out by PIN diodes primarily for 
energy measurement. The amount of light detected 
from the scintillating crystals gives the measure of 
the energy of the initial gamma ray. Because the 
calorimeter material is necessarily dense and 
heavy, most of the instrument’s large mass is 
included in this subsystem. 
Anticoincidence Detector. 
The ACD is composed of plastic scintillator 
material segmented into tiles and read out by 
waveshifting fibers connected to photomultiplier 
tubes. The ACD is used primarily to detect when a 
signal is a cosmic ray - a background signal vs. a 
gamma ray. Cosmic rays will leave a measurable 
trace in the ACD where a gamma ray will not. 
This signal can be compared with the tracker 
detector signals to subtract out the cosmic ray 
background. 
Data Acquisition System. 
This system includes all the electronics to 
determine a “trigger”, i.e., a threshold indicating 
when a signal is considered a gamma ray. It then 
acquires all the detector signals, processes them, 
and prepares them for transmission to the 
spacecraft to be recorded and eventually sent to the 
ground. A very important role of the electrical 
subsystem is on-board processing. Since the 
number of background cosmic rays is four to five 
orders of magnitude more than the number of 
gamma rays, the on-board processing reduce the 
background signals to keep the data rate to a 
manageable level. This subsystem also handles all 
instrument housekeeping data and interfaces with 
the spacecraft. 
Required Resources. 
The LAT instrument weighs 3000 kg. The 
required power is 650 watts, orbital average. The 
data rate averages 300 kbps. A few times during 
the mission, especially during initial checkout, the 
7-3623 
instrument will turn off its filtering mode (i.e., 
cosmic ray suppression) and telemeter all the data, 
so that the filtering algorithms can be verified on 
the ground. In this case, the peak data rate jumps 
to several megabits per second. 
GLAST Burst Monitor [2]  
Organization. 
The Principal Investigator for the GBM is Dr. 
Charles Meegan from the NASA/Marshall Space 
Flight Center (MSFC). Along with the MSFC, the 
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) will 
provide design and hardware. A significant portion 
of the instrument (i.e., all the detector hardware) 
will be provided by Germany. Project 
management is centered at the MSFC. 
incident gamma rays in the range of 5 keV to 1 
MeV. The detectors are positioned around the 
spacecraft, facing in different directions to achieve 
the large FOV and to determine burst location 
using relative rates. The mechanical mounting of 
the detectors to attain their FOV is the most 
stringent GBM requirement. 
BGO Detectors. 
The GBM includes two bismuth germinate (BGO) 
scintillation detectors that provide spectral 
coverage in the range of 150 keV to 30 MeV. The 
detectors are directly coupled to two PMTs on 
opposite sides, whose outputs are summed. The 
roughly omnidirectional detectors are positioned on 
opposite sides of the spacecraft, providing full-sky 
coverage. 
Figure 2 - GBM Instrument Concept 
Technical Description. 
The GBM (Figure 2) will produce spectral 
observations of gamma-ray bursts and provide 
approximate burst locations over a wide field of 
view. Its spectral range will span from 5 keV to 30 
MeV, providing good overlap with the LAT 
yielding an unprecedented six decades of burst 
energy spectra with no gaps. On-board burst 
locations will be determined to within 15 degrees 
(refined to about 1.5 degrees on the ground), and 
used to repoint the observatory to allow the burst to 
enter the LAT field of view (FOV). The GBM 
effective FOV exceeds 8 steradians. 
The GBM consists of two types of detectors and a 
data processing unit: 
NaI Detectors. 
The GBM incorporates 12 sodium iodide (NaI) 
scintillation detectors directly coupled to a 
photomultiplier tube (PMT). They measure 
Data Processing Unit (DPU). 
The DPU interprets the signals from the detectors 
and formats the data to output to the spacecraft 
recorder. It also generates alert messages for 
gamma-ray bursts that exceed a predetermined 
brightness threshold (see the section on ground 
system and operations). For these bursts the DPU 
also computes a rough position to be included with 
the burst alert message. 
Required Resources. 
The GBM weighs 70 kg and uses about 10 watts 
orbital average. The telemetry rate is about 10 
kbps, orbital average and 10 Mbps peak. 
4 ALTERNATE TECHNOLOGIES 
An alternate technology considered for GLAST 
gamma-ray detection was a concept based on using 
scintillating fibers [ 3 ] .  Although not used on 
GLAST, it has made much progress as a future 
instrument concept. 
The primary detector element is a doubly clad 
square plastic scintillating fiber. The fibers are 
closely packed in layers of several detector planes 
with a dense converter material directly above 
them. The signal created by the incident gamma 
ray causes the fiber to scintillate, which is 
measured by photomultiplier tubes. The track 
reconstruction yielding the gamma ray direction is 
performed by the electrical subsystem and on- 
board processing. The calorimeter section, which 
measures the energy, also uses closer packed 
scintillating fibers. 
7 - 3 6 2 4  
Much more detail was developed with this concept 
during the technology development phase of 
GLAST. 
5 SPACECRAFT 
The spacecraft (Figure 3) utilized for the GLAST 
Figure 3 - Spacecraft Concept 
mission will be procured through the Rapid 
Spacecraft Development Office (RSDO) at 
NASA/GSFC. This contractual vehicle in place at 
GSFC allows a user to select and quickly procure a 
spacecraft from a catalog of options. To be in the 
catalogue, the spacecraft must have already been 
designed, built, qualified for flight, tested, passed 
through launch processing, and determined launch 
ready. This approach ensures that the spacecraft 
are a true catalog item in that they have been 
successfully built. When RSDO vendors propose a 
solicitation for a particular mission, they are 
allowed to propose their catalog spacecraft bus and 
mission-unique modifications. This procedure is 
particularly useful for missions that do not have 
many unique or complicated spacecraft interfaces, 
For GLAST, the large mass is the most unique 
aspect of the spacecraft as compared to the 
capabilities of the current spacecraft buses in the 
RSDO catalog. For proposing spacecraft, a unique 
structure will have to be defined to handle the mass 
of the two instruments. The on-board data bus is 
possibly also a unique item; various possibilities 
are being studied, including trading off new 
technologies with the lower cost of the existing 
capabilities listed in the current RSDO catalog. 
This tradeoff will affect the allowable peak data 
rates of the instruments, which in turn will affect 
the instrument data handling design, particularly 
the amount of data buffering internal to the 
instruments. 
The RSDO spacecraft contracts are fixed price. 
This impacts mission development by putting off 
spacecraft procurement late in the mission 
development. The reason is to develop instrument 
interfaces in as much detail as possible before 
procuring the spacecraft. That way fewer cost 
changes will impact the fixed price spacecraft as 
development progresses. 
The disadvantage of this approach is that no 
spacecraft vendor is on board early in the program 
to refine instrument interfaces and perform 
interface trade studies. To mitigate this situation, 
GLAST has determined to perform accommodation 
studies with potential RSDO vendors in the early 
years of mission development. These studies will 
help to refine the instrument interfaces so that the 
instrument teams can continue development. In 
turn, the required interfaces for the instruments will 
be incorporated into the Spacecraft Performance 
Specification for the next study, and eventual 
spacecraft procurement. This entire process of 
defininghefining, trading off, and specifying 
requirements is overseen by the GLAST Project 
engineering staff, which uses its technical 
judgement to monitor the process, as well as to 
perform technical trade studies to feed into the 
process. 
The first accommodation study was completed in 
August 2000. Three spacecraft vendors were 
chosen to perform the study. One of the most 
significant results of that study was the addition of 
a propulsion system for a controlled re-entry into 
the Earth’s atmosphere at the completion of the 
mission. A break-up analysis of the spacecraft and 
instruments was performed as part of the 
accommodation studies. Results of the analysis 
indicated that GLAST will not meet the NASA 
requirement of 8 m2 aggregate area (average over 
all orbits) for debris surviving re-entry burn-up. 
This requirement is a safety concern considering 
the probability of harming a human being. This 
analysis, coupled with heightened safety awareness 
as exemplified by the reentry of the CGRO 
Observatory, drove the decision to add the 
propulsion system. 
The impact of adding a propulsion system was to 
increase mass, which may affect the choice of 
launch vehicle. The capabilities of a Delta 2920 
would allow very little mass margin, an 
unacceptable situation at this stage of development. 
The Delta 2920-H (Heavy) provides sufficient 
margin. 
Another key result of the accommodation studies 
was to highlight the pointing knowledge 
requirement as a potential driver. This knowledge 
7 - 3 6 2 5  
is important to the mission to locate gamma-ray 
sources accurately. The initial science requirement 
was 5 arcseconds (radius, I-sigma). Existing star 
trackers can easily provide this accuracy; however, 
the problem is the thermal/mechanical distortions 
between the star tracker and the instrument 
boresight. The problem is exacerbated by the 
requirement that no spacecraft hardware be 
mounted above the bottom of the LAT instrument. 
Having hardware so close may allow background 
cosmic rays to enter the instrument. Two actions 
were taken to resolve this problem: First, the 
science team agreed to a two-fold reduction in the 
pointing knowledge requirement (to 10 
arcseconds). Second, options for mounting the star 
trackers to the instrument grid are being 
investigated. Such mounting would keep the 
trackers below the instrument level while providing 
a more tightly coupled system that would greatly 
reduce the thermal distortions between the trackers 
and the instrument. 
6 LAUNCH VEHICLE 
With the inception of the NASA Launch Services 
contract in June 2000, changes have occurred in 
launch vehicle procurement. When the project is 
ready to procure a launch vehicle, which in the 
case of GLAST is about two years away, any 
vendor that meets the mission requirements can 
propose a vehicle. For design purposes, however, 
we have used the capabilities and environment of a 
specific vehicle: the Delta 2920 with a 10 foot 
fairing. The same vehicle in the ‘H’ model is also 
a possibility; technically it is feasible, the tradeoff 
is cost. This model would add enough capability to 
provide sufficient mass margin, given the addition 
of the propulsion system on the spacecraft. 
An early coupled loads analysis has been 
performed to provide the instrument developers 
with a range for the mechanical environment at 
launch. This analysis is to be redone later with 
more accuracy, and will include the selected 
spacecraft. 
7 GROUND SYSTEM AND OPERATIONS 
Elements of the ground system include a Mission 
Operations Center (MOC); two Instrument 
Operations Centers (IOCs), one at each instrument 
developer’s site; a Science Support Center (SSC); 
and ground stations and associated data routing 
networks. 
The MOC, which operates the GLAST 
Observatory, is the only element that can 
communicate directly with the spacecraft. It sends 
and receives commands and telemetry. It monitors 
the health and safety of the spacecraft, and 
conducts limited health checks of the instruments. 
It routes the telemetry to other ground elements. 
The location of the MOC has not yet been 
determined. As a cost saving measure, it most 
likely will be shared with other missions. 
Automated lights-out operations is being studied, 
which would allow staffing of the center only 
during a normal work week. 
The IOCs perform health and safety monitoring of 
the instruments and data processing. The LAT 
IOC is located at Stanford/SLAC; the GBM IOC is 
located at MSFC. Science data products are sent 
from the IOCs to the SSC for archiving and 
distribution to the science community. The IOCs 
also support the instrument science teams in 
performing their investigations. The IOCs will 
provide instrument command structures, software 
updates, and table loads to the MOC to be 
uploaded to the instruments. 
The SSC is used to process production data to 
higher levels of data products, and archive and 
distribute GLAST data products to the science 
community (Figure 4). It will also support selected 
guest investigators during their particular 
investigations. Tools for data use will be provided 
to data users. The SSC is responsible for 
generating the GLAST observing schedule, an 
activity led by the Project Scientist. It will also 
determine the course of action when targets of 
opportunity are identified - interesting events 
identified by other observing platforms which 
GLAST may be repointed to observe. The SSC is 
l o c a t e d  a t  G S F C .  
7 - 3 6 2 6  
Figure 4 - Ground System Elements with Data Flow 
Ground stations will be selected to allow for one 
nominal data downlink per day. The spacecraft 
recorder will be sized to hold 36 hours of data, 
leaving 12 hours for contingency. 
The space network, i.e., the Tracking and Data 
Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), will be used for 
alert messages. These are messages generated by 
the instruments to signal special transient events 
such as gamma-ray bursts or flares of active 
galactic nuclei. The alert messages will be sent to 
the ground, using the demand access feature on 
TDRSS, within about 8 seconds and broadcast over 
the Gamma-ray burst Coordinate Network. This 
notification will be sent to other experimenters, 
allowing them to observe the same events. This 
approach will enable multiwavelength studies of 
interesting phenomena. 
There will also be an automatic repointing feature 
on board the spacecraft. If one of the instruments 
detects an interesting event (defined by a 
predetermined threshold), the spacecraft will 
automatically repoint to observe that event better. 
8 SCHEDULE 
GLAST is scheduled for launch in September 
2005. A System Requirements Review was 
successfully completed in September 2000. The 
Preliminary Design Review and Non-Advocate 
Review (NAR) will be held in August 2001. The 
NAR is the gateway to moving into the 
implementation phase of the project. 
9 CONCLUSIONS 
The elements of the mission, as described in this 
paper is being developed by scientists and 
engineers from several different countries. Most of 
the engineering challenges have some basis in 
heritage, however, much of the development is new 
for this application (e.g., silicon strip detector 
technology in this space application; the RSDO 
spacecraft is a catalog item, but modified for this 
particular mission). 
The GLAST mission will push forward the 
boundaries of gamma-ray science. Results of this 
mission will enhance our understanding of the 
structure of high energy phenomenon in the 
universe. The results will also increase our 
understanding of the early universe, and what 
interactions were occurring during the era of 
galaxy formation. Perhaps most importantly, it 
will lead us to new discoveries of things which 
cannot be predicted. 
7 - 3 6 2 7  
REFERENCES 
[l] Peter F. Michelson, et. al., G U S T  Large Area 
Telescope Flight Investigation: An Astro-Particle 
Physics Partnership Exploring the High-Energy 
Universe, proposal to NASA A 0  99-OSS-03, 
Stanford University, November 1999. 
[2] Charles Meegan, et. al., G U S T  Burst Monitor, 
proposal to NASA A 0  99-OSS-03, 
NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center, November 
1999. 
[3] Geoffrey N. Pendleton, FiberGLAST Final 
Report, University of Alabama in Huntsville, May 
2000. 
Scott Lumbros is the Project Manager f o r  the 
G U S T  mission at NASMGoddard Space Flight 
Center. He has worked on various space projects 
at GSFC for the past 20 years. Graduating from 
Rutgers University with a degree in mathematics, 
he began his career at GSFC by performing 
mission analysis and orbit mechanics. From there, 
he moved into a series of management positions. 
Most recently, he was the instrument manager for 
the ASTER instrument, a Japanese contribution, 
for the Earth Observing System (EOS) Terra 
spacecrafi, which launched in December 1999. 
7 - 3 6 2 8  
