Automated Planning for the Modified Antarctic Mapping 
Mission1 
Benjamin D. Smith, Barbara E. Engelhardt, Darren H. Mutz, John P. Crawford 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
!firsttiame.lastnaine: @ipl.nasa.ml 
WS 126-347 
Abstract-The RadarSAT Modified Antarctic Mapping 
Mission (MAMM) ran from September to November 2000. 
The MAMM mission consisted of over 2400 synthetic 
aperture radar (SAR) data takes over Antarctica that had to 
satisfy coverage and other scientific criteria while obeying 
tight resource and operational constraints. Developing these 
plans is a time and knowledge intensive effort. It required 
over a work-year to manually develop a comparable plan for 
AMM-1, the precursor mission to MAMM. This paper 
describes the automated mission planning system for 
MAMM, which dramatically reduced mission planning costs 
to just a few work-weeks, and enabled rapid generation of 
"what-if-' scenarios for evaluating mission-design trades. 
This latter capability informed several critical design 
decisions and was instrumental in accurately costing the 
mission. This paper describes the mission, the planning 
problem, the system architecture, the planning challenges 
involved, and the impact of the automated planning system 
on planning and operating the mission. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
MAMM MISSION DESCRIPTION 
AUTOMATED PLANNING SYSTEM 
USING AUTOMATED PLANNING 
FUTURE WORK 
CONCLUSIONS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Modified Antarctic Mapping Mission (MAMM) 
executed from September through November of 2000 
onboard RadarSAT, a Canadian Space Agency (CSA) 
satellite. This joint NASNCSA mission is a modified 
version of the First RadarSAT Antarctic Mapping Mission 
(AMM-1) executed in 1997. The objective of AMM-1 was 
to acquire complete coverage of the 'Antarctic continent, 
whereas the objective of MAMM is to acquire repeat-pass 
interferometry to measure ice surface velocity of the outer 
regions of the continent, north of SOS. The mission 
objective is to perform synthetic aperture radar (SAR) 
mapping of the Antarctic over three consecutive 24-day 
repeat cycles. The SAR instrument has several "beams" each 
of which can be commanded to take data in rectangular 
swths. These swaths are eventually compiled into a mosaic. 
The incidence angle of each beam is separated by a few 
degrees and partially overlaps the swaths of adjacent beams. 
The location of the swaths at any given time is determined 
by the spacecraft orbit. The planning problem is to select a 
subset of the available swaths that fully cover the visible 
area of Antarctica and satisfy operational and resource 
constraints imposed by the RadarSAT Mission Management 
Office (IvlMO). The driving operational constraints are the 
limited on-board tape recorder (OBR) capacity and 
downlink opportunities, which constrain the swath subsets 
that will fit on the OBR between downlinks. 
The AMM-1 mission demonstrated the need for an 
automated planning capability. The schedule for AMM-1 
consisted of 850 acquisitions (swaths) over 18 days, and 
took over a work-year to develop manually. Despite 
repeated checking, this plan violated operations constraints 
that were not detected until the final MMO review. This 
inability to detect all the operations and resource constraint 
violations during the planning process required expensive 
and disruptive last-minute revisions. An automated planner 
could have quickly identified constraint violations, 
suggested repairs, and reduced the chance of errors, all of 
which would have significantly expedited the mission 
planning process. 
This experience led to the development and use of an 
automated mission planning system for MAMM. The system 
expanded a set of swaths selected by the human mission 
planner into a detailed plan, automatically scheduled 
downlink activities to minimize resource costs and other 
criteria, and checked the resulting plan for operations 
constraint violations. With this system MAMM developed a 
24-day mission plan containing 800 swaths in a matter of 
weeks, as compared to the work-year required to develop a. 
comparable mission plan for AMM- 1. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
1 - 1  Ll 
In addition to reducing the plan development effort, the 
MAMM planner also provided resource tracking and other 
details that enabled accurate costing and feasibility 
estimates. The MAMM planner also enabled "what-if' 
studies that were not possible under AMM-1. The planner 
quickly generated detailed variations of the baseline plan for 
different ground station availability assumptions. These 
study plans were instrumental in selecting ground1 stations 
and making other decisions about mission alternatives. 
The rest of this paper describes the automated planning 
system that was constructed for MAMM based on the 
ASPEN [1,4,5] planning environment. Section 2 describes 
the mission planning problem, Section 3 describes the 
automated planning system, Section 4 describes the impact 
the system had on mission planning and operati'ons, and 
future work and conclusions appear in Section 5. 
2. MAMM PLANNING PROBLEM 
The objective of MAh4M is to acquire repeat-pass S A R  
interferometry of Antarctica north of -80 degrees latitude 
over three consecutive 24-day repeat cycles' to meaSure ice 
surface velocity of the outer regions of the continent. 
MAMM will use fine beams (high resolution) from 
RadarSAT to increase the accuracy of the interferometric 
data analysis for fast-moving glaciers found in the AMM-1 
mission. 
Interferometry requires multiple images, each taken with the 
same beam and on the same relative orbit within a repeat 
cycle. The mission plan consists of SAR acquisitions and 
data downlinks for one 24-day repeat cycle. This plan is 
repeated over a total of three consecutive repeat cycles in 
order to obtain identical bedorb i t  images taken on 
consecutive cycles as required for interferometry. Since the 
acquisitions for all three cycles must be the same, data takes 
lost to anomalies in the second and third cycles will not be 
rescheduled. However, data takes lost during the first cycle 
will be rescheduled for later in that cycle, and the modified 
schedule will be executed on cycles two and three. 
The Planning Process 
The mission planning process consists of the following four 
steps: 
1. Select S A R  swaths that cover the desired target regions 
in Antarctica and satisfy other scientific requirements. 
Each target must be imaged once on an ascending pass, 
and once on a descending pass. The swaths are selected 
from all the swaths that intersect the target regions 
during one 24 day repeat cycle. This problem is 
illustrated in Figure 1. 
The RadarSAT instrument ground-track repeats itself every 
306 orbits, which takes 24.days. That is, orbit x of any given 
cycle inscribes the same ground track as orbit x of every 
other cycle. 
Expand the selected swaths into a complete schedule. 
Acquiring a S A R  image (swath) can involve turning on 
the instrument, changing beams, spinning up the 
recorder, and other actions. Then determine whether the 
expanded schedule violates any operations constraints 
(e.g., there is insufficient time to make a beam-switch 
between two data-takes that require different beams). 
Create a downlink schedule. Each image must either be 
downlinked in real-time to a ground station that is in 
view during the acquisition, or stored to the data 
recorder and downlinked at a later opportunity. The 
downlink schedule must obey resource and operations 
constraints (e.g., recorder capacity, station visibility, 
time: for station lock-up and exit) and conform to a 
priority policy (certain stations are more reliable or 
have lower costs than others; resource costs make real- 
time: takes preferable to recorded ones). 
If the schedule violates operations constraints, or the 
downlink schedule is of insufficient quality or cannot 
transmit all of the acquisitions, retum to Step 1 and 
mod@ the selected swaths to correct the problems. 
Modifications include changing the swath start time, 
duration, and/or beam; or selecting an alternate swath 
on a different orbit that covers the same target area. 
Figure 1: Swath Selection Problem. The mission planner 
must select swaths and beams that meet coverage and 
scientific criteria, and also satisfy operations constraints. 
This process results in an acquisition plan. Acquisitions lost 
during execution of the first cycle are rescheduled using a 
similar process-identify an alternate swath that covers the 
missed tixget region, perform Steps 2 and 3 to see if the 
resulting schedule is valid, and if not return to Step 1 and 
modify the swath or select another candidate. The other 
swaths in the plan are not modified in order to minimize 
disruption. 
The MAMM planning system automates Step 2 and 3, and 
reports ithe information needed for Step 4: operations 
violations, data that cannot be downlinked, and schedule 
quality summary. It is up to the mission planner to select 
1-152 
(Step 1) and modify (Step 4) the SAR swaths, since these 
steps require human judgement of the science impact. 
Swath selection (Step 1) is partially automated by a tool 
called SPA [7], developed by the Canadian Space Agency, 
that identifies the available swaths by propagating the 
spacecraft orbit but does not consider operations or 
downlink constraints. The future work section discusses how 
automated planning technology could M h e r  automate Steps 
1 and 4 with varying degrees of input from human experts. 
The Planning Problem 
The MAMM and AMM-1 missions were conducted aboard 
RadarSAT. For purposes of planning, the satellite can 
perform the following activities: 
Perform a SAR data take and save it to the onboard 
recorder (OBR-Take) 
0 Perform a SAR data take and downlink it in real time 
(RTM-Take) 
0 Switch the SAR beam 
0 Start the tape recorder (takes a few seconds to spin-up) 
0 Stop the tape recorder (takes a few seconds to spin- 
down) 
Playback the entire tape and downlink it. 
0 Establish a downlink session with a ground station. 
A mission plan consists of a list of activities, each with a 
fixed start time and duration. These activities consume 
spacecraft resources, which are also tracked in the plan. The 
relevant resources are the tape capacity used, instrument on 
time per orbit, and number of tape stadstop cycles. In 
planning parlance, these are all depletable resources. The 
first two of these depletable resources are renewable: the 
tape capacity is replenished by playback activities, and the 
instrument on-time is replenished once per orbit. 
The mission plan must obey certain operational constraints. 
For example, recording acquired data to the OBR must 
occur while the tape recorder is running. OBR playbacks 
and real time (RTM) acquisitions must occur during an 
established downlink session. There are a total of 24 
operational constraints, some of which are shown in Table 1. 
There are four ground stations that can potentially receive 
RadarSAT data for MAMM. A downlink session can only 
be established with one station at a time, and only while the 
station is in view of the satellite. These requirements are 
specified as a list of downlink opportunities, or masks, each 
of which consists of a start time, duration, and station 
identifier. A downlink session can only be established with a 
station when the satellite ground track is within one of these 
station masks. The opportunities vary in duration, but are 
always shorter than the tape capacity. A ground station can 
acquire RTM data in parallel with an OBR playback. 
The planning problem primarily consists of selecting swaths 
and downlink opportunities. The key decisions are which 
swaths to select. whether to take a given swath in OBR or 
RTM mode, and at which downlink opportunity to play back 
data. In making these decisions, the planner (human or 
automated) must not only meet hard constraints, but also try 
to maximize preference criteria. These include preferring 
ground stations that have higher reliability or lower cost, 
preferring RTM data to OBR (to minimize ground station 
and OBR resource costs), and selecting swaths to maximize 
coverage and other scientific criteria. 
The swath and downlink selection decisions are tightly 
couple. Minor alternations to one part of the schedule tend 
to require a cascade of additional changes throughout the 
schedule, which is part of what makes this planning problem 
difficult. For example, changing a swath from RTM to OBR 
will increase the tape usage, which may invalidate a 
previously selected downlink opportunity (if its duration is 
shorter than the recorded data volume to be downlinked). A 
different (longer) downlink opportunity must be chosen, and 
that choice may require changes to other data acquisitions, 
and those changes may impact other downlinks, and so on 
throughout the schedule. 
As another example, the temporal spacing between adjacent 
data takes determines whether the tape recorder keeps 
running between takes or can be stopped, which in turn 
impacts the tape usage. Changing the temporal spacing 
between data takes can therefore change the tape usage, 
which may have cascading effects through the schedule. 
Table 1: Selected Operations Constraints 
OBR data can only be downlinked when a ground 
station outer (or inner) mask is in view 
Gap between last data take and transmit must be 
> 2*(tape length -tape remaining) 
All data must be downlinked 
OBR tapes cannot playback outside of the outer 
mask 
Two activities using SAR cannot happen 
simultaneously 
Cannot transmit RTM data when recorder is in 
record, spin-up, or spin-down modes 
Data takes shall be no less than 1 .Om (including 
8s pads) 
Data takes shall be at least 5.25s apart when 
beams are changed 
Data takes shall be at least 1 1 s apart when beams 
are not changed 
There will be a maximum of 6 OBR transactions 
loer orbit 
OBR takes 10s to spin up, consumes 10s of tape 
OBR takes 5.5s to spin down, and consumes 5.5s 
of tape. 
OBR spin-upkpin-down between takes iff OBR 
data takes are > 30s apart 
To downlink OBR data, OBR must be in playback 
mode 
OBR cannot record during playback or record 
during RTM data take 
SAR shall be on at most 32.0 minutes per orbit 
3. AUTOMATED PLANNING SYSTEM 
The automated planning system takes a list of swaths and 
downlink opportunities (masks), and produces a detailed 
plan that assigns swaths to downlink opportunities, tracks 
resource usage, and reports operations constraint violations. 
Specifically, it takes as input a list of S A R  swaths selected 
by the mission planner, a list of accessibility masks for each 
ground station, the station priority policy, and station 
capabilities (real-time downlink [RTM] and/or on-board 
recorder playback [OBR]). The swath input specifies the 
time, duration, and beam of each swath. The user generates 
this input using a swath selection and coverage analysis tool 
called SPA, which CSA developed for RadarSAT missions. 
The mask files are provided by the RadarSAT Mission 
Management Office (MMO). 
The mask and swath files are combined into a single file and 
passed to the ASPEN planning system, which is described in 
more detail below. The planner expands the swaths and 
masks into a detailed plan that includes downlinlc session 
activities, tape odof f  transitions, beam switches, and tracks 
resource usage. ASPEN then checks the resulting plan for 
operations constraints violations. The resulting plan and 
violations are then converted from ASPEN format to a time- 
ordered sequence of events and constraint violations in an 
Excel format that was specified by the mission planners. It 
also summarizes plan metrics, such as total on-board and 
ground station resource consumption. This flow of 
information is documented in Figure 2. 
Based on the report files, the human mission planner 
modifies the selected swaths as needed to resolve the 
conflicts or improve schedule quality. The check-and-edit 
cycle is repeated until a conflict-free plan is generated. This 
rapid feedback allows the user to generate a conflict-free 
plan much more quickly than is possible by hand. 
Maintaining the human planner in the loop enables the use 
of human scientific judgment in selecting swaths. 
The ASPENplanner for MAMM 
ASPEN [1,4,5] is an automated planning and scheduling 
system developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and used 
for a nwnber of space applications. Its basic operation is to 
find a d.etailed course of action-or plan-that achieves 
specified high-level goals. The goals, the actions it can take, 
and the operations constraints on the plan are specified in a 
declarative domain model. 
The ASPEN planner has an incremental constraint tracking 
facility and a search facility. It uses these to process MAMM 
plans as follows. The search facility generates downlink 
activities and expands the initial plan into a detailed plan. 
The constraint tracker determines whether the expanded 
plan violates any of the constraints in the domain model. 
This stn.xture is shown in Figure 3. The remainder of the 
section discusses this operation in more detail. 
An ASPEN plan consists of three elements: activities, states, 
and resources. An activity is an action the spacecraft can 
perform., such as a data take or beam switch. Activities have 
a start time and duration and may overlap each other. A 
resource represents a physical or logical resource of the 
spacecraft, such as the onboard recorder tape or instrument 
on-time. A state represents a physical or logical state of the 
spacecraft, such as the current SAR beam or whether a given 
ground station is in-view or not- in- view. Each state and 
resource is represented as a timeline that shows how it 
evolves over time. Figure 4 shows a sample plan fragment 
with each of these elements. 
The MAMM domain model defines the following major 
activities: 
DataTake(start, duration, OBR-RTM mode) 
0 B eamSwitch( from, to) 
I nn 
I I constraint 
violations)  
Edit plan to resolve conflicts 
Figure 2: System Data Flow Architecture 
1-154 
Domain Model Plan 
Da ice OFF 
0 
0 SpinDown [stop the obr] 
0 
OrbitStart 
The InView activities populates the station mask timelines, 
and is not an executable activity. The Orbitstart activity 
resets the SAR instrument on-time resource to zero (the 
SAR on-time has a per-orbit maximum). 
SpinI.Jp [start the tape recorder] 
OBRContinue [keep running between takes] 
Playback [play the entire tape and downlink it.] 
Downlink [establish a downlink session] 
InView (one for each station) 
WARM ON 
Figure 3: ASPEN planning components 
The planner takes as input a partial plan that contains just 
the swath activities and the downlink mask activities. The 
mask activities populate the mask timelines for each ground 
station. The planner then decides how to downlink the 
swaths. This downlink assignment phase assigns swaths to 
downlink opportunities (masks) and records these decisions 
in the plan by adding downlink activities for each selected 
mask and grounding the ‘downlink mode’ parameter of each 
swath activity to OBR or RTM accordingly. 
The MAMM domain model defines these major states and 
resources: 
0 SAR-on-time [resource] 
OBR-storage [resource] 
0 OBR-tape-transactions [resource] 
0 StationInView (yes,no) [state] (1 per station) 
0 Beam (Sl-S7,El-E7) [state] 
OBR-mode (idle, playback, rec.) [state] 
These plan elements are related by constraints. These can be 
temporal constraints among activities (a tape spin-down 
must immediately follow a data take), resource constraints (a 
data take uses d seconds of OBR tape, where d is the 
duration of the data take), and state constraints (the SAR 
instrument must be ON during a data take). The MAMM 
operations constraints were encoded in terms of these 
constraints. 
The planner’s constraint tracking facility maintains the state 
and resource timelines for the current plan and determines 
whether the constraints are satisfied. Whenever the plan 
changes, it incrementally recomputes the impacted timelines 
and constraints. State and resource timelines are computed 
from the state and resource constraints imposed by the 
activities in the current plan. 
The downlink scheduling problem is a constrained 
assignment problem. Each swath must be assigned to exactly 
one downlink opportunity, and that assignment must satisfy 
OBR constraints (the duration of the selected opportunity 
must exceed the amount of recorded OBR data) and 
operations constraints (can only downlink a data take RTM 
if it is contained by an RTM capable mask; cannot downlink 
to two stations simultaneously). This problem is solved by a 
greedy algorithm. In each iteration it makes the best feasible 
assignment. If no assignment is possible, it backtracks. Since 
there may be no way to downlink all the selected swaths, it 
limits its backtracking to a two-orbit window. If no feasible 
Figure 4: Timelines for activities, two resources (energy 
and power), and a state variable (device). Each box on 
the timelines is called a timeline unit and represents the 
value of that state or resource over that time period. 
1 - 1  5 5  
solution can be found in that window, it selects a feasible 
schedule that downlinks the most data, and reports the lost 
data as a constraint violation. 
After adding downlink activities and grounding the 
‘downlink mode’ parameters of the data take activities the 
planner performs a limited expansion and grounding of the 
plan. At this point the plan consists solely of swath, mask, 
and downlink activities. In each iteration it selects a value 
for an ungrounded activity parameter, or adds an activity to 
satisfy an open temporal constraint. For example, if activity 
A is in the plan and has an open constraint that it must be 
before activity B, the planner will add an activity instance of 
type B just after activity A. At the end of this phase, the plan 
contains all of the activities needed to acquire and downlink 
the requested swaths. The resource and state timelines have 
also been computed based on the reservations macle by the 
activities. 
For a 24-day plan with 819 swaths and 1,068 downlink 
masks, the expanded plan contains 8,825 activities and over 
16,000 timeline units. In a plan this size the expansion must 
be performed carefully to avoid unnecessary computation. 
When an activity is added to the schedule and imposes a 
resource reservation, it forces all of the resource timeline 
units downstream of the activity to be recomputed. Placing 
activities in increasing time order, where possible, 
minimizes the computation effort. 
The expansion uses heuristics to ensure the most 
computation-efficient ordering. It also uses heuristics in 
selecting values for grounding parameters, and for resolving 
disjunctive constraints. For MAMM these choices can 
always be made correctly based on the surrounding plan 
context. The expansion heuristics must therefore ensure that 
those parts of the plan have been expanded before making 
one of these choices. 
One the plan is expanded and grounded, the planner uses its 
constraint tracking mechanism to identlfy conflicts: 
violations of constraints in the domain model. These consist 
of temporal violations (e.g., data take activities are too close 
together), resource violations (e.g., exceeded tape capacity), 
and state violations. 
Finally, the plan and the conflicts are converted into a 
spreadsheet format. This is a time-ordered list of swath, 
mask, and downlink activities, with one row jor each 
activity. There is one column for each resource. The value of 
that column for each activity (row) is the value of that 
resource at the end of that activity. The last columrt holds a 
list of the operations constraint violations in which that 
activity is involved. A table maps ASPEN conflicts to 
corresponding high-level operations constraints, and it is 
these high-level constraints that are reported in the 
spreadsheet. 
4. USING AUTOMATED PLANNING 
Before the Mission 
The mission planner used the automated planning system to 
generate the MAMM plan. This consisted of a draft plan, a 
final plan, and several contingency plans. The MAMM plan 
consisted of 800 swaths over 24 days, and required 
approximately three work-weeks to develop. By 
comparison, the mission plan for the first Antarctic Mapping 
Mission (AMM-1) consisted of 850 swaths over 18 days, 
and required over a work-year to develop manually. 
The first draft plan was generated in under two weeks. This 
was an iterative process, the bulk of which was spent 
selecting, swaths and resolving conflicts. This draft plan 
providedl valuable information for feasibility analyses, and 
for first order estimates of ground station costs and required 
on-board estimates. 
This plan was then refined over several versions, each of 
which was developed in a few days using this iterative 
process. The resource information and other details in the 
plan enabled mission designers to make informed decisions 
on how to shape the mission. 
In planning the mission, ASPEN was used for several 
preliminary analyses and what-if scenarios. Specifically, 
Determine the resource requirements for purposes 
of costing the mission and negotiating spacecraft 
resource allocations with the CSA. 
How do different downlink scheduling policies 
impact the mission plan? 
What is the impact of not using certain ground 
stations? 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The ASPEN system answered each of these questions. 
Question (1) was addressed using a summary page 
containing usage statistics generated after each analysis run 
of ASPEN, which gave the vital statistics for on-board 
recorder usage, SAR on-time, and total downlink data time 
broken down by station. This was invaluable in negotiating 
on-boardl resource allocations. The detailed downlink 
schedules were used to determine ground station cost 
estimates, and schedule resources. The early and detailed 
availability of these schedules greatly simplified this process 
over AMM- 1. 
Question (2) was addressed by performing what-if 
simulations using the ASPEN system. Since downlink 
station priorities were one of the parameters of the downlink 
generation algorithm, the plan was expanded and downlink 
schedules generated using four different possible priority 
systems, based on the actual cost to downlink data to certain 
ground stations. ASPEN supplied the data to reach a 
decision on the priorities and significantly impact the 
mission negotiations during the early stages. 
Question (3) was addressed using similar what-if scenarios, 
where ASPEN was restricted fi-om creating downlinks to 
1-156 
certain stations. This enabled a closer examination of the 
impact of removing a ground station on the other stations 
and on the science collection in general. Using this 
information, the mission eliminated an unnecessary ground 
station early on in the mission operations planning phase, 
and saved a significant amount of funding that would have 
been needed to support that station during operations. 
During the mission 
Data takes missed due to spacecraft or ground station 
anomalies during the first cycle can be rescheduled for later 
in the cycle. The automated planner was available during 
operations for identifying operations conflicts in manually 
generated replan schedules. The system took as input the 
replanned schedule, and provided a list of conflicts within 
minutes. This capability enabled the replanning team to 
quickly identify and correct any constraint violations before 
submitting it to the MMO for a final (and more costly) 
check. 
These capabilities were demonstrated during operations 
rehearsals, and were available for use in operations, but 
were not in fact needed during the mission. Few anomalies 
occurred in the first cycle, and they impacted swaths that 
could be trivially and confidently rescheduled manually. 
5 .  FUTUREWORK 
Although replanning was trivial on MAMM, it was much 
more difficult on AMM-1. In general, the ability to quickly 
and automatically reschedule observations lost to anomalies 
would be beneficial to many missions. 
Anomalies during Ah4M-I operations resulted in the loss of 
several data acquisitions. AMM-1 suffered 10 satellite 
anomalies and lost a primary ground receiving station. When 
anomalies occur, the missed observations must be 
rescheduled to meet the science requirements. The 
operations re-planning staff had between 48 and 72 hours in 
which to find up to 30 replacement swaths and submit a new 
schedule. To manually turn around plans within these time 
constraints required a team of four people working from pre- 
generated contingency plan segments. The missed 
observations were placed into gaps in the original plan to 
minimize coverage holes. More extensive changes, such as 
altering the remaining (unexecuted) planned swaths were 
avoided to minimize the planning effort and the chance of 
introducing errors into the plan. Unfortunately, it was 
sometimes impossible to find a way to reschedule all the 
missed observations within that time frame using these 
manual procedures. These observations were simply 
dropped fiom the schedule. Automated replanning during 
operations would allow faster turn-around with fewer 
people, and enable more extensive changes to the schedule 
in order to maximize science return. 
Automated replanning could be implemented as follows. 
The user provides a set of swath opportunities for each 
missed observation, based on possibilities generated using 
the swath analysis tools. ASPEN selects at most one 
opportunity for each observation such that the resulting plan 
satisfies the operational constraints and recovers as many 
missed observations as possible. In selecting these 
observations, it avoids introducing conflicts and/ resolves 
them by modifjmg the schedule. The ASPEN search 
facility is designed for solving these kinds of problems. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Automated planning created a significant savings in 
developing mission plans, and optimized science return in a 
way that manual planning would take too long to perform. 
The planning systems also enabled rapid generation of 
“what-if’’ plans for feasibility studies, mission costing, and 
resource negotiations. These studies directly contributed to 
the quality and success of the mission, and the mission 
planners considered this capability an invaluable tool. 
Automated planning was overwhelmingly successful for 
MAMM, and we would expect similar successes for future 
missions that employ this technology. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper describes work performed at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under 
contract from the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. The authors also wish to acknowledge the 
support of the Canadian Space Agency in providing the 
RadarSAT operations constraints, and the support and 
sponsorship of Dr. Kim Parhgton during his tenure as 
manager of NASA’s Polar Science Program. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Chien, S., Rabideau, G., Knight, R., Sherwood, R., 
Engelhardt, B., Nutz, D., Estlin, T., Smith, B., Fisher, F., Barrett, 
T., Stebbins, G., Tran, D. “ASPEN - Automating Space Mission 
Operations using Automated Planning and Scheduling,” 
SpaceOps 2000, Toulouse, France, June2000. 
[2] Fukunaga, A.; Rabideau, G.; Chien, S.; and Yan, D. 
“Toward an Application Framework for Automated 
Planning and Scheduling,” in Proceedings of the 1997 
International Symposium on Artijkial Intelligence, 
Robotics, and Automation for Space, Tokyo, Japan (1997). 
[3] Garey and Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A 
guide to the theory of NP-completeness. W.H. Freeman and 
CO., New York (1979). 
[4] Rabideau, Knight, Chien, Fukunaga, and Govindjee, 
“Iterative Repair Planning for Spacecraft Operations in the 
ASPEN System” Znternational Symposium on Artificial 
Intelligence, Robotics, and Automation for Space 
(ZSAZRAS), Noordjwijk, The Netherlands, June 1999. 
. . *  1-157 
[5] Sherwood et al, “ASPEN User’s Guide” Internal 
Technical Document D- 15482, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology. April, 1999. Also 
available at http://aspen.jpl.nasa.gov 
[6] Zweben, M.; Daun, B.; Davis, E.; and Deale M., 
“Scheduling and Rescheduling with Iterative Repair,” in 
Intelligent Scheduling, Morgan Kaufinan, San Francisco 
(1994). 
[7] http://www.radarsolutions.dera.gov.uklswath.htm 
[SI littn:li\i~~~.stk.com 
BIO GRAPHIE s 
Ben Smith is a Senior Member of 
the Exploration Systems Auton- 
omy Section at JPL. He led the 
development of the MAMM 
Automated Planning System, and 
is currently pursuing research in 
planning and scheduling for space 
applications, and in verification of 
autonomous systems. His other re- 
search interests include intelligent 
agents and machine learning. He 
received his Ph.D. from the University of Southern 
California in 1995. 
Barbara Engelhardt is a 
member of the technical staff in 
the Artificial Intelligence Group 
at IPL, and a member of the 
Replanning Team for MAMM 
during the mission. Barbara’s 
research interests are in machine 
learning, specifically learning 
spacecraft behavior from data, 
and planning and scheduling. 
Barbara received her M.S. in Computer Science from 
Stanford University working on Bayesian Learning 
Techniques, and her B.S. from Stanford University, both in 
1999. 
Darren Mutz is a member of 
the technical staff? in the 
Artificial Intelligence Group 
at JPL. Darren received the 
Bachelor of Science degree in 
Computer Science at the 
University of California, 
Santa Barbara in 1997. His 
other current projects include 
Long Range Science Rover 
(LRSR), statistical hypothesis evaluation, and ASPEN. 
John Cirawford is the JPL Project 
Manager for the Modified Antarctic 
Mapping Mission and the Mission 
Architect for the Antarctic Mapping 
Mission in 1997. Furthermore, he 
has a point somewhere in Greenland 
named after him. 
1-158 
