Developing GIs-Supported Location-Based Services 
Kirsi Virrantaus 
Helsinki University of Technology, Finland 
kirsi. virrantaus@hut.fi 
Jouni Markkula 
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland 
markkula@yu.fi 
Artem Garmash 
University of Jyvasbla, Finland 
artyom. garmash@titu.jyu.fi 
Vagan Terziyan 
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland 
vagan@it. jyu.fi 
Abstract 
Mobile networking is developing und proliferating ut U 
high speed. Muny estimates suy thut the number of mobile 
telecom subscribers will exceed I billion in the yeur 2003. 
Among the terminals deployed, there will be hundreds of 
millions of Internet-enabled ones muking Mobile Internet 
U reality for the big musses. The terminals and/or the 
mobile networks ure now uble to determine the position of 
the terminal on the eurth with more und more precision. 
This is the busis for the new cluss of services culled 
Locution-Bused Services (LBS). The puper discusses this 
new emerging upplicution ureu thut some people consider 
the centrul novel upplicution cluss of Mobile Internet. The 
main topic of the puper is the question, how Geogruphic 
Informution Systems (CIS) und the dutu hosted currently 
by them could be used in the context of LBS. We unulyze 
their properties und relute them with the needs of LBS. 
We ulso present our LBS pilot system thut is using XML- 
bused vector formut ,for city mups und runs on Juvu- 
enabled mobile terminals, PDAs and smurtphones. 
1. Introduction 
The mobile phones have revolutionized the 
communication and drastically affected the life style of the 
modern nomadic people. The voice capabilities of the 
mobile phones are currently augmented with data 
capabilities of increasing speed. The small size mobile 
Jari Veij alainen 
University of Jyvasbla, Finland 
veijalai@cs.jyu.fi 
Artem Katanosov 
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland 
artem. katasonov@titu. jyu.fi 
Henry Tirri 
University of Helsinki, Finland 
tirr i@cs. helsin ki.fi 
terminals - mobile phones and PDAs - are converging 
and evolving into smartphones and communicators, which 
allows users to access Mobile Internet services and run 
applications at any time and at any place. The 
telecommunication industry estimates that by 2003 there 
will be about 500 million Internet-enabled mobile 
terminals in the world. The number of these mobile 
Internet-enabled terminals is expected to exceed the 
number of fixed line Internet users around 2003 [19]. The 
rapidly growing population of mobile data terminal users 
generates huge markets for related services, offering new 
tempting opportunities for business. 
The inherent features of mobile terminals are their high 
portability and personal nature. They are used for storing 
and accessing information at any time wherever the users 
go. The continuous availability of the device and the 
emerging capability of the terminals and/or the mobile 
network infrastructure to position the terminals on the 
earth allows new types of spatio-temporal real-time 
services that are called Local ion-Based Services (LBS). 
LBSs are services accessible with mobile devices through 
the mobile network and utilizing the ability to make use of 
the location of the terminals. Major part of the future 
Mobile Internet services is expected to be LBSs. 
LBS business is still in early and evolving stage. 
Japanese operators [7] have been offering special services 
(like tracking childreddemented people) for a few years 
and since 1999 more complicated services are emerging. 
Currently, mobile service providers also in other parts of 
the world have introduced some basic LBSs for general 
0-7695-1393-WO2 $17.00 0 2002 IEEE 66 
public, and the number and versatility is steadily 
increasing. For a review of the existing LBS see, for 
example, [8]. 
The commercial potential is a major driving force of 
development of LBSs. A similar tendency is emerging in 
closely related field of Geographic Information Systems, 
the main characteristic of which is to link spatial data and 
the vast amount of non-spatial attribute data together. 
Nowadays we can really speak about CIS business and 
geographic information markets. Openness of CIS 
markets and software standardization in data transfer 
make interoperable geoprocessing fully possible and 
allows to utilize the existing huge geodatabase contents. 
The strengths of geographic information in supporting 
business are fully agreed. On the other hand CIS is not 
only data but also a lot of knowledge on data analysis and 
visualization. Mobile cartography is a new field inside GI 
science [25] and now available in GIs-based applications. 
In this paper the focus is studying the relationship of 
LBS and CIS, as well as the possibilities of CIS to 
support development of more advanced LBS systems. On 
the other hand, there are many related business issues that 
should be better known also by CIS professionals. Among 
CIS field, LBS services are often seen to consist of only 
technical problems of positioning, distributed 
geoprocessing and data management. In LBS field, there 
is a lot of business knowledge on services, without which 
one can not develop good e-commerce based on 
geographic data, sometimes called as g-commerce [ 151. 
The goal of the paper is actually to make both LBS and 
GIS people more deeply aware of the knowledge of each 
others. Some experiences are also shown in a form of 
piloting CIS-supported LBS. 
The article is organized as follows. In the next section, 
LBS is introduced in the mobile context. Following this, 
the relationship of CIS and LBS is studied. After that, an 
LBS pilot system using XML-based lightweight vector 
format, developed in the MultiMeetMobile -project [20], 
is presented. Finally, conclusions based on the discussion 
are given. 
2. Location-based services 
In the general case, the location-based services can be 
defined as services utilizing the ability to dynamically 
determine and transmit the location of persons within a 
mobile network by the means of their terminals. From the 
mobile users’ point of view, the LBSs are typically 
services accessed with or offered by her/his mobile 
terminal. Let us consider two examples of LBSs: a visitor 
finding a suitable restaurant and ordering a taxi in a city 
being visited. 
In a scenario for finding a restaurant, you want to find 
a “near-by” restaurant where to eat. Using your mobile 
terminal you query for close moderately priced restaurants 
offering vegetable food. As a response, a map is presented 
on your terminal, displaying your current location and the 
locations of a few close restaurants offering vegetable 
food. By selecting a particular restaurant symbol on the 
map, you can get information about that restaurant, for 
example, the contact information and a lunch offer. After 
choosing one, you can ask for turn-by-turn navigation 
instructions to guide your way along the trip to the 
restaurant. 
In a scenario of taxi ordering, you need a taxi. With 
your mobile terminal you order a taxi selecting ”order 
taxi” button in an LBS menu of your terminal, and give 
perhaps some parameters, for example, how long you are 
prepared to wait and where you are going. After a while, a 
taxi arrives beside for taking you to your destination. 
Restaurant finding is a “classic” example of an LBS. 
Taxi ordering presents a highly practical and seemingly 
simple, but inherently complex, service. Both of them 
present very common tasks, met on daily basis by most of 
the travelling people. These examples reveal some key 
aspects of typical LBSs. They are intended to support 
suddenly “here and now” emerging well specified 
everyday tasks, expecting immediate solving. The services 
are designed to manage the tasks more easily, 
conveniently and efficiently. They should also be 
accessible anywhere and anytime, ideally globally, with a 
personal mobile device. The LBSs are useful for a 
population in large, implying potentially huge markets. 
The using conditions and terminal restrictions imply 
expectation of minimal effort from the user, fast and easy 
usability. When a person needs a taxi, shehe  likes i t  to be 
there by a “press of a button”. 
2.1. Environment of location-based services 
LBSs are services operating in mobile networks and 
intended mostly for public at large. The mobile 
environment provides good opportunities for new 
services; however it  sets also restrictions and limitations 
that have to be taken into account in designing the 
services. 
Mobile users can access the LBSs with their mobile 
terminal in any time at any place. The LBSs are offered to 
them by the LBS providers. Mobile networks, provided by 
mobile network operators, are the infrastructure for the 
telecommunication. Currently in the LBS system context 
the mobile network is a cellular network. In the near 
future it  can be also Bluetooth or WLAN network. 
In mobile environment, a Location Service (LCS) is a 
service providing the location of the terminal for using 
with LBSs. LCS computes the location estimate based on 
one or more positioning methods and delivers it  to the 
services in a form of coordinates in the standard WGS 84 
system. The positioning can be network based (e.g. cell 
67 
area), terminal based (e.g. GPS) or a hybrid solution (e.g. 
assisted GPS). The different LCS specifications for 3G 
and GSM networks are standardized by the Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) [27]. Currently the 
LCS providers are usually network operators. They can be 
also independent service providers. However, in most 
positioning methods, the LCS needs measurement data 
from the mobile network, which is controlled by the 
network operators. 
Central component of the LBSs is also the content. 
Content is the data that are used by the LBS to provide 
location-based information or functionality for the users. 
The content is in many cases offered by third party 
content providers. In the context of LBSs, the content can 
be divided into two categories: geographic base data and 
location-based information. The division is required 
because these contents are different by their nature and 
typically they come from different sources. They may be 
managed, offered and billed by different providers. 
Geographic base data forms the data infrastructure of the 
services, consisting of the digital map data. Location- 
based information is any value added information that can 
be joined to the base data, associated to a particular 
location. Geographic data is for example a street network 
and location-based information the information about 
restaurants. 
2.2.Types of location-based services 
The LBSs types can be classified by their functionality 
and utilization of location information. The basic class of 
LBSs is location-based information services, utilizing the 
mobile users present location. In a simplest form it is a 
positioning service, informing the user about herhis 
present location (Where am I?). However, knowing the 
coordinates is not very useful. Therefore this service is 
usually combined with a digital map associated to the 
users location. This service is a map service. A digital 
map can be only a basic map on street network without 
any more information. When the map is augmented with 
an access to some point-of-interest location information, 
the service type becomes a city guide service. When the 
service includes capabilities to search information about 
real-world physical services, and perhaps a possibility to 
contact them, it becomes a mobile yellow pages service. 
The service may have features that support finding of the 
way to the specified destinations. This type of service is 
called navigation service. 
Location-based functional services can be 
distinguished from the information services. Functional 
services are using the mobile user’s present location, but 
they are providing some function instead of information. 
The example of ordering a taxi to the present location 
belongs to this category. Other examples are location- 
based fishing permit acquisition and ticket payment. 
Emergency and security services are also an important 
group of functional services. They also show that in LBSs 
the essential feature is not that the services are actively 
used by the means of the mobile terminals. The key is that 
the location of the terminal can be utilized by the service. 
The next class of LBSs that can be distinguished from 
the ordinary actively used “pull” type of services are 
location-aware services. Location-aware services are 
“push” services where the user’s position or proximity to 
another object triggers some event or defines some 
condition. One example of lolcation-aware services is 
location-based marketing, where for example 
advertisement is send to the terminals approaching the 
restaurant. 
The LBSs types above make only use of the mobile 
users dynamic location and some other static location 
information. There is additionally a class of LBSs that are 
based on dynamic information on one or many other 
locatable target objects. Finding service is a basic type of 
these services (Where is X?). You can “find” an identified 
target, a friend, a pet, a taxi, etc. When the time element is 
added, the question is about tracking service, where you 
can track for example a child. More developed services of 
this class are location-based community services allowing 
to find or track an identified group or specified class of 
targets. You can for example, see where your family 
members are (if they allow you to track them!). Certain 
types of dating services are also based on this scheme. 
LBSs can of course be classified also in numerous 
other ways. See for example [8]. 
3. GIS and LBS 
A CIS can be de‘fined generally to be an information 
system that processes geographic data. In this sense an 
LBS system can be considered as a specialized CIS. 
However, CIS and LBS have different roots. CIS systems 
have been developing several decades on the basis of 
professional geographic data applications. LBSs were 
born quite recently by the revolution of public mobile 
services. 
CIS was the innovation of the academy in the early 
1960’s, It took its first week steps in the 1970’s and 
became fully commercial technology during the 1980’s. 
Today, GIS technology as well as Geographic Information 
Science are mature. Commercial CIS software, such as 
ArcGIS (11 and Oracle Spatial [24], offers extensive 
possibilities to handle spatial data with accurate 
coordinates, linked to vast amount of attributes by using 
spatial analysis methods, efficient geographic data 
management systems and high quality visualization of 
geographic information. 
68 
Geographic Information Science, the field of science 
behind CIS, offers specialized knowledge about spatial 
data collection and processing, data modeling as well as 
modeling of spatial processes for analysis purposes, 
methods based on mathematics, statistics, modern 
numerical and computation tools as well as the knowledge 
on visualization. A lot of this theoretical knowledge was 
already there before GIs,  but it took some time to apply it 
into the computerized environment. For example, map 
generalization, which is one of the core issues in the 
traditional manual map making, has been now formalized 
and partially automated, as well as supported by AI 
methods. The small book on generalization by McMaster 
and Shea [16] gives a nice overview of this important 
subfield of computerized map production. The latest 
research projects on generalization seem to be 
concentrated on mobile applications and introduce “real 
time generalization” to be developed [ 131. 
The presentation of all maps in various forms, from 
printed maps to maps on mobile devices, is based on the 
same development of cartographic knowledge on map 
design. Kraak and Brown have collected a excellent 
squeezed information package about visualization of 
geographic information as well as the required web 
technology for map publishing in Internet in their recent 
book on Webcartography [lo]. A more recent reference 
[2] introduces the term mobile cartography that “deals 
with theories and techniques of dynamic cartographic 
visualization of spatial data and its interactive use on 
portable devices anywhere and anytime under special 
consideration of the actual context and user 
characteristics”. Mobile cartography is a big challenge for 
cartographers and CIS developers, thus the knowledge 
related to mobile visualization will be a strength of CIS. 
It is clear that data collection, with transformations and 
conversions from one projection and coordinate system to 
another, is one of the strengths of CIS. Without these 
abilities, no geographical application can run. However, 
quite often people coming outside Geographic 
Information Science underestimate the complexity of 
these transformations. Geographic Information Science is 
nowadays very rapidly developing towards more 
advanced computational methods and many new 
technologies from standard IT  are applied to CIS field. 
Good examples are spatial relational databases and spatial 
data mining methods [26]. CIS is developing towards 
openness and standardization [21]. 
CIS has been traditionally a “professional” system 
intended for experienced users with wide collection of 
functionality and requiring extensive computing resources. 
LBS has quite opposite roots. They are developed as 
limited services and applications intended for large non- 
professional user population, public at large, and 
operating within the restrictions of mobile computing 
environment. The central role of business has been 
immanent from the early stages. 
The development of LBSs for mobile terminals got a 
strong impetus when US Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) set the Wireless E91 1 Rules, initially 
in September 1999, requiring that it should be possible to 
locate all of the mobile phones for emergency purposes 
with the accuracy of about 100 meters in 67 % of the 
cases. Quickly the more general potential of determining 
the location of mobile terminals was realized in the 
business environment, and the emphasis of the LBSs 
development has moved its focus to value-added services. 
Currently, the first relatively simple LBSs are on the 
markets, and the experiences are collected. The more 
advanced, useful and usable, services are under 
development. The mentioned LBS applications - map 
service, city guide service and navigation service as well 
as location-aware services will get much more contents 
when CIS capabilities are fully available. 
3.1. GIS Supporting LBS 
The approach here is to examine the use of existing 
features of CIS to support development of more advanced 
LBSs. There are several important aspects of a CIS, which 
have to be analyzed when trying to create innovations 
about the extra value that CIS can offer to LBS. They are: 
geographic data collection and conversions, geographic 
data management, geographic data analysis, and 
geographic data presentation. The “Big Book on CIS” 
[15] is excellent source for further information on the 
features of CIS. 
Considering data collection and conversion, the 
knowledge and methods of CIS can support LBS 
development. In the context of LBS, positioning 
techniques give coordinates mainly in global WGS 84 
coordinates. However, a lot of data are available in 
different projections and coordinate systems worldwide. 
Among CIS a rich amount of different data collection and 
digitization methods are used, and new methods are all the 
time developed. GPS was a reamrkable advancement in its 
time, and at the moment laser scanning gives a lot of new 
possibilities especially for 3D model generation. CIS data 
are not only made of points, but also lines and curves, 
polygons and volumes as well as data modeled as grid 
structure. Coordinates make the instrument to integrate 
any data set and convert them into one model of the 
reality. CIS is not only 2D; 3D models and virtual realities 
can offer an interesting alternative for a traditional guide 
map. Also LBS applications can put this to use [ 1 I ] .  
Considering geographic data management, the 
geographic databases are nowadays open and have 
standard interfaces. In theory, there is no problem in 
distributed geoprocessing and interoperability. Of course 
it  takes its time to stabilize the situation so that geographic 
69 
data can be transferred as easily and processed as typically 
as any regular non-spatial data type. Spatial relational data 
management systems and graphical/spatial extensions of 
standard development environments, like Java, make this 
possible. Also some other features of geographic 
databases are interesting from the point of view of LBS 
applications. For example so-called multiple 
representations in databases closely connected with the 
generalization issue. 
Considering geographic analysis, the LBSs can get 
support from the strong sub-field of CIS in spatial 
processing of data by using so-called CIS analysis tools 
based on spatial algorithms and data structures. There is 
much in common between spatial algorithms and 
computational geometry, but there is also a lot of 
knowledge developed specifically for CIS. CIS analysis is 
at the moment making a major transition from simple 
geometry and topology based analysis tools towards more 
advanced computational methods called GeoComputation, 
as well as spatial modelling. The goals of 
GeoComputation include development of more advanced 
analysis tools for CIS, based on classical and modern 
theories. The theories involve: mathematical modeling, 
optimization, simulation, statistics, fuzzy modeling, 
cellular automata, knowledge based systems, fractal 
analysis, neural computing, spatial multimedia, 
visualization, and genetic programming [23]. For 
example, the concept “closest” is quite clear, but defining 
“close” needs a fuzzy approach. The role of spatial 
modeling in intelligent applications is essential. 
Considering geographic data presentation, the LBSs 
can gain from the advances in CIS. The traditional 
visualization method, 2D map, has grown into interactive, 
animative, 3D and 4D virtual models. In mobile 
applications map generalization and presentation 
knowledge has experienced a renaissance. Old books on 
cartographic design and generalization have been read 
thoroughly and the knowledge has been applied to the 
modern requirements. Actually, the entire concept and 
definition of “map” has been found outdated, a map is no 
more what it  used to be, a presentation of the reality with 
scale and legend. A map is something much more 
conceptual and earns some scientific discussion [ 10, 251. 
A mobile map on personal terminal can consist of the map 
drawing, sound and text. The map can be very schematic 
without any place of street names. It can also be more 
pictorial, for example, a 3D-model view. This may not be 
possible on phone, but on handheld terminal it is. 
In addition to knowledge, methodology and tools of 
CIS, the existence of large geographic databases are a 
major potential resource that can be utilized in LBSs. The 
data collection and conversion capabilities of existing GIS 
systems have produced large and expensively collected 
information contents that could be utilized for LBS in 
business. National and municipal CIS databases all over 
the world include data on population, apartments, 
enterprises, along with public and commercial services. 
Several databases are available on the prices of real estate 
and apartment purchases as well as indicating available 
homes and apartments. Municipal and private facility 
service companies have information about ongoing 
projects on the streets and other civil infrastructures. The 
landscape and built environment has been modeled in CIS 
databases and can even be utilized via virtual model 
enabling sophisticated visualization. 
LBS system development is also relying on GIS 
standardisation. Standards of OpenGIS Consortium 
(OpenGIS) [21] for spatial data modeling and processing 
are extensively used for ircreasing interoperability. 
Standardization has occurred also via I S 0  ( IS0  21 1TC). 
OpenGIS and I S 0  are working in parallel. Development 
of an XML-based GML (Geography Markup Language) 
[22] is also a significant attempt towards interoperability 
of different systems and indicates the high importance of 
LBS. 
4. MLS pilot system 
The authors have studied the LBS and related e- 
commerce in MultiMeetMobile research project [20]. An 
LBS pilot system, called Multirneetmobile Location-based 
Service system (MLS), was developed on the basis of the 
research. MLS is a general LEIS system for mobile users 
offering a map and navigation service accompanied with 
access to location-based infcirmation. The purpose of 
MLS was to concentrate on problems and features of 
advanced and usable mobile LBS that will be expectedly 
available within a few years time. 
When developing an LBS, the constraints of a mobile 
computing environment have to be careful taken into 
account. A general location-based service demands 
flexibility and scalability from the system architecture: 
The service has to provide information of different 
types (geographic, location-based), covering different 
geographic regions. This information could possibly 
be acquired from different sources. 
The service possibly has to provide dynamic 
information. 
Interoperability of LBS components has to be 
managed. 
On the other hand, a mobile environment imposes 
strong restrictions on LBS thus creating a demand for 
information relevance: 
Mobile terminals have limited memory, limited 
computational power, limited screen size and 
resolution, limited battery life, and input devices 
that usually do not allow a user to operate quick 
enough. 
70 
Mobile networks have high cost, limited 
bandwidth, high latency, low connection stability, 
and low predictable availability. 
LBSs are often used in time-critical circumstances 
(e.g. during driving a car); thus a user has not to be 
piled with a large amount of information, because 
this complicates decision making. 
In designing the MLS system, we took into account 
these somewhat conflicting demands. In addition, the 
usability of the service was considered. MLS system has 
the following important features: 
It is based on geographic vector data. 
It is XML-based. 
Some computations are delegated to the client. 
The client application of MLS system is 
implemented in Java. 
0 It uses an intelligent algorithm for selection of 
relevant data. 
It has a transactions management support. 
Geogruphic vector dutu. The MLS system transmits 
geographical data to the client in the vector form, instead 
of bitmaps, on which most of the other existing LBS rely 
on. This has the following advantages: 
The vector model explicitly describes geographic 
features. This allows linking spatial data and 
attributes. 
In the vector model the explicit description of the 
road network topology is possible. This allows 
implementation of route finding algorithms. 
Vector data enables the use of advanced, real-time 
generalization routines. 
Vector data enables the user to customize a map by 
defining colors and symbols as well as excluding 
some data themes. 
Vector data in most cases requires less storage space 
than data in the raster form. 
Extensible Murkup Lunguuge (XML). MLS system 
uses XML encoding for geographic data. The XML-based 
geographic data formats used in MLS are the standard 
Geography Markup Language (GML) specified by 
OpenGIS Consortium [22] and Geographical Mobile 
Markup Language (GMML) [4] developed in the 
MultiMeetMobile -project [20]. GMML was developed 
before the standard GML became available. However, the 
reason for continued use of GMML is the limitation of 
standard GML: the latter does not explicitly support 
network topology information. Network topology is 
necessary for many typical navigation applications, such 
as route finding. However, the most recent GML version 
2.0 enables implicit modeling of topology by m i n k  
mechanism, and better tools for topology arc promised in 
the future. 
0 
Moreover, MLS system utilizes XML as the core 
technology for data representation. XML-based approach 
offers the following advantages: 
Standard tools such as XML parsers and XSLT 
processors can be used for extracting and 
transforming data. 
XML allows data integration from heterogeneous 
sources. Data from various sources, from different 
geographic data and location-based information 
content providers, can be integrated into one LBS 
system. 
XML facilitates interoperability between LBS 
components. 
Different data formats for different target platforms 
can be used. 
Delegution of some compututions to the client. Various 
queries, such as search for the nearest point of interest or 
route finding, are delegated to the client application in the 
MLS system. Computing power of mobile devices usually 
allows processing of limited volumes of data in a 
reasonable time. On the other hand, execution of queries 
on the server side causes extensive use of the mobile 
network and probably even greater latency of queries 
because of the limited bandwidth of the network. 
Juvu lmguuge. The client application of the MLS 
system is implemented in Java language. Support for Java 
technology is an important feature of modern mobile 
devices. Currently, all the Symbian EPOC and Microsoft 
Windows based portable computers support Java. New I- 
Mode 50x series mobile phones are able to run Java 
programs. Java support is included also in a version of 
Symbian EPOC 6 operating system, Pearl, aimed for next 
generation smartphones. Therefore, Java support is 
expected to be a standard feature of future mobile devices. 
Java language presents a powerful and flexible tool for 
mobile services development because of its platform- 
independence. Client-side software developed in Java can 
be run in nearly every device supporting this technology, 
thus eliminating the need for development of different 
versions for every target platform. The MLS client 
application is lightweight, and after rewriting the user 
interface, it could be run even under Java 2 Micro Edition 
(J2ME), used in smartphones. 
Intelligent dutu trunsmission. MLS system is capable 
of selecting geographic data that is relevant for a specific 
user at a specific time. It uses a user-centered approach. 
The location of the user and his preferences are taken into 
account. The MLS client allows the user to specify a set of 
values defining the preferred scale of map and the relative 
importance of data themes. The MLS server then uses this 
information together with data on the location (as well as 
the direction and the speed of movement, if available) of 
the user for calculating importance of every geographic 
feature. The importance of a feature then defines if it will 
71 
be represented, and, if so, the level of detail LOD this 
feature will have (some attributes can be excluded and the 
geometric form simplified). The total data volume is kept 
constant. Progressive data transmission is also supported. 
This means that if for a geographic feature LOD2 < LOD 1 
then the dataset representing this feature at LOD2 is a 
subset of the dataset at LOD1. No new data is introduced 
during generalization, what can occur if, for example, 
smoothing of the geometric form or generalization of 
attributes values are used. Therefore, increasing the level 
of detail for a feature we have only to transmit additional 
data, no retransmission of already sent data or deletion of 
any data is needed. The MLS server stores the current 
LOD value for every geographic feature thus keeping 
track of data that user has available in his mobile terminal 
at the moment. 
The objectives of such an approach are the following: 
Increase of the service usability, while only relevant 
data is transmitted to the user and unnecessary is 
filtered out. 
Reduction of the transmitted data volume. 
Details of the used computational algorithm can be found 
in [9]. 
Trunsuctions munagement support. In order to protect 
itself from the unexpected disconnections and crashes, the 
MLS client application keeps track of the history of 
interaction with the server (what data was sent and 
received) and stores all the data needed for recovery. This 
saves the application from information losses and 
guarantees basic transactional properties. 
At the present stage the MLS pilot system supports 
geographic data on a road network and on points of 
interest. Geographic data is managed by Oracle Spatial. 
Client-server interaction is implemented on the top of 
HTTP protocol. The XML-based data is transmitted in a 
compressed form using standard GZIP algorithm. 
Location Service is emulated. MLS supports two ways 
of interaction with it. The client application can request 
the location from LCS and provide i t  then to the MLS 
server in the request parameters. Alternatively, if the 
client does not do this, the MLS server can request the 
user location from LCS during a request handling. 
The appearance of the client application on the EPOC 
system is presented in figure 1. 
Figure 1. MLS client running on EPOC system 
Dutu Presentution. After retrieving data from the MLS 
server, it is presented to the user is the form of a map. The 
current location of the user is al:io represented on the map 
and continuously updated. The interface supports basic 
operations like panning and zooming. The presentation of 
the map can be customized. The user can select colors and 
symbols used for representation as well as exclude some 
data themes. The user can retrieve information about 
specific point of interest by pointing at the map. He can 
also execute query for the nearest point of interest of a 
specified type. 
Future work. The MLS pilot system is still under 
development. The basic features implemented are to be 
complemented with advanced features and methods. Some 
new solutions could be implemented and tested. This is 
related to both the client application and the architecture 
of the system in general. In relation to the MLS client 
application, we could define the following directions of 
future work: 
Improving functionality and increasing usability of 
the user interface. 
0 Implementing analysis functions like advanced 
search or route finding. 
Development of a version of the MLS client for 
J2ME. It could be interesting to test the 
application on a smartph,one. When developing the 
client application we designed in a way allowing 
portability to other platforms and attempted to 
make it  maximally lightweight. However, changes 
are needed at least in the user interface for porting 
the MLS client to Java 2 Micro Edition. 
Further development of Transaction Monitor. On 
the current stage, TM i!; responsible primarily for 
data integrity on the client side. However, research 
has to be done still on questions related to the need 
to rollback an uncompleted transaction conducted 
via a mobile network and other problems. 
Moving to the standard Geography Markup 
Language (GML). However, development of GML 
is still going on. Therefore, this direction of future 
work strongly depends on the standardization 
work held in the OpenGIS Consortium. 
0 
72 
In relation to the server application of the MLS system, 
the main direction of the future work is further 
development of the data selection algorithm and 
implementation of progressive data transmission. The 
selection algorithm supports progressive transmission; 
however, there are open questions about removing data 
from a mobile terminal memory when the level of detail of 
a geographic feature is reduced (e.g. user moves out of the 
feature). A discussion could be found in [9] on this topic. 
In relation to the system component responsible for 
content, we could define the following directions of future 
work: 
An effective exploitation of Oracle Spatial and 
probably other GIS software. Various spatial 
queries and analysis functions implemented in the 
GIS software could be utilized in the MLS system. 
Providing dynamic information. An example of 
such information is information on the current 
traffic situation and roads condition. 
Providing information on mobile objects. 
Currently, the user is the only mobile object in the 
MLS system. However, there are taxies, busses 
and other users of mobile devices in the area of 
interest. 
XML-based interaction with content servers. For 
flexibility and scalability reasons, the MLS server 
and content servers should be separated. Some 
XML-based data formats should be used in 
interaction between them. However, this direction 
of work depends on the standardization process 
held in World Wide Web Consortium. 
Integration of MLS with real location services. 
However, there are no standards in this field yet. 
This direction of future work strongly depends on 
the standardization work held in Location 
Interoperability Forum (LIF) and Open Location 
Service (OpenLS) Initiative of OpenGIS 
Consortium. 
Another important direction of future work is testing 
the solutions, on which the MLS system is based, in new 
environments while new mobile devices and operating 
systems are being introduced, new mobile networks are 
appearing. 
5. Related work 
Currently, the market provides a set of mobile mapping 
applications and services. Some of them are born in the 
GIS field and represent simplified GIS systems running on 
mobile devices, like ESRI’s ArcPad. Some others 
represent rather navigational LBSs providing the user with 
maps and possibly other data, like Webraska system [ 181 
accessible with a WWW or a WAP browser. 
While existing systems rely primarily on bitmaps or 
some application-specific formats, XML is positioned 
currently to be a standard way for encoding geographical 
data in future, including data transmitted to LBS clients. 
OpenGIS Consortium developed GML language [22 J that 
is going to be the standard. LaserScan developed a GML- 
compatible Spatial Object Transfer Format (SOTF) [ 171 
supporting incremental updates of data and topology 
information. XML-related work is going on for example 
in Finnish Geodetic Institute. In [I21 the applicability of 
XML and related technologies for geospatial applications 
is argued: using XSLT for transforming geographical data, 
XML Schema for spatial data modeling, XLink for 
description of spatial relationships. In [ 131 an approach 
and a prototype system for real-time generalization of 
XML-encoded geographical data using XSLT are 
presented. 
Active research is going on concerning various aspects 
of mobile GIs.  TeleCartography project of the 
Department of Cartography in Vienna University of 
Technology studies LBSs and impact of new technologies 
like UMTS on them [ 5 ] .  Research work in LaserScan is 
related to on-demand generalization of geographical data 
before transmitting to a mobile device; approach is based 
on the active-objects technology [6]. Research in 
University of California in Santa Barbara considers 
questions related to human-computer interaction in mobile 
GIS, usability of their user interfaces and use of augment 
reality technology [ 2 ] .  Reichenbacher in [25] presents a 
general view on mobile cartography, which emphasizes a 
need for transmitting data in the vector form, adaptive 
map rendering depending on the context and preferences 
of the user. 
6. Conclusion 
Location-based services have been introduced in recent 
years into mobile telecommunication networks. Currently, 
one speaks about first generation of services. These are 
almost solely based on the capability of the mobile 
network to determine the basestation serving the terminal. 
The accuracy of this method depends largely on the cell 
size and several more fine-grained methods for finding the 
position of a terminal have been standardized. The 
accuracy of the positioning varies from about ten meters 
to several hundred meters or even kilometers depending 
on the method. 
We discussed in this paper about the relationship 
between LBS and CIS. A functioning LBS clearly needs 
some of the same functionality as GIS already has (such as 
spatial queries, use of topological data structures, and the 
need for intelligent processing and presentation methods). 
Further, any reasonable LBS needs the geographic data 
stored in one or more GIs. Also, the GIS and LBS fields 
73 
have common interests such as standardization for 
interoperability and need for more efficient computation 
methods. These common problems will cause LBS to be a 
driving force supporting development of CIS. 
CIS databases are an obvious resource for further LBS 
applications. They are not limited to location, but offering 
spatial and attribute data that are relevant to any aspect of 
human life. CIS systems can also foster new services. The 
main strength of GIS is that coordinate based integration 
enables to exploit the possibility of combination of any 
sets of data, without limits. 
Although CIS and geographic data in general are a 
necessity for LBS, it  is not evident that the current CIS 
systems, actually containing the geographic data, should 
be tightly integrated to LBS systems. The most usable 
solutions require proper analysis of performance and 
technical integration, as well as business models. GIS 
technology is the way to support the LBSs, but it can be 
integrated into database servers in different levels, in 
order to achieve optimal performance for the particular 
services. 
Some actors offer CIS services via Internet. These are 
not directly applicable to the mobile terminals, because of 
the small displays and lack of other resources. The 
services must be adapted to mobile environment. We 
describe here our LBS pilot system, which demonstrates 
that vector maps can be presented and manipulated on 
PDA-level devices. When Java support becomes more 
widely available in mobile terminals, this approach will 
most probably become more popular. 
GeoComputation promises many new advances in 
geographic analysis. Several methods and approaches that 
can be used in developing application for LBS m- 
commerce are already there. Advanced spatial data 
structures and algorithms will be utilized by developers of 
network based applications. LBS and CIS can co-operate 
in  this computational field in order to finding the best 
approaches. 
It seems very clear that LBS providers should be 
seriously interested in CIS and geographic information 
science. Innovations are most often created when several 
fields of science meet and feed each others with 
completely different approaches and knowledge. LBS and 
m-commerce is probably most interested in the economic 
value of innovations - geographic information science 
will get the best benefit if the huge geographic data 
sources will become into a real, profitable use. 
Car navigation systems have been on the markets for 
quite some time. They have been largely GPS based. 
There is an emerging convergence trend between car 
navigation systems and mobile terminal based navigation 
systems. Car manufacturers are currently pushing LBS 
from their perspective (Internet-enabled cars). 
The most problematic unsolved issue for LBS currently 
seems to be the global-local nature of LBS. It is not 
guaranteed that the roaming user can initially find the 
locally relevant services and then really make use of them 
via hisher terminal due to technical heterogeneity and 
language problems. This is a hard problem area that still 
requires a lot of further research and business solutions. 
Also the problems of global geographical databases and 
their quality, as well as copyright and pricing, are still 
unsolved. However, LBS services have already now given 
a required drive and taste of business to the previously so 
academic CIS field. However, the emerging location- 
based m-commerce is to be bui’lt on knowledge of both of 
the fields, Geographical Information Science and e- 
commerce. 
References 
ArcGIS, http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis. 
K.C. Clarke, “Cartography in a Mobile Internet Age”, 
Proceedings of the 20th International Cartographic 
Conference, Beijing, China, August 2001, pp. 1481-1488. 
A.K. Elmagarmid (ed.), Database Transaction Models for  
Advanced Applications, Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. 
A. Garmash, Management of geographic information in 
mobile environment, M.Sc. thesis, University of Jyvaskyla, 
Finland, 2000. 
G. Gartner, S. Uhlirz, and A. Pammer, “Mobile Internet: 
Applying Maps to Mobile Clients”, Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Maps and the Internet in the 20th 
International Cartographic Conference, Beijing, China, 
August 2001. 
P.G. Hardy, K.R. Haire, R. Sheehan, and P.A. Woodsford, 
“Mobile Mapping On-Demand, Using Active 
Representation and Generalisation”, Proceedings of the 
20th International Cartographic Conference, Beijing, 
China, August 2001, pp. 3239-3247. 
Japanese actors in LES: WWW.nttdocomo.co.jp, 
www.mitsui.co.jp, www.nec.co.jp, www.ntt-me.co.jp, 
www.epson.co.jp, www.elgenex.com, www.location- 
agent. co m. 
E. Kaasinen and A. Ahonen, Products and services for  
personal navigation - classification ?om user’s point of 
view, NAVI programme KEN project report, V’IT, Finland, 
2001. 
A. Katasonov, Intelligent user-centred transmission of 
geographical data in mobile location-based services, 
M.Sc. thesis, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland, 2001. 
[ I O ]  M-J. Kraak and A. Brown (eds.), Web Cartography, Taylor 
& Francis, 2000. 
[ 1 I ]  J. Kukkonen, J. Myllarinen. A. Nissinen, M. Voipio, “A 
dual approach for creating very large virtual models”, 
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Virtual and 
Augmented Architecture (VAA’OI), Trinity College, 
Dublin, June 21-22, 2001. 
[ 121 L. Lehto, “XML in Web-based Geospatial Applications”, 
Proceedings of the 3rd AGILE Conference on Geographic 
Information Science, Helsinki, Finland, May 2000. 
[ 131 L. Lehto and T. Kilpelainen, “Generalizing XML-Encoded 
Spatial Data on the Web”, Proceedings of the 20th 
74 
International Cartographic Conference, Beijing, China, 
August 2001. 
[ 141 Location Interoperability Forum (LIF), 
http://www.locationforum.org. 
[IS] P.A. Longley, M.F. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire, and D.W. 
Rhind, Geographical Information Systems and Science, 
John Wiley & Sons, UK, 2001. 
[I61 R.B. McMaster and K.S. Shea, Generalization in Digital 
Cartography, Publication of the Association of American 
Geographers, Washington, 1992. 
[I71 P. Mims, P. Pilkington, and J. Blizzard, “An object 
oriented transfer format for the future”, Proceedings of the 
ASPRS 2001 conference, St. Louis, USA, April 2001. 
[ 181 K. Mitchell, “Wireless Mapping and Guidance Services”, 
Proceedings of the 20th International Cartographic 
Conference, Beijing, China, August 2001, pp. 1785-1789. 
[I91 Mobile electronics Transactions (MeV, 
http://www.mobiletransaction.org. 
[20] MultiMeetMobile -project, http://www.cs.jyu.fi/-rnmm. 
[21 J Open GIS Consortium (OpenGIS), http://www.opengis.org. 
[22] OpenGIS, Geography Markup Language (GML) 2.0, 
OpenGIS implementation specification, OGC document 
number 01-029, 20 February 2001. 
[23] S .  Openshaw and R.J. Abrahart (eds.), GeoComputation, 
Taylor & Francis, 2000. 
[24] Oracele Spatial, http://otn.oracle.com/products/spatial. 
[25] T. Reichenbacher, “The World in Your Pocket - Towards a 
Mobile Cartography”, Proceedings of the 20th International 
Cartographic Conference, Beijing, China, August 2001, pp. 
2514-2521. 
[26] P. Rigaux, M. Scholl, and A. Voisard, Spatial databases 
with application to CIS, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
2001. 
[27] Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), 
http://www.3gpp.org. 
[28] P. Timmers, “Business Models for Electronic Markets,” 
Electronic Markets, vol. 8, no. 2 ,  1998, pp. 3-8. 
75 
