. _-- 
Retromodulator for Optical Tagging 
for LEO Consumables 
G. C. Gilbreath, Timothy J. Meehan, W. S. Rabinovich, Michael J. Vilcheck, Rita Mahon’,Mena Ferraro’, 
John A. Vasquez, Ilene Sokolsky, D. Scott Katzer, K. IkosskAnastasiou, and Peter G. Goetz 
Naval Research Laboratory 
Washington, DC 20375 
pilbreath@,rsd.nrl.naw.mil 
202-767-0170 
Abstract- In this paper, we report the results of a recent 
demonstration in which a Multiple Quantum Well 
retromodulator array was used as a low power, lightweight 
means to provide optical tagging of a remotely located 
object. A laser diode integrated on a trackerlpointing system 
scanned without cueing for a modulated retroreflected beam. 
The retroreflected energy was received and the embedded 
code demodulated for tagging identification. Ranges were 
on the order of 40 meters using an array of 112 cm MQW 
devices. Data were transferred at a rate of one mega chip per 
second over the link. Device power requirements were on 
the order of several milliwatts. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. RETROMODULATORS AND MQW DEVICES 
3. FIELDTEST 
4. RESULTS 
5. SUMMARY 
6. REFERENCES 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Future long-range manned NASA missions will require very 
large reserves of consumables, such as food, and fuel. The 
cost of launching these consumables into orbit using 
conventional rocket technology is prohibitive and so 
alternative methods must be found. A proposed solution to 
the problem is to launch consumables into space with non- 
conventional means, such as a rail gun. Once the problem of 
getting these packages to orbit has been solved a new 
problem of locating and identifjmg them arises. These 
consumables will initially be located in a variety of orbits and 
it would be necessary to locate them and then aggregate 
them into a “warehouse in the sky”. This task would involve 
finding the consumables, identifying them, and then guiding 
them to a central warehouse facility. 
Modulating retro-reflector systems using Multiple Quantum 
Well (MQW) technology provide a low power, low weight, 
multi-functional solution to some of these problems. [ 1-31 A 
modulating retro-reflector is a solid-state device that allows 
optical communication, ranging, and relative orientation 
determination between two platforms. MQW shutters are 
particularly suited to these applications because the 
technology enables fast data rates, requires very low drive 
powers, is lightweight, robust, and is not polarization- 
sensitive. 
Author is with Jaycor, Inc., McLean, VA 22102 
Author is with Research Support Instruments, Inc., Lanham, MD 20706 
Implementation of such a device requires that only one of 
the platforms have onboard a laser, telescope, and tracker. 
Thus, the device is well suited to problems in which one 
platform has a large payload capacity and can serve as the 
interrogator and the other platform does not. The 
interrogator illuminates the platform carrying the modulating 
retro-reflector with a laser beam. The laser beam is 
automatically reflected back with no need for pointing or 
tracking. The reflected return is modulated in an On Off 
Keying (OOK) mode. 
Bidirectional communications can occur if a lower data rate 
is imposed on the interrogation beam. The modulated 
retroreflected signal is then received in a burst 
communications mode. Detectors on the retro-reflector 
platform can receive the transmitted signal, which may 
inform the smaller platform of interrogator ID, or location 
details, etc. These detectors can also receive photonic 
information which can be used in acquisition and tracking. 
A representative concept is illustrated in Figure 1. 
3-1531 
the recoverable consumable problem and can be used to (1) 
uniquely frequency-tag a given "container"; and (2) provide 
acquisition, rendezvous, and docking. 'This former point has 
implications for other problems as well, such as 
Identification of Friend or Foe (IFF). 
MQ WRetromodulators 
As has been discussed in previously referenced work, the 
modulator must have several characteristics to rnake a link 
possible. The shutter must have a high switching speed, low 
power consumption, large area, wide FOV, and high optical 
quality. In addition, it must work at wavelengths where good 
laser sources are available, be radiation-tolerant (for space 
applications) and rugged. Semiconductor multiple quantum 
well moclulators are one of the few technologies that meet all 
these requirements. [7,8] These devices are based upon the 
same materials technology as laser diodes. They consist of 
several hundred very thin (-10 nm) layers of semiconductor 
material, such as GaAs, deposited on a large (7.6 cm 
diameter) semiconductor wafer. Electrically, they take the 
form of a PI-N diode. Optically, the thin layers induce a 
sharp absorption feature at a wavelength that is determined 
Figure 1. Concept drawing for MQW retromodulators 
used as ID tags for consumables in orbit. The devices 
are compact, lightweight, and low power and cain serve 
as transceivers which identify LEO consumable 
contents as well as aid in acquisition and tracking. 
2. RETROMODULATORS AND MQW DEVICIES 
The Concept 
The idea of a retromodulator for communications is not a 
new one. The concept was successfully demonstrated by 
the Air Force in 1997 using Ferro Liquid Crystal devices. [4] 
The concept has also been explored using the Stark: effect at 
10.6 microns [ 5 ]  and in the microwave regime [6] .  However, 
these device technologies are inherently slow, can be fragile, 
and can require high power draws. 
Over the past three years, a crossdivisional program at the 
Naval R.esearch Laboratory (NRL has demonstrated MQW 
modulating retro-reflectors with data rates up to 12 Mbps 
while consuming only about 100 mW of power. In addition, 
these devices have been used in field tests with a small 
unmanned airborne vehicle (UAV). In these tests, ,a ground- 
based laser tracked the UAV and a modulating retrol-reflector 
optical link was demonstrated.[2] The mounted 
retromodulator used in this test has about a twentydegree 
field-of-view (FOV), fdl half width maximum. If a modulating 
retro-reflector system uses an array of corner cubes, this 
relatively small FOV can be expanded. Such an array can 
have an arbitrarily large field-df-view while maintaining a 
very low divergence on the return beam (typically, between 
100 and 200 microradians). Thus, a modulating retro- 
reflector system has the loose pointing tolerances of an 
omni-directional antenna while still maintaining a very high 
gain. Such a feature lends itself to a number of applications. 
The NRL MQW retroreflector concept is readily adaptable to 
by the constituent materials and the sbructure that is grown. 
When the device has a moderate (-15V) voltage placed 
across it in reverse bias, the absorption feature changes, 
both shifting to longer wavelengths and dropping in 
magnitude. Thus, the transmission of the device near this 
absorption feature changes dramatically and can serve as an 
on-off shutter. This switching capability is shown in Figure 2 
for an InGaAs-based MQW modulator that was designed 
and grovm for use in a tagging demonstration for Low Earth 
Orbiting (LEO) spacecraft. 
. .  
O b  0.b 1 .bo 
Wavelength (microns) 
Figure 2. Transmission as a function of wavelength 
for various applied voltages for an InGaAs-based 
MQW Modulator 
The modulator for this experiment co:nsists of 75 periods of 
InGaAs wells surrounded by AlGaAs barriers. The device is 
grown on an n-type GaAs wafer and is capped by a p-type 
contact layer, thus forming a P-I-N diode. It is a transmissive 
3-1532 
modulator designed to work at a wavelength of 980 nm, 
compatible with many good laser diode sources. 
4 x lo1* 
4 1013 
1 x 1 0 ' ~  
Unlike liquid crystal modulators, MQW modulators have 
very high switching speeds. Small devices (diameters of 
microns) have been operated at speeds in the tens of GHz. In 
practice, the speed is limited primarily by the RC time of the 
device. Thus, the large area devices (on the order of a 
centimeter) used for retromodulator-based communications 
typically have speeds between 1 and 10 Mbps. Higher 
speeds are possible, however, depending on range and the 
sophistication of the fabrication process. In practice, data 
rates like these are appropriate for many of the sensors 
carried on the small platforms for which these devices are 
intended. 
2.16 x 10" 140.2 
2.16 x lo'* 1402.4 
5.40 x 1Ol2 3505.9 
Robustness 
The devices are also extremely robust. They are not 
polarization-sensitive and except for detuning which can be 
compensated for using a variety of techniques, are 
functional over large temperature ranges. Recently, 
radiation tests were performed on these devices and results 
are discussed in depth in Reference 9. InGaAsIAlGaAs 
modulators were characterized optically and electrically and 
then exposed to a sequence of bombardments of lMeV 
protons. One of the devices was irradiated while under a 
normal operating reverse bias voltage of 15 V; the other 
devices were unbiased. 
0.0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Proton Fluence (x10' an3 
Figure 3 - Reverse leakage current measured at 20V 
reverse bias after irradiation by increasing 1 MeV protons 
fluences. The solid line represents a LSQ fit of the data, 
and the data are seen to increase linearly with fluence. 
After each exposure the electronic, optical and modulation 
characteristics of the modulators were evaluated. No 
degradation was observed until a cumulative fluence of 
1 x 1014 protons/cm2, equivalent to an ionizing radiation dose 
of approximately 200Mrad(Si). Figure 3 shows some of 
these results. Table I shows equivalencies in orbit to the 
fluences tested. As can be seen from these results, there 
was no deleterious effect on the devices due to radiation 
indicating that the MQW shutter will survive in a radiation 
environment characteristic of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and Mid 
Earth Orbit (MEO) for many years. 
3. FIELD TEST 
The Interrogator 
A field test was conducted at the NlU Chesapeake Bay 
Detachment to demonstrate the concept using a static target 
and an uncued optical trackerlinterrogator. The test 
simulated a search for one of many packages, each with 
different tags. For this experiment, a simple optical 
configuration for the Transmit/Receive (Tx/Rx) interrogator 
was used. A 100 mW distributed Bragg reflector laser diode 
operating at 976 nm was fiber-coupled to a lens pair. The 
beam was given a relatively broad divergence of 3 
milliradians to avoid laser safety issues with traffic. The 
outgoing beam passed through a 7.62 cm diameter 50 percent 
beam splitter. Half the light went out and half went into a 
beam dump. This beam splitter to a 5.08 cm diameter lens 
reflected the retro-reflected light where it was focused onto a 
silicon avalanche photodiode. A 10 nm bandwidth optical 
filter was used to remove background sunlight. A 3 MHz 
Table L - Comparison of irradiation with that in Low 
Earth Orbit 
Equivalent number 
Fluence Equivalent Dd 
1 x 10" 
8 x 10" 432 x 10" 28.0 
bandwidth amplifier amplified the resulting signal. The 
output was read out on an oscilloscope and fed into a 
computer for matched filter signal correlation and code 
identification. 
The optical assembly &as mounted on a motorized gimbal to 
allow for uncued zquisition of the target. The gimbal was 
controlled directly with a laptop computer, over an RS232 
interface. The laptop set the signal return thresholds to 
trigger different acquisition modes. It also set the search 
area. It then commanded the gimbal to work in an automated 
search pattern to find the target and maximize the return 
signal. The optics mounted on the gimbal is shown in 
Figure 4. 
3-1533 
Figure 4. Optical TransmitReceiver with gimbal. 
The receive electronics consisted of an Avalanche 
Photodiode (APD), amplifier, low pass filter, analog-t o-digital 
converter, Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), and 
computer. The return light was received by the APD, 
amplified, filtered, and then sampled by the A/D caxd. The 
sampled data was then read by the FPGA card that 
performed the processing described in the next section. The 
results of the processing were read by the receive computer 
which archived the data and passed on the levels to the 
tracking computer over the RS232 link. 
The MQWRetromodulator 
Five 0.5 mm MQW modulators were arranged in an may for 
the demonstration. The modulators used had a 75 period 
InGaAsI AlGaAs MQW structure with an exciton resonance 
at 981 m. Each modulator was affmed to a mount centered 
above a cornercube retro-reflector. Wire bonds to the p and 
n contact layers on the modulators were used to bias each 
device, -which were then run in parallel with a prescribed 
code sequence. 
Each retromodulator was mounted in a lightweight, ten-gram 
package, which was comprised of the holder, the modulator, 
a 6.33 nxn diameter AR coated retro, cover glass window, 
Figure 5. Compact, lightweight mount used in 
demonstration. Unit is 1 Og with all parts. 
and wire bonds. The FOV of each mounted device was about 
30 degrees, dark-todark. The devices were arranged into an 
array to present a 60-degree FOV to the interrogator. A 
photo of single mounted device is shown in Figure 5. 
The modulators used in this demonstration required a - 15 
Volt swing to achieve a sufficient optical contrast between 
the on and off states at Mega chip per second rates. Each 
modulatcir drew about 75 milliwatts. The five-element array 
when configured in parallel required about .375 watts. An 
FPGA was used to encode the data for the driver. FPGA 
technology was chosen to enable the user to quickly modify 
encoded data streams, change format, add error correction, 
etc. Each driver drew about 80 milliwatts for a 0.4 watt total 
power draw for the array for the drivers only. 
The Algorithms 
At the heart of the feasibility test were the control algorithms 
used to identify the signals, correlate gain, control the 
tracker, and decode the received signals into information. A 
description of the process has two parts: (1) The tracking 
algorithm; and (2) the signal received. 
The acquisition software initiates a series of ever decreasing 
rectangular searches based on pre-set threshold levels, t,. A 
given swath is painted by the 3 mRid beam and stepped 
through a given pattern. The gimbal controller receives a 
relative signal level from the receiver controller and 
compares the received signal level to the thresholds to 
command the gimbal through four modes of target 
acquisitiion and signal optimization. 
As the beam begins to paint the modulator array, the return 
signal level increases and the next threshold level is reached, 
initiating the smaller pattern. This continues until a maximum 
signal level is obtained and the interrogator locks onto the 
maximum signal. If the signal is lost for some reason, or if 
the dwell time is too short, after a period, the search pattern 
“restarts” from the beginning. A hypothetical search pattern 
is shown in Figure 6. 
Figure 6. Simulated search pattern is shown above. 
S denotes signal level, t, denotes threshold level, and 
X denotes gimbal stop. 
3-1534 
When a signal is received by the photodetector, the receive 
algorithm processes the bit stream in accordance with the 
following relationships for the matched filter and envelope 
detector respectively: 
65' 
where: s(filter) is the filtered signal value, qpeq) is the chip 
sequence which defines a symbol, and qreC) is the signal 
received from the APD. N is the product of the number of 
samples per chip and the number of chips per symbol. A 
signal level, S,,,,,, is sent to the tracking algorithm when the 
correlation gain between the received sequence and the 
matched sequence in the receiver software is maximized for a 
given tracking position. Figure 7 shows how the above 
equations are implemented into hardware. 
reigivi fed to lnching siaor IF 
uu i, T4 
n n n  
55 
n r  I I  
I I 
I 1 
MA, MB, MFn = Matched Filter for Code A, B, . . .n 
EDA, EDB, Edn = Envelope Detector for A, B, . . .n 
Figure 7. Block diagram showing how received signal 
from the APD is translated into the chip stream used to 
generate correlation gain for the acquisition sequence and 
for tag identification. 
An important feature in the algorithm set is that more than 
one bit stream can be processed if each stream is channeled 
to its own matched filter and envelope detector. This means 
that more than one identification can be made for (1) 
discrimination in clutter; or for (2) transmission of additional 
information with a primary identification tag. 
All values for $.ut, are sent to the tracker. However, the 
search algorithm only initiates when the value is greater than 
a given set threshold as described earlier. When a threshold 
is exceeded and subsequent tighter patterns are initiated, the 
target is finally located and identified. If there is more 
than one ID sequence, the pattern can be analyzed to 
determine additional information such as location, contents, 
received photon level, if a photo detector where put onboard 
the consumable, etc. Figure 8 is an illustration of the 
relationship between levels sent and thresholds. 
Tests 
Two tests were made. Both were conducted at the N U  
Chesapeake Bay Detachment in winter months of 2000. The 
first employed a relatively simple robust data stream of 
binary F's, i.e.: 11 1100001 11 1.. ., transmitted at one Mega 
chip per second, with 4 samples per chip, 32-chip sequence 
per symbol. The dwell limit was 32 microseconds and the 
signal out to the tracking algorithm was sent at about one 
I 
T2 
45 
40 T l  ' 
'"0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 
Figure 8. Levels sent from matched filter sequences to 
tracking controller. All green levels are sent to the 
controller for acquisition. Only those values above 
the arbitrarily set thresholds are used to reduce the 
acquisition pattern area. 
kilohertz, limited by the RS232 bandwidth. Laser light was 
transmitted and data received down a corridor in room light 
at room temperature to establish a baseline and to more 
closely replicate propagation conditions in space. Then, 
laser light was transmitted and modulated light signals 
received over a range of approximately 43 meters, out of 
doors, in the daylight. The beam was progressively 
attenuated to emulate photon levels characteristic of longer 
ranges. 
In the second test, two separate bit streams were sent, 
characterizing two different ID tags. Again, corridor as well 
as field data was taken to establish baselines and emulate 
propagation conditions in space. The two bit streams were 
generated by two different psuedo random code sequences 
in 64 chips per symbol sequences with 4 samples per chip. 
The dwell time was 64 microseconds with a chip transfer rate 
of one Mega chip per second as before. The two psuedo 
random code sequences were alternated approximately every 
ten seconds 
3-1535 
4. RESULTS 
Test I 
In the first test, chip streams were received at a range of 
approxim.ately 43 meters, out-of-doors, during the daylight. 
Laser output powers were decreased to observe algorithm 
response at lower signal levels. Figure 9 is a photograph of 
the acquisition system and the modulator array in the field. 
Figure 9. Photo of Tx/Rx and NRL retromodulator 
array in the field at Chesapeake Bay Detachment. 
Representative data from the chip streams recorded using 
the parameters described is shown in Figure 10. The robust 
data sequence provided clean signals for the receiver 
algorithm, even at the lower laser output values. The test 
showed that the uncued tracker could successfully acquire 
and lock onto a modulated signal for decreasing levels of 
photon flux in the presence of sunlight. 
Laser power 7.8 mW @ 976 nm 
Laser power 1.2 mW @ 976 nm 
0.6 dy l Laser power 2.2 mW @ 976 nm 
2 0.1 
Time 
Figure 10. Received data from retromodulator m a y  
using MQW modulators for decreasing output laser 
levels. 
Test II 
In the second test, two different chip streams were 
alternately sent to the receiver controller as described 
previously. The processed levels were sent to the gimbal 
controller as well. Again, the output laser power was 
decreaseld. The chip streams were more stressing than in 
the first test as they uere generated from psuedo random 
codes. Consequently, they were potentially more 
susceptible to scattering. Received chip streams are shown 
in Figure 11 for 3.6 mW out (30 ma) and 1.1 mW out (15 ma) 
Test 2: Data Sbeams: Outside 
64OE-02 
Figure 1 1. Chip streams received in field test for 1.1 mW 
laser output (15 mA drive) and 6.4 mW (30 mA). 
for the field data obtained in daylight. Considerable scatter 
in the received bit streams, most likely due to atmospheric 
turbulence, is apparent even at the higher flux level. The 
relative levels for the 1.1 mW chip stream is shown in Figure 
12. These levels are derived from the chip streams 
characteristic of those shown in the previous figure. The 
w: Received U) Signal for P(out) of -1 mW 
Range: 41 m Outsidle 
EmwRate: .0305for64Chipper!~ymbdLength 
2 
r o  e 
P -2 
I' . 
-a '  
-10 ' 
Figure 12. Level sent to gimbal controller from receiver 
algorithm at lowest output power,outside, during day. 
graph in Figure 12 shows the impact of scattering at low light 
levels (long ranges) on errors, hence, error rate. As can be 
seen from the figures, the acquisition and tag ID process 
was robust even at low light levels. 
To understand the impact of transmission through a 
turbulent atmosphere, corridor results were compared to field 
3-1536 
results for levels processed for gimbal control. These results 
can be directly compared to the field data in Figures 11 and 
12 and are shown in Figure 13 and 14. The data in these 
1.3 250 0.030518 
1.1 (Nominal) --- 1044 0. I0923 
- 0.97 1804 0.17617 
0.94 517 0.094654 
0.794 516 0.15114 
Figure 13. Chip streams received in comdor for 1 . I  mW 
laser output (1  5 mA drive) and 6.4 mW (30 mA). 
figures for the more stressing case of 1.1 mW output power, 
are interesting because they are characteristic of signals 
received over a longer range, in the sunlight. The graphs 
show that even at the low light levels, recovered levels are 
robust with essentially no eqors. Essentially, the inherent 
“notch” nature of the MQW shutter combined with a 
- Test 2 :Received ID Signal for P(out) of - at 1 mW 
Range: 39 m Conidor 
Error Rate: Nominal 
1.5 
1 
E OS 
I D  in” 4.5 
1 
-1.5 
Figure 14. Level sent to gimbal controller from receiver 
algorithm at lowest output power, down corridor in 
ambient light. 
quiescent propagation channel enable effective data transfer 
for space applications. As the power received is 
proportional to the product of the power transmitted times 
the square of the channel loss, divided by the range to the 
fourth power, a quiet channel can have an important impact 
on link closure at longer ranges andor lower transmit power 
densities. 
Error rates for comdor and field tests are summarized in 
Table II. Errors of one or less for a 64-bit word were counted 
as “nominal”. It is clear from this table that turbulence has 
an impact on effectively longer range acquisition. However, 
in space, where this is not a factor, the comparative output 
powers can maintain a link at longer ranges for acquisition 
and tag identification with nominal errors. 
5. SUMMARY 
In this paper, results have been reported which demonstrate 
how a Multiple Quantum Well retromodulator can be 
effectively used as an identification tag for remotely located 
consumables. Modulated, retroreflected laser light was 
received and processed to provide levels for acquisition 
algorithms. These levels were established through a discrete 
convolution of the received chip sequence. Thresholds 
were set by the acquisition software to use the levels to 
search for the consumable in ever decreasing rectangular 
patterns. 
Data was obtained from field tests at the NIU Chesapeake 
Bay Detachment. Chip streams were obtained at rates of 
one megachip per second over ranges on the order of 40 
meters. Baselines were established from propagation down a 
corridor for comparable ranges and compared to results 
taken from field tests out doors in daylight. 
When two sequences were alternatively sent and 
demodulated, the process demonstrated that a tag could be 
identified out of a crowded environment. The method also 
demonstrated that additional information, such as 
geolocation, photonics, or container content, could be sent 
with alternating data streams without affecting acquisition 
efficacy. 
MQW retromodulators are particularly useful as they can 
support faster data rates, hence longer ranges, at lower 
powers than other devices presently on the market. Recent 
radiation tests also indicate considerable robustness for 
space applications. 
3-1537 
6. REFERENCES Dr. G. Charmaine Gilbreath received her B. S .  in Physics 
from Georgia Institute of Technology in 1982, her MSE in 
[ 1 J G.C. Gilbreath, S.R. Bowman, W.S. Rabinovich, C.H. 
Merk, H.E. Senasack, “Modulating Retroreflector Using 
Multiple Quantum Well Technology”, U.S. Patent No. 
6,154,299, awarded November, 2000. 
[2] G. (2. Gilbreath, W. S .  Rabinovich, T. J. Meehan, M. J. 
Vilcheck, R. Mahon, Ray Burris, M. Ferraro, I. Sokol!;ky, J. A. 
Vasquez, C. S. Bovais, K. Cochrell, K. C. Goins, R. 
Barbehenn, D. S .  Katzer, K. Ikossi-Anastasiou, and Marcos 
J. Montes, “Compact, Lightweight Payload for Covert Data 
Link using a Multiple Quantum Well Modulating Retro- 
reflector on a Small Rotary-wing Unmanned Airborne 
Vehicle,” SPIE Annual Meeting Proceedings, 412 7, 
p p .  57-67, 2000. 
[3] D.S. Katzer, W.S. Rabinovich, K. Ikossi-Anastasiou, and 
G.C. (iilbreath, “Optimization of buffer layers for 
InGaAs/AlGaAs PIN optical modulators grown on GaAs 
substrates by molecular beam epitaxy”, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 
B 18, pp. 1609-1613 (2000). 
[4] Charles M. Swenson, Clark A. Steed, Imelda A. A. 
DeLaRue, and Robert Q. Fugate, SPIE Proceedings, 2290, 
pp. 296-310, 1997. 
[SI M. B. Klein and R. H. Sipman, “Large Aperture Stark 
Modulated Retroreflector at 10.8 p”, J. Appl.. Phyo. 51, pp. 
6101-6104 (1980). 
161 Gordon E. Peckham and Robert A. Suttie, “Microwave 
Reff ection Properties of a Rotating Corrugated Metallic Plate 
Used as a Reflection Modulator”, IEEE Trans on Antennas 
and Propagation, 36, pp. 1000-1006 (1988). 
[7] W. S. Rabinovich, S .  R. Bowman, D. S .  Katzer,, and C. S .  
Kyono, “Intrinsic multiple quantum well spatial light 
modulators”, Appl. Phys. Lett, 66, pp. 1044-1046 (1995). 
[SI C. S. Kyono, K. IkossiAnastasiou, W. S .  Rabinovich, S .  
R. Bowman, D. S .  Katzer, and A. J. Tsao, “GaAs/NGaAs 
multiqiiantum well resonant photorefractive devices 
fabricated using epitaxial lift-off,” Applied. Physics. Letters 
64 (1 7j, pp. 2244-2246,25 A d  1994. 
[9] Peter G. Goetz, W. S .  Rabinovich, Robert J. Walters, 
Scott R.. Messenger, G. Charmaine Gilbreath, Rita Mahon, M. 
Ferraro, Kiki IkossfAnastasiou, and D. Scott Katzer, “Effects 
of Proton Irradiation on InGaAsJAlGaAs 
Multiple Quantum Well Modulators”, Proceedings of IEEE 
Aerosense Conference, Paper No. 470, March, 200 1. 
Electrical Engineering and 
Ph.D. frorn The J o h s  Hopkins 
University in 1986 and 1989, 
respectively. She: has been 
with the Naval Research 
Laboratory since ’1982. Her 
specialties are in nonlinear 
optics, free space optical data 
transfer, and optical device 
development. She is the Lead Principal Investigator for 
NRL’s MiQW retromodulator programs. 
Timothy J. Meehan received his BSEE from the IJniversity of 
Maryland in 1996 and his MSEE from The Johns Hopkins 
University in 2000. He has been with the Naval Research 
Laboratory since 1993 where he came as an engineering 
coop. He joined the permanent staff as electrical engineer in 
1996. He is the electronics lead for .the MQW modulating 
retroreflector program. 
Dr. William SLRabinovich received 
the B. S. in Physics from State 
University of New York at Stony 
Brook in 198;’ and the MS and Ph.D. 
degrees, also in Physics, from 
BrownUnivewity, in 1984 and 1987, 
respectively. He has been with the 
Naval Research Laboratory since 
1987, starting as a Postdoctoral 
Associate. He is presently the 
Head ofthe Photonics Materials and Devices Section and is 
the co-PI for the MQW modulating retroreflector program at 
NRL. 
Michael J. Vilcheck graduated from Allegheny College with! 
a BS degree in physics. He joined NRL as a coope in 1997 
and became permanent with the Electro-Optics Technology 
Section in 1999. He is currently working toward a MS 
degree in Mechanical Engineering at the University of 
Maryland. He is the optical tracker lead for the MQW 
modulating retroreflector program. 
Rita Mahon received the BSc. ancl 
the Ph.D. degrees in Physics from 
Imperial College at the University of 
London in 1970 and 1973, 
respectively. She did postdoctoral 
research at York University in 
Toronto folllowed by a research 
associate position in Plasma 
Physics at the University of 
Maryland College Park. She works in the Photonics 
Technology branch of the Optical Science Division at NRI, 
under {contract with Jaycor. 
3-1538 
Mena Ferraro received the B.S. in 
Aerospace Engineering and B.S. in 
Applied Physics from Illinois 
Institute of Technology in Chicago, 
IL in 1995. She works in the 
Electro-optics Technology section 
of the Space Systems Development 
Department at the Naval Research 
Laboratory under contract with RSI, 
Inc. 
John Vasquez received his B.S. in aerospace engineering in 
1997 from the University of Cinncinati. He joined NRL as a 
coop in 1994 and became permanent in 1997. His specialty is 
mechanical design and he works in the Spacecraft 
Engineering Department 
Ilene Sokolsky received B.S.in mechanical engineering in 
1996 from the University of Maryland. She joined NFU in 
1997 as a contractor and became a permanent staff in 1999. 
Her specialty is in structural analysis and she is the 
mechanical engineering lead on the MQWQ retromodulator 
program- 
D. Scott Kaber received the B.A. degree in physics from the 
University of Chicago in 1983, and the Ph.D. in solid-state 
electronics from the University of Cincinnati, in 1988. In 
1989, he joined the Naval Research Laboratory, as an Office 
of Naval Technology Postodoctoral Fellow. Since 1991, he 
has been an Electronics Engineer in the High Frequency 
Devices and Materials Section of the Microwave 
Technology Branch at the NRL. 
Kiki Ikossi received the B.S. in Electrical Engineering from 
the National Technical University of Athens, Greece in 1977 
and M.S. and Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from the 
University of Cincinnati in 1982 and 1986, respectively. In 
1998, she joined the Naval Research Laboratory. She has 
worked optoelectronic devices, MQW modulators, resonant 
tunneling diodes, photovoltaic cells, nondestructive 
electrical characterization techniques and Deep Level 
Transient Spectroscopy. She is the fabrication lead in the 
MQW retromodulator program. 
Peter G. Goeb received the BSEE from the University of 
Maryland, in 1988. He received the M.S.E. and Ph.D. 
degrees in electrical engineering from the University of 
Michigan, in 1996 and 1998, respectively. In 1999, he joined 
the Photonics Technology Branch 
at the NRL, where he has worked in 
the fields of large-area, low-power 
multiple quantum well modulating 
retroreflectors for free space optical 
communication as well as high 
current photodiodes. 
