Target Detection Enhancements using In-Situ Environment 
Adaptive Clutter Modeling1 
Michael Datum 
Engineering Technology Center 
Mystic, CT 06355 
dlerro@etc.atinc.com 
Donald Lerro 
Engineering Technology Center 
Mystic, CT 06355 
dlerro@etc.atinc.com 
Fred McMullen 
Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Division Newport 
Surface Undersea Warfare Department 
Newport, RI 02841-1708 
mcmullenfe@nuwc.npt.navy.mil 
860-572-9600 
860-572-9600 
401-832- 8670 
Abstract-The significant challenge in shallow water active 
sonar is to provide reliable target detection and 
classification while maintaining a reasonable false alert rate. 
When reverberation appears target-like due to persistence in 
location from ping to ping and exhibits a coherent intensity, 
an extremely high false alert rate occurs. This phenomenon 
occurs frequently in littorals where boundary interaction and 
bathymetry effects dominate the reverberation profile. In 
current systems the assumptions of the noise statistics are 
based upon Gaussian derived processes. The distribution of 
the envelope at the output of the matched filter is assumed 
to be Rayleigh. In conditions of high clutter the distribution 
deviates significantly from Rayleigh, where the tail of the 
density function tends to be significantly higher than the 
theoretical noise assumption. These conditions can be 
predicted and certainly can be measured by estimating the 
distribution of data at the detector output to adapt the 
detection processing based upon changes sensed in the 
background distribution. Performed in a spatiallrange 
dependent manner environmental sensing can greatly reduce 
the clutter on a display and aid the automated detection 
process. A target detection technique based on the 
Interacting Multiple Model estimation algorithm is 
presented to exploit the consistency of position and motion 
information in conjunction with accurate models for target 
and clutter amplitudes observed over multiple pings to form 
a detection decision. The density and nature of the 
amplitude distribution for clutter, which is highly dependent 
upon the environment, is shown to dramatically affect 
detection performance. Performance improvements can be 
obtained by adapting the statistical model for reverberation 
based upon localized in-situ measurements to reduce the 
adverse effects of high amplitude clutter on multiple ping 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
detection and classification. Using this knowledge an 
adaptive sequential likelihood ratio test that minimizes the 
decision time and improves detection performance under a 
vast set of environmental conditions is developed and 
demonstrated using collected sea test data. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. ~ O D U C T I O N  
2. ENVIRONMENTALLY ADAPTIVE DETECTION 
3. 
4. MULTIPLE PING DETECTION PERFORMANCE 
AND TRACKING 
TARGET PARAMETER ESTIMATION WITH THE lhfM 
ALGORITHM 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In current surface ship active sonar signal and information 
processing systems, the design approach is based upon 
obtaining the best average performance in all environments. 
In simple terms, each processing algorithm has parameter 
settings that have been chosen so that they will work 
sufficiently well under all conditions in all oceans; i.e., deep 
and shallow water, all times of year, etc. Therefore, the best 
performance under specific environmental conditions is 
rarely obtained. The objective is to reduce false alerts in 
high amplitude clutter environments and provide reliable 
low signal to interference ratio detection in quiet 
environments for lowho motion contacts. It is shown that 
improved detection performance can be achieved by 
adapting the amplitude clutter distribution based upon 
observations of amplitude data obtained at the output of the 
4-1757 
matched filter within localized spatial regions of each ping 
of data. By estimating the amplitude distribution parameters 
of the regional ping data an estimated clutter amplitude 
distribution will be used in the detector. 
This paper presents an environmentally adaptive multiple 
ping detection algorithm and provides performance results 
from data collected in varying environmental conditions. 
The detection adaptation based upon clutter amplitude 
sensing is described in Section II. Section III provides 
details of' the Interacting Multiple Model (IMM) detection 
and tracking algorithm, and the performance of this adaptive 
algorithm is compared with a current non-adaptive, 
automated detection and tracking (ADT) algorithm in 
Section W .  Conclusions and conjectures about future 
improvements are contained in Section V. 
2. E N W S 0 " T A L L Y  ADAPTIVE IMM DETECTION AND 
TRACKING 
Conventional implementations of the multiple ping 
detection and tracking algorithms do not adapt the detector 
based upon the observed clutter conditions, necessitating a 
compromise between preventing excessive false alerts in 
high clutter and permitting targets with low signal to 
interference ratio (SIR) to be detected. An algorithm is 
presented to adaptively choose the parameters of the 
probability density function used to model the interfering 
background amplitude so as to match the current clutter 
conditions within a localized region of range and bearing, 
resulting in improved detection performance for the specific 
operating environment. The objective is to modify the 
amplitude models in the detector so that low SNR target 
detection performance is obtained in quiet, low amplitude 
low density clutter (well behaved reverberation or noise 
limited environments) and a high false alert rate is reduced 
in high amplitude dense clutter environments (highly 
nonstationary reverberation backgrounds). 
The current non-adaptive detection and tracking algorithm 
makes a static assumption of the amplitude probability 
distribution. During performance evaluation of previous 
trackers, it was observed that the amplitude clutter 
probability density varies significantly with environmental 
condition. In making one robust choice of clutter model for 
detection, a compromise was struck between minimizing 
false alerts in high-clutter conditions and maximizing 
detection probability of low SIR targets. It was obvious that 
varying the noise pdf assumption, used in both the tracker 
and detector, with environmental conditions could result in 
both lower false alert rates in high clutter to noise ratio 
(CNR) conditions and higher detection probabilities (or 
equivalently, more rapid detection) in low CNR conditions. 
This section outlines the technique used to adapt the 
amplitude noise probability density function, and hence the 
amplitude log-likelihood function, to local changes in clutter 
density. 
Modelsfor Track Residual and Amplihrle Information 
The data input to the tracker is assunned to be processed 
sonar echos from multiple discrete azimuthal bearing 
angles, olr beams. The tracker is updated once per ping 
cycle, which is defined as the time between sonar pulse 
transmissions. Within a ping cycle, samples are available 
from each beam, with each beam-time sample representing a 
unique bearing-range position relative to the receiver. 
The acaiustic data for each beam is match-filtered 
(correlated with the transmitted signal). then normalized. In 
addition, the unnormalized data at each time sample in a 
ping cycle (corresponding to a discrete range) is interpolated 
across beams to produce bearing estimates with higher 
resolution than the beam spacing (but still limited to one 
estimate for each discrete beam and range). Data for which 
the normalized amplitude exceeds a threshold and which is 
proximal in range and bearing is grouped into clusters. The 
bearing ,and range of each cluster is formed from an 
amplitude weighted mean of the range and bearing of all 
data samples in the cluster, and the amplitude is taken as the 
maximum amplitude in the cluster. We will not describe 
details about the system in this paper, but will simply define 
the assumed model of the data. 
We mlodel the complex beam output data, 
B(k)  E {Bl (k), Bo (k)}, at time index k, as 
B, (k) = ~ ( k )  + rt(k) , for the target present 
Bo (k) = ~ ( k )  + n(k) , for no target 
where s ( k )  is the target, ~ ( k )  is the clutter, and n(k) is 
the ambient noise, all of which are assimed to be normally 
distributed complex random processes with mean zero and 
variances os , oc , and o,,, , respectively. 2 2  2 
Prior to normalization, the magnitude of the complex data is 
taken. The normalizer is here modeled as dividing each time 
sample b y  the mean of the magnitude of the ambient noise, 
so that thle normalized data is given by 
The problabilistic model of the normalized amplitude data 
will be described in more detail in the next section. 
The range, r (k )  , and bearing, b(k) , cif each cluster passed 
to the tracker is assumed to be of the form 
4-1758 
where qn,e(k) and b,,,,,(k) are the actual range and 
bearing positions, and rHojse (k) and b,,,,, (k) are the range 
and bearing position measurement noise, assumed to be 
independent and normally distributed with mean zero and 
variances or and ob2 , respectively. The tracker converts 
r ( k )  and b(k)  into Cartesian coordinates, which are used 
to form the measurement vector, z ( k )  , 
2 
where 4 (k) and q (k) represent the measured position in 
Cartesian coordinates, having measurement noise ]v5 (k) 
and ws (k) , respectively. The measurement noise will here 
be assumed to be normally distributed with zero mean and 
covariance matrix R. Note that the conversion results in the 
measurement noise being, in general, non-zero mean and 
correlated. This effect is accounted for in the tracker, but 
will not be discussed here. For details of the converted 
measurement correction, see reference [I]. These cluster 
measurements are only used by the tracker when the 
amplitude of the cluster exceeds an input threshold, z . 
Zmproved Models for the Target and CZutter Amplitude 
Feature 
The following probabilistic models of the amplitude data are 
assumed to be available: 
p o  (a) = pdf of the amplitude if it is due to noise only 
p1 (a) = pdf of the amplitude if it originated from a target, 
with the latter parameterized by the expected minimum 
detectable SNR of the target returns, d. In the ADT, 
measurement amplitude was modeled as Rayleigh 
distributed: 
a 2 0  
1 a= 
for noise only (after constant false alarm rate - CFAR noise 
normalization) and target, respectively, where the - t q  
results from the normalizer, as described in the previous 
section. This model assumes no clutter is present. 
2 
n 
In the presence of clutter, an improved model of clutter 
background interference amplitude is the Rayleigh mixture 
density [2], 
where a is the mixture probability and o? is the power in 
the ith component. This allows for a probabilistic 
combination of two clutter density components in the 
model. It will be assumed that 0: = 1, and that 
022 = 1 + C N R ,  where CNR is the clutter-to-noise power 
ratio. 
When the full signal-processed data set is thresholded and 
clustered to provide a set of measurements for tracking, the 
target detection probability is 
(7) 
and the false alarm probability 
The corresponding pdf s of the amplitude of a measurement, 
which by the validation requirement must have exceeded the 
threshold, are 
1 
p i ( a )  = --po(a) a 2 z 
PFA 
(9) 
1 
p ;  (a) = --pl(a) a 2 z (10) 
The target to clutter amplitude likelihood ratio, defined as 
4-1759 
will be used in the tracker and detector. 
Models .for the Target and Clutter 
Measurements 
(1 1) 
Track Residual 
Define the predicted measurement from the tracker as 
:(k I k -- 1) , where the notation (k I k - 1) will, 
throughout this report, be used to indicate that this is the 
prediction for time k given the previous value from time k- 1. 
The pdf of the measurements resulting from the target will 
then be defined as jointly normally distributed with mean 
?(k I k --I) and covariance matrix S(k). Define the 
residual (or innovation) as the vector difference 
~ ( k )  = ~ ( k )  - ?(k I k - 1) (14) 
The joint pdf of the residual is then normally distributed 
with zero mean and covariance matrix S ( k ) ,  i.e. 
N[v(k);O, S(k)]. The validation region of the track gate 
is defined as the elliptical region centered on the 
measurement prediction for which the target measurement 
(given the above assumption of a normally distributed target 
position) has a probability of PG of being within the gate. 
The tracker produces the estimates :(k 1 k - 1) and S ( k )  , 
so that the only measurements that are used are those 
satisfying the inequality 
[z(k) - ;(k(k - l ) r s - ' (k ) [ z (k )  - i?(klk -I)] I y (15) 
where y is the gate sue  parameter, defined as the value for 
which the probability of being in the gate is PG. Thus the 
joint pdf of vector v ( k )  when target is present is defined as 
p(v(k) I targe t )  = pGIN[v(k),O,S(k)] (16) 
When no target is present, it is assumed that the 
measurement is uniformly distributed in the track gate 
where V is the track gate area (or volume for higher 
dimension z), given by 
n, is the dimension of the measurement vector, and c,~: is 
the volume of a unit hypersphere of dimension n,,  e.g. 
3. TARGET PARAMETER ESTIMATION WITH THE IMM 
ALGORITHM 
A recursive algorithm is presented in this section, which 
utilizes multiple target motion models, each with a 
probabilistic data association filter using amplitude 
information (PDAFAI) estimator [3]. The probabilistic data 
association filter (PDAF) estimator is a Kalman tracker in 
which multiple measurements near the predicted track 
position are utilized by the tracktx, each associated 
according to it's probability of being the target 
measurement. The PDAFAI estimator is a PDAF estimator 
that mak;es use of the amplitude information of each 
measurement [ 11. 
The interacting multiple model (IMM) [3] is a technique in 
which miiltiple trackers are evaluated !simultaneously, each 
with a different target motion assumption, with the results of 
all assumed models combined probabilistically to produce a 
single estimate. In this paper, the IMM is implemented with 
PDAFAI trackers used for each model, as described in 
[11,[41 and [51. 
The detector makes a targetlno-target decision using the 
position information fiom the tracker, as well as the target 
strength information, via the amplitude log-likelihood 
function defined in the previous section. Utilizing both the 
consistent strength (regularity in a probabilistic sense) of the 
target returns provided by the single observation detector, 
and consistency in target motion (again in a probabilistic 
sense) improves detection of a target track with a small 
number of measurements and enhances discrimination 
against fallse tracks. 
To summarize, the estimator consists of the IMM 
configuration with 
(i) PDAFAI estimation modules matched to each 
target motion model; 
(ii) ;a probability evaluator for each model, which uses 
the model likelihood function that incorporates 
the amplitude information, detailed below, and 
the model transition probabilities; 
(iii) an estimate mixer at the filter inputs; 
(iv) an estimate combiner at the output of the filters. 
The Markov chain that predicts the transitions among the 
target maldels (model switching) has transition probabilities, 
i.e. the probability that the target is closest to model t at time 
k given that it was closest to model s at time k-1, 
4-1760 
where Mt(k)  indicates model t at time k. The transition 
probabilities are estimator design parameters. 
Target Motion Models 
In practice, two of the most common forms of target motion 
in the Cartesian plane are a target that moves with constant 
course and speed and a target that undergoes a constant 
radius turn. In state estimation tracking, a constant course 
and speed target can be tracked very accurately. Tracking a 
maneuvering target is more difficult since the maneuver 
must be detected and a filter reasonably matched to the 
motion must be used to gain accuracy. The IMM approach 
uses a finite set of models to handle a wide range of target 
dynamics. The following target motion models will be used 
to perform track formation and track maintenance. 
Define the state vector of the target, x(k), as including 
both the position and velocity components in both Cartesian 
coordinate dimensions, 5 (k) and q (k) , 
x(k) = 
The target motion models in Cartesian coordinates with 
sampling period T are, in general form, defined by the state 
equation 
where 
[l T 0 01 
is the state transition matrix, and 
is a zero-mean white noise sequence in the 5 and q 
coordinates used to model uncertain accelerations. The 
variations in velocity are modeled as piecewise constant 
zero-mean white noise accelerations, thus the noise gain is 
I "  51 
MODELS I ,  2: White Noise Acceleration Models 
M' is a second order kinematic model (with position and 
velocity components) in each of the two Cartesian 
coordinates. Assume the variances of v,(k) and v,(k) , 
denoted as 0;: (k) and 0; (k) , respectively, are defined 
for M' as 
A "small" q1 yields a "nearly constant velocity" motion. 
Model M is applicable for tracking targets moving at very 
close to constant course and speed and, when used in 
conjunction with MO , will provide a means of performing 
target track detection or track formation. M 2  has the 
same state equation as M with higher level of process 
noise 
1 
1 
Model M 2 ,  using a higher level of white noise 
1 acceleration than M , allows for target acceleration and is 
applicable to tracking maneuvering targets. 
MODEL 3: The "No Target" Model 
Model M 3  has the same state equations and noise 
assumptions as M ' .  The difference is in the PDAFAI 
estimation using this target model. This model assumes the 
probability of obtaining a target measurement is zero, hence 
the estimator is an open loop prediction with no 
measurement update stage. The "no target" model 
likelihood function to be described in Equation 5 1 is critical 
to the performance of the detector since the likelihood 
h c t i o n  is used to assess noise only track quality for 
dismissing erratic tracks. 
Summary of the Basic PDAFAI 
The predicted state estimate at time k given the previous 
state estimate, x(k - 1 1 k - 1) , is 
.?(klk - 1) = Fi(k  - 1 k - 1) (27) 
4-1761 
which is a linear prediction and has associated covariance 
P(klk - 1) = FP(k - 1 k - l)F'+Q 
the predicted measurement is given by 
i (klk - 1) = H?(k/k - 1) 
where H is the measurement matrix, 
H=[' '1 
0 0 1 0  
The measurement covariance matrix is 
S ( k )  = HP(k/k - l)HT + R 
and the filter gain is 
W ( k )  = P(k  I k-l)H T S -1 ( k ) +  R 
As described above, a validation region centered around the 
predicted' measurement is set up to select the set of 
measurements to be associated probabilistically to the 
target. The validation region is 
where y determines the size of the validation region. The 
number of measurements in the gate at time k is m(k)  . The 
set of validated measurements which exceed the detection 
threshold at time k are used to update the state estimate. 
The updated state is 
2(kjk)= 2(klk - 1)+ W ( k ) v ( k )  (34) 
and the updated covariance is 
P(klk) = P(klk - 1) - (1- &)W(k)S(k)WT(k)  + F ( k )  
(35) 
where 
is a measurement dependent term, called the "spread of the 
innovations", and 
nl(k)  
v(k) = P,Vi (k) (37) 
i = l  
is the combined innovation formed from all the validated 
measurements. The innovation or residual associated with 
the i" measurement in the gate is 
V i ( k )  = q ( k )  - i(klk - 11) 
The association probabilities are given by 
c e; i = 1, ..., m(k) 
i = O  
(39) 
where Po is the probability that none of the measurements 
are correct, The term that incorporates the residual 
information is 
J v ,  (k ) 'S (k ) - ' v , (k )  
(40) 
and 
The Steps of the IMMEstimation Algorithm 
The steps of the Ih4M algorithm with r models are 
performed as follows: 
A. Interaction ( j  = 1, ..., r )  : Initial estimate and 
covarianc:e for filter j (for the current update): 
r 
io'@ -Ilk - 1) = C i i ( k  -Ilk - l)p+(k -Ilk - 1) 
i=l  
1 N k )  C P , v , ( k ) v , ? ( k )  - v ( k ) v T ( k )  W T ( k )  i=l 
4-1762 
r 
pO-'(k-llk-l)= & l + ( k - l I k - l ) .  
( p i  ( k  - Ilk - 1) + [ i ' ( k  - l/k - 1) - 
iOJ ( k  - Ilk - l)][ii ( k  - l /k - 1) - 
i o j  ( k  - Ilk - l)]' 1 
i=l 
(43) 
B. Mode-conditioned filtering (j = 1, ..., Y)  : The filter 
module matched to M j ( k )  (filterj) uses z (k)  to yield 
x j ( k l k )  and p j ( k l k ) ,  which are the state estimate and 
covariance for model j. The likelihood function, A j (k) 
corresponding to PDAFAI model j is described in 
equations 50 and 5 1 the next section. 
C. Probability evaluations: Mixing probabilities 
(i, j = 1, ..., Y): 
1 
'j 
p .  I /  J . (k - l lk - l )  = y p & ( k - l )  (44) 
r 
C .  J =  A z p q p i ( k - l )  
i=l 
(45) 
Update of the model probabilities ( j  = 1,. . . , r )  : 
r 
c - A C A  (k)Cj (47) 
i=l 
D. Combination of the model-conditioned estimates and 
covariance's (for output purposes): 
+ [ i J ( k l k )  - i ( k J k ) ] [ i j ( k l k )  - i(klk)]') 
The Mode Likelihood Functions for Residual and Amplitude 
Information 
The likelihood function of mode t at time k is the joint 
probability density of the validated innovations fiom time 
k and can be shown to be given by 
where b and e are as described above. 
For the "no target" model, the above becomes 
j=l 
Sequential DetectiodClassijkation Test 
The detection processing makes a decision based on both an 
amplitude and a kinematic-based log-likelihood function. 
The basic form is the sequential probability ratio test, as 
defined in [6], which forms a decision based comparing 
accumulated statistics to a fixed detection threshold. We 
combine two separate SPRT decisions from the amplitude 
and kinematic statistics. 
The kinematic likelihood function makes use of the 
residual-only model likelihood functions (without the 
amplitude). For the constant velocity target case, this is 
and for the non-target case, 
The cumulative log-likelihood ratio (CLLR) for kinematic 
component is updated using the constant motion model and 
noise model residual-only likelihood functions 
The amplitude-only cumulative log-likelihood function for a 
track is computed using the measurement in the validation 
region with the maximum amplitude 
4-1763 
am, = max(a,;i = 42, ... m(k))  ( 5 5 )  
The pdf of am, for noise-only hypothesis is, suppressing 
the time index to simplify notation, 
and for target hypothesis is 
where 4, (a, ) and 4 (am, ) are the cumulative density 
functions for noise-only and target hypotheses, respectively, 
which may be found by integrating pi  (a,) and 
p,'(a,) . The amplitude CLLR for the track is then 
updated by 
CLLR,, ( k )  = CLLR,,p ( k  - 1 )  + 
The overdl detection decision combines the amplitude and 
kinematic CLLR's by requiring each to exceed a threshold, 
hence a detection is declared if 
Detect : 
A track dismissal occurs when either statistic drops below a 
threshold 
4. MULTIPLE PING DETECTION PERFORMANCE 
Evaluation of performance improvement provided by 
environmental adaptation is demonstrated by comparing 
detection results fiom the non-adaptive Automatic -Detect 
and Track (ADT) tracker/detector, which uses Rayleigh 
noise pdf assumption, to that of the adaptive track and detect 
method d.escribed above. The ADT tracker is a PDAFAI 
tracker similar to that described above, with only one 
kinematic model used, i.e., IMM is not used. ADT uses only 
amplitude information in making the detection decision, in a 
manner similar to the amplitude CLLR component 
described above. 
Both the ADT and the Environmentally Adaptive (EA) 
IMM trackers were operated on the same sets of data. The 
data was broken into sets of about 20 to 30 pings each, 
which gave the tracker enough time to detect, but allowed 
for more detection opportunities to be evaluated. 
Performance metrics used are average time-to-detect, 
average number of false alerts, and overall detection 
probability. Average time-to-detect represents the average 
number of pings fiom acoustic opportunity to detection, 
where acoustic opportunity is defined its the time when the 
target eclho appears as a measurement for the tracker, i.e. 
when the amplitude of the target measurement exceeds the 
input threshold. The average number of false alerts is the 
average inumber of detected tracks that were not targets. 
Probability of detection measured as the total number of 
submarine detections divided by the total number of 
submarine detection opportunities. 
Evaluation Data 
Only frequency modulated (FM) data was used for 
evaluation, consisting of data fiom 5 different 
areadexercises. Data was broken up into sequences of 
approximately 20-40 pings each. An attempt was made to 
use data with a wide range of clutter-to-noise ratios and 
system parameters. Table 1 contains a summary of the data 
sets used. 
Detection Performance 
As described above, detection performance was evaluated in 
terms of the average time to detect, measured in pings, the 
average number of false alerts, and the total probability of 
detection., given in ternis of (number of detections)/(number 
of opportunities). Table 2 summarizes the performance 
results, including details of each data set along with totals, 
which are computed fiom the results of individual ping 
sequences. 
Overall, the number of false alerts was reduced 
significantly, fiom an average of 759.lhour to 57.6/how, 
with only a small decrease in probability of detection, from 
90.9% to 86.4%. The average time-to-detect increased fiom 
5.0 to 9.4 pings. 
Performance Results 
4-1764 
Table 1. Summary of Data Used for Performance Evaluation 
5 
Total 
414 1561.4 2.0 414 121.1 8.8 
40144 759.1 5.0 3 a144 57.6 9.4 
4-1765 
Displq Plots 
A qualitative view of performance is illustrated by 
looking at several display plots with auto-alert overlays. 
The display tool was used to plot ping histories for all 
beams. A B-Scan of 16 pings history for 24 beams is 
displayed to illustrate performance gains. The intensity 
indicates the amplitude of the cluster data, where shades 
of blue represent amplitudes between 9.5 and 18 dJ3 and 
white represents amplitudes greater than 18 dB. Figure 1 
shows the display plot for one data sequence which 
contains a large amount of high amplitude clutter. Each 
column represents 16 pings of one beam of data, with 
range increasing up the plot. The bearing center of each 
beam in degrees is at the bottom of the plot. The green 
lines overlaying the plot indicate the approximate grid of 
regions where the adaptation occurred. Note how the 
clutter density can vary greatly over space, but generally 
tends to remain the same for a spatial region. Figures 2 
and 3 contain again the display plot for the same ping 
sequence, with track marks overlaying the cluster 
amplitude, as indicated by open yellow squares. The ADT 
results are displayed in Fig. 2, and the environmentally 
adaptive IMM results are displayed in Fig. 3. 
5. CONCISJSIONS 
In this paper we have developed and tested the 
performance of a novel, environmentally adaptive, track 
and detect algorithm based on the multiple model Ih4M 
tracker. Improved detection performance was achieved by 
adapting the amplitude clutter distribution based upon 
observations of amplitude data obtained at the output of 
the matched filter within localized spatial regions of each 
ping of data. In-situ estimation of the probability 
distribution of the clutter amplitude allows for reduced 
false alerts in high clutter conditions without sacrificing 
detection probability in low clutter conditions. 
Performance comparisons were made with a non-adaptive 
single model PDAFAI tracker. We showed, that a 
significant reduction in false alerts, approximately 13: 1 
can be obtained with a relatively small decrease in 
probability of detection, from 90.9% to 86.4%. 
4-1766 
m 
.e 
m 
a, .- * .3
8 
+ s
.e i 
a 
8 
0 
a, 
Y 
* 
m a,
Y 6 
m 
.e 
A 
.- 2 
2 
I2 
n 
a 
3 
.e 
i 
4 - 1 7 6 7  
I 
4-1768 
c. 
3 
0 
a 
YI 
4-1769 
REFERENCES 
[l] Y. Bar-Shalom and X. R. Li. Multitarget-Multisensor 
Tracking: Principles and Techniques, Y B S  Publishing, 
Storrs, CT, 1995. 
[2] Abraham, Douglas, “Modeling Non-Rayleigh 
Reverberation,” SACLANT Undersea Research Centre 
Technical Report SR-266, 1997. 
[3] Y. Bar-Shalom and X. R. Li. Estimation and 
Tracking: Principles, Techniques, and Sofhyare. Artech 
House, Norwood, MA, 1993. 
[4] D. Lerro and Y. Bar-Shalom. “Interacting Multiple 
Model Tracking with Target Amplitude Feature,” IEEE 
Trans. Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES-29 
(2):494-509, April 1993. 
[5] A. Nuttall, E. Eby, “Signal to Noise Ratio 
Requirements for Detection of Multiple Pulses Subject to 
Partially Correlated Fading with Chi-squared Statistics of 
Various Degrees of Freedom,’’ NUWC Technical Report 
No. 7707,, June 2 1986. 
[6] Poor, H. Vincent, An Introduction to Signal Detection 
and Estimation, Springer-Verlag, second edition, 1994. 
Michael Datum graduated with a MS. 
degree iri Electrical Engineering from 
the University of Connecticut, Storrs, in 
1993. He has spent the last 8 years 
working at the Engineering Technologv 
Center in Mystic, CT, designing 
detection, tracking and signal 
processing algorithms for both active 
and passive sonar systems. Specific interests include 
automated detection and tracking algorithms and 
associated signal processing. 
Donald Lerro received the B.S. degree 
in Mathematics at the University of 
Connecticut, Storrs, 1979, the MS. 
degree in Electrical Engineering at the 
Hartfod Graduate Center, RPI in 
1984, and the Ph.D. degree in 
ElectrLcal Engineering from the 
University of Connecticut, Storrs, in 
1995. 
He hay over 18 years experience in analysis, design, 
development, testing and evaluation oj-passive and active 
sonar signal and information processing systems. He has 
perforfived system designs, developed requirement 
spec$cations, analyzed and evaluated the performance 
for several low and mid-frequency active sonars. From 
1983 to 1995 he was with the N ~ v G ~  Undersea Warfae 
Center (NUWC) where he worked on experimental long 
range low frequency multistatic and monostatic sonars. 
He currently works for the Engineering Technolog 
Center in Mystic, Ci? He has developed automatic 
detection, tracking and classijication algorithms to 
sitppor,t mid and low frequency sonars for both hull 
mounted and towed arrays. 
Fred AkMullen received the B.S. degree in Elect;*ical 
Engineering at Clarkson University in 1984 and the MS.  
degree in Electrical Engineering at the Hartford 
Graduate Center, RPI in 1988. 
He has been employed at the Naval Undersea Warfare 
Center since 1984 where he has worked in the analysis, 
design, development, testing and crvaluation of active 
sonar signal and information processing systems. He has 
analyzed system performance of surjkce combatant sonar 
systems and implemented automated detection algorithms 
into jleet processing systems. He currently is working on 
experinrental active sonar signal and control processing 
that ad,apts to the ocean environment. 
4-1770  
