A Spaceborne L-Band Radiometer-Radar Concept for 
Land and Ocean Surface Monitoring1 
Eni Njoku, Yunjin Kim, Michael Spencer, Wu-Yang Tsai, 
Bill Wilson, Simon Yueh, Jakob van Zyl 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 9 1 109 
81 8-354-3693, eni.~.n-iiokutii:ipI.nas~.~~~, 
Yahya Rahmat-Samii 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90094 
3 10-206-3847, rahmat@ee.ucla.edu 
Mark W. Thomson 
TRW Astro Aerospace 
6384 Via Real, Carpinteria, CA 93013-2920 
805 - 6 84- 6 64 1, inark. t h omsonf$,tnv. coin 
Abstract-An L-band radiometer-radar concept has been 
studied for spacebome remote sensing of land surface soil 
moisture, freeze-thaw state, and ocean surface salinity. The 
integrated design provides simultaneous passive and active 
measurements with potential for enhanced geophysical 
retrieval accuracy and spatial resolution. The design takes 
advantage of cost savings achievable using shared subsys- 
tems and hardware. The baseline system concept has been 
evaluated to determine the feasibility of the technical 
approach and as a point of departure for system trade-offs. 
The unique features of this concept are the integration of the 
radiometer and radar sensors, the use of a deployable-mesh 
conically scanned reflector antenna, and the use of unfocused 
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) processing. Taken together, 
these features represent a significant departure from conven- 
tional radiometer, scatterometer, and S A R  approaches. The 
conical wide-swath scan is a desirable feature that provides 
constant incidence angle and antenna pattem characteristics 
across the swath, simplified data processing (passive and 
active), and frequent global sampling. The concept is 
targeted for a low-cost, short-development-cycle mission, 
suitable for NASA's Earth System Science Pathfinder 
(ESSP) series. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1.  INTRODUCTION 
2. CONCEPT DESCRIPTION 
3. ANTENNA SYSTEM 
4. RADAR PROCESSING 
5. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes a combined L-band radiometer-radar 
concept for global remote sensing of the Earth's surface. The 
concept is designed to measure soil moisture, freeze-thaw 
state, and ocean salinity from space. These measurements 
are high priorities for land surface hydrology, oceanography, 
and climate research, but cannot be obtained by any current 
spacebome system. The science needs and rationales for 
these measurements are outlined in NASA's Earth Science 
Enterprise Research Strategy [ 11 and Strategic Plan [2]. The 
present study is an outgrowth of an earlier study to evaluate 
the technology of large, lightweight mesh antennas for 
remote sensing applications requiring low frequency and/or 
high spatial resolution [3], [4]. Soil moisture, freeze-thaw, 
and ocean salinity sensing all require low fYequency (L- 
band) large-aperture antennas to achieve the desired mea- 
surement sensitivities and spatial resolutions [5]-[7]. 
Concept Overview 
The baseline concept is a combined radiometer and radar 
system operating at 1.4 GHz (radiometer) and 1.2 GHz 
(radar). The radar is an unfocused SAR that provides 
resolution enhancement over a conventional scatterometer 
but does not utilize the full high-resolution SAR capability. 
The antenna is a 6-m-diameter deployable-mesh parabolic 
reflector with dual feedhoms. The antenna beams are offset 
at 40" from nadir, and the entire system rotates about the 
nadir axis providing a conical scan and wide swath (Figure 
1). The radiometer resolution is 40 km. The processed radar 
resolution varies from 1 km at the edge of the swath to 20 
km at the center of the swath (see discussion, Section 4). 
Global repeat coverage is obtained in approximately 3 days. 
By optimally combining the passive and active data, the 
goal is to estimate soil moisture at a resolution of 10-40 
km, and freeze-thaw state at a resolution of 1-3 km, every 3 
~ ~~~ 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE. 
4-1841 
2. C:ONCEPT DESCRIPTION 
Beam offset angle 
Orbit type 
Spin rate 
Earth-incidence angle 
Figure 1. Antenna and conical scan configuration 
46" 
6rpm 
Circular, sun- 
synchronous, 450-km 
altitude:, 6ad6pin 
equator crossing 
50" 
days. Ocean salinity will be retrieved as space-time 
averages, at 100-km resolution and weekly or monthly time 
intervals. Final specifications of the output products are 
determined by trade-offs between estimation accuracy and 
space-tim.e resolution. 
Concept Rationale 
There are a number of advantages to be gained by integrat- 
ing the L.-band radiometer and radar sensors into a single 
instrument with a conical scan configuration. 
(1) Surface roughness adversely affects radiometric 
estimates of ocean salinity and soil moisture. Radar 
measurements are sensitive to surface roughness, and can be 
used to improve the accuracy of radiometric estimates if the 
radar data are acquired simultaneously and at similar 
frequency and spatial resolution to the radiometric data. 
(2) Synthetic aperture processing is commonly used to 
improve the spatial resolution of the radar signal. Radar 
estimates of soil moisture and freeze-thaw state can thus be 
derived at higher spatial resolution than radiometric 
estimates. However, the radar signal is more influenced by 
roughness, vegetation, and topographic effects. By combin- 
ing the two types of data, the coarser-resolution radiometric 
estimates can be used as constraints on the radar-derived 
estimates, leading to better estimation accuracies at the 
higher resolution. 
(3) The conical scan configuration provides constant 
incidence angle and antenna pattern characteristics across the 
entire swath. This considerably simplifies the data process- 
ing, interpretation, and geophysical retrievals. The wide 
swath capability also provides frequent repeat coverage for 
global monitoring. 
(4) Significant cost savings can be achieved operationally 
by integrating radiometer and radar sensors into a single 
instrument rather than launching them as separate rnissions. 
The general characteristics of the system concept are listed 
in Table I .  The specific radiometer and radar characteristics 
are showri in Tables 2 and 3. The antenna system has two 
feedhorns that reduce the required antenna spin rate to a 
reasonable 6 rpm with overlapping focotprint coverage. A 
pre-dawn equator crossing is desired so that sampling occurs 
when the soil temperature and moisture profiles are at their 
most uniform; i.e., before solar-inducecl surface heating and 
evaporation occur. During the pre-dawn hours the extent of 
the ionosphere, and resulting Faraday rotation effects, are 
also at a minimum. A 6am/6pm equator crossing orbit is 
optimum for spacecraft power management since the solar 
panels can be fixed in orientation with respect to the sun. 
The orbit altitude ol' 450 km and beaim offset angle from 
nadir of 4.6" provide a swath width of 975 km. Due to earth 
curvature the incidence angle at the surface is 50". Global 
coverage is obtained in 3 days with this orbit and swath. 
The antenna one-way 3-dB footprint resolution is 30 x 46 
km. The radiometer measures the third Stokes parameter (U) 
in addition to the vertical (V) and horizontal (H) polariza- 
tions. This provides a capability fior Faraday rotation 
correction, enabling data from the 6pm orbit overpasses to 
be utilized in addition to data from the 6am overpasses [8]. 
The radar measures three polarization modes (VV, HH, and 
HV). These modes are required by the soil moisture retrieval 
algorithms in order to compensate fix surface roughness 
effects and to discriminate vegetation. 
Table 1. System Characteristics 
Antenna type Offset-fed, deployable, 
Reflector aperture 
diameter 
Number of feedhoms 
Swatlh width I 975 km 
Table 2 .  Radiometer Characteristics 
Frequency 1.41 GHz 
Polarizations V, H, U 
Accuracy 
Stabi.litv 0.5 K 
Resolution 
Data Rate 8 Kbpis 
4-1842 
Table 3. Radar Characteristics 
Frequency 
Polarizations 
Precision (12-100 looks) 
1.26 GHz 
VV, HH, HV 
1-0.5 dB 
Stability 1 0.2 dB 
Footprint Resolution 
Low-res 
High-res 
Noise Eauivalent oo 1 < -30 dB 
3-20 km 
1-3 km 
Coverage I 
Data Rate 16 Mbps peak, 5 Mbps 
As discussed in Section 4, the radar spatial resolution varies 
continuously across the swath as a fhction of the capability 
for synthetic aperture processing. For convenience, the outer 
(366-km) swath regions with resolution in the range 1-3 km 
are designated as “high-res”, and the center (244-km) portion 
of the swath with resolution in the range 3-20 km is 
designated as “low-res’’ (Figure 2). Global coverage at high 
resolution is not 100% achieved in 3 days due to the 
reduced swath. 
3. ANTENNASYSTEM 
Mesh Reflector 
The key antenna component is the lightweight deployable 
mesh reflector. Deployable mesh antennas are now mature 
technology with, extensive flight heritage in military and 
civilian space telecommunications. The reflectivity and 
transmission loss characteristics of mesh antennas have been 
studied in detail [9]. However the use of these antennas for 
remote sensing applications is novel and challenging. This 
is due to: (1) the requirements for radiometric precision and 
accuracy that demand a highly reflective and geometrically 
accurate mesh surface; and (2) the additional requirements 
for momentum compensation and spacecraft attitude control 
imposed by a large mechanically-scanned antenna. These 
aspects have been studied as part of an ongoing NASA 
instrument incubator technology task at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. The results of the study show that the radio- 
be, ..../.*’ 
Figure 2. Swath dimensions showing “high”- and 
“low”-resolution regions 
metric performance, momentum compensation, and attitude 
control capabilities of the antenna and spacecraft designs 
considered are more than adequate to meet the requirements 
of the mission under study. 
The mesh reflector design used for this study is the 
perimeter-truss design developed by TRW Astro. This 
design provides high surface accuracy and reflectivity up to 
40 GHz. The construction provides high stiffness, low 
mass, and high aerodynamic and solar transmissivity. A 
12.25-m-diameter version of this antenna was launched in 
October, 2000 on the commercial geosynchronous commu- 
nication satellite Thuraya-I. Figure 3 shows the 12.25-m 
reflector during ground testing in stowed and deployed 
configurations. 
A 6-m version of the perimeter-truss antenna design was 
considered for this study. An antenna subsystem design 
and structural analysis was performed, and the vibrational 
modes determined. From the centripetal acceleration at 6 
rpm there is a maximum deflection of no more than 4 mm 
at the far end of the antenna major axis. This can be 
corrected by the boom design in the final configuration. 
Based on the momentum compensation and attitude control 
system analyses carried out with candidate small-spacecraft 
platforms, no problems with pointing or stability are 
anticipated. 
The stowed 6-m antenna on the spacecraft bus can fit 
Figure 3. TRW Astro 12-25-m-diameter perimeter-truss reflector in stowed and deployed configurations 
4-1843 
Figure 4. Launch vehicle accommodation and deployment sequence 
comfortably within the Taurus launch vehicle. Figure 4 
shows schematically the stowed configuration within the 
launch vehicle and successive stages in the deployment 
sequence. 
Feedhoni Design 
A key aspect of the overall lightweight antenna design is the 
feedhom design and construction. Operating at L-band the 
feedhoms are necessarily large in dimension. As part of the 
instrument incubator task, a study was done to optimize the 
feedhom design and construction such that the volume and 
mass of the feedhorns are minimized while maintaining the 
beam performance (symmetry, gain, beam efficiency, cross- 
polarization) of the overall antenna system. Figure 5 shows 
a profiled corrugated horn design which provides the desired 
Conical corrugated horn geometry 
Sine-Protiled, R-220". r-75mm. s-0.2, qm-5 ,  r-0.06, p 0  9 
300 
250 
200 
150 - ; 100 - 
Center ayis (mm) 
Figure 5. Profiled corrugated hom geometry 
i i  
radiation patterns and has reasonable length. It has good 
overall performance in terms of symmetric patterns, edge 
taper, and low cross-polarization. A major portion of the 
mass is due to the corrugation walls. In this design the 
number of corrugations (14) and wall thickness (2.54 mm) 
are minilmized, and the mass contribution due to the 
corrugation walls is only 2.9 kg. The total feedhom mass 
is less thian 4.5 kg. 
4. RADAR PROCESSING 
The dimensions of the 3-dB antenna footprint on the surface 
essentially determine the spatial resolution of the radiometer 
measurements. The resolution of the radar measurements 
can be improved significantly by applying familiar signal 
processing techniques. Specifically, simultaneous range and 
Doppler discrimination can be employed to sub-divide the 
radar footprint into higher resolution pixels, as shown in 
Figure 6. This basic technique has been used extensively 
on previious SAR missions. In the present case, there are 
unique issues presented by the conically scanning geometry 
that malke the perfo&ance of the radar different from 
previously-flown systems [ 101. Because the antenna is 
rotating at 6 rpm, the footprint dwell time over the target 
region 11s much shorter than would be the case with a 
conventional side-looking system. This constrains the 
Doppler-dimension resolution to be on the order of one 
kilometer. This resolution, however, is adequate to address 
the desired global scale measurement of soil moisture, 
fieeze/thaw, and sea surface salinity, as discussed earlier. 
Furthermore, the relatively coarse resolution allows 
significant simplification of the radaI processing relative to 
conventional SAR systems. 
Another performance characteristic 1 hat results from the 
conically scanning geometry is the dependence of radar 
resolution on the antenna azimuth angle. As shown in 
4-1844 
- 1000 -500 0 500 1000 
East-West Range (km) 
Lines of Iso-Doppler 
* ‘ i > ’ :  ’ I ?  
Figure 6.  In the upper diagram, the iso-Doppler contours 
are shown for the radar scan geomety. The lower diagram 
illustrates how simultaneous range and Doppler discrimi- 
nation are used to achieve sub-footprint high resolution 
radar measurements. 
Figure 6 ,  the measurement pixels are delineated by the 
intersection of lines of iso-range and iso-Doppler on the 
surface. When the antenna is rotated to the side-looking 
position, these contours are perpendicular and the measure- 
ment cell is effectively rectangular. As the antenna is 
rotated forward or aft of this position, however, the Doppler 
contours rotate with respect to the range contours and the 
intersecting region which forms the measurement pixel is 
consequently elongated. This elongation effect continues to 
occur until, when the antenna is forward looking, the 
Doppler and range lines are parallel and two-dimension 
resolution of the surface is no longer possible. The ultimate 
implication of this “squint elongation effect” is that 
resolution is a function of cross-track position (i.e., distance 
from the subsatellite track). Near the subsatellite track, 
therefore, there is a region of swath where the desired higher 
resolution cannot be obtained, as shown in Figure 2 .  Note 
that in this “center gap” region lower resolution radar 
measurements are still obtained. For this system the center 
gap region is approximately 25% of the total swath. 
5. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT 
The combined passive and active L-band system described 
here has the potential for providing enhanced retrieval 
accuracies, at high spatial resolution, for measurements of 
soil moisture, freeze-thaw state, and ocean salinity under 
vaned surface conditions. To realize this potential, addi- 
tional algorithm development work is required that would 
involve optimal estimation techniques applied to the multi- 
channel multi-resolution data types. Few historical data sets 
currently exist of the type required for this analysis. New 
experimental data have been acquired recently using the 
Passive-Active L-/S-band (PALS) airborne sensor which 
was flown for the first time during the SGP99 field 
experiment in Oklahoma [ 111, and over the Atlantic Ocean 
Gulf Stream [12], in summer 1999. Synthetic data sets can 
also be generated to analyze the effects of temporal and 
spatial sampling, spatial resolution, instrument noise, and 
model uncertainty on the scientific utility of the retrievals 
[4], [13]. These efforts are continuing and will be expanded 
in the near future. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has described an innovative system for passive 
and active spacebome sensing at L-band. The system uses a 
large-aperture reflector antenna, optimized for low mass and 
low stowed volume, and providing the on-orbit spatial 
resolution, swath width, global coverage, measurement 
accuracy and stability required by the scientific objectives of 
the mission. The analysis of the baseline system design 
indicates that the system is feasible and can provide the 
performance characteristics desired. The concept fits within 
the scope of the Earth System Science Pathfinder (ESSP) 
program which focuses on low-cost research missions with 
rapid development and implementation paths. The system 
would contribute important new measurements on soil 
moisture, freeze-thaw, and ocean salinity for applications in 
Earth science and global change. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work represents one phase of research carried out at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Califomia Institute of Technol- 
ogy, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
4-1845 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 NASA, Understanding Earth System Change: NASA ’s 
Earth Science Enterprise Research Strategy 2000-201 0, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washing- 
ton, DC, 2000. 
[2] NASA, Exploring Our Home Planet: The Earth Science 
Enterprise Strategic Plan, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Washington, DC, 2000. 
[ 3 ]  E. Njoku, W. Wilson, S. Yueh, R. Freeland, R. Helms, 
K. Oxnevad, T. Campbell, W. Lawrence, Y. Rahmat-Samii, 
H. Feingold, G. Didinsky, J. Rauwolf, “Large deployable- 
mesh antenna system for ocean salinity and soil moisture 
sensing,” Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, Big Sky, MT, March 18-25, 2000. 
[4] E. Njoku, W. Wilson, S. Yueh, and Y. Rahmat-Samii, 
“A large-antenna microwave radiometer-scatterometer 
concept for ocean salinity and soil moisture sensing,” IEEE 
Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens., (November, 2000, in press). 
[5] T. Jackson (Ed.), “Soil Moisture Mission (EX-4),” 
Report of the NASA Post-2002 Land Surface Hydrology 
Planning Workshop, Imine, CA, April 12-14, 1999, NASA 
Land Surface Hydrology Program (LHSP), 1999, 
htto:!ilsh!,.~sfc.nas~.~~~~. 
[6] D. Cline (Ed.), “Cold Land Processes Mission (EX-7),” 
Report gf the NASA Post-2002 Land Surface Hvdrology 
Planning Workshop, Imine, CA, April 12-14, 1999, NASA 
Land Surface Hydrology Program (LHSP), 1999 
h t tp : / / l shn .~sfc .n~s~.~~)v .  
[7] G. Lagerloef (Ed.), “Preliminary assessment of the 
scientific and technical merits for salinity remote sensing 
from satellite,” Final Report of the First Workshop, 
Salinity Sea Ice Working Group, La Jolla, CA, 7-8 
Februar): 1998, httr,::”www.esr.org. 
[8] S. Yueh, “Estimates of Faraday rotation with passive 
microwave polarimetry for microwave remote sensing of 
Earth surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens., vol. 38, 
pp. 2434-2438, 2000. 
[9] W. Imbriale, V. Galindo-Israel, and Y. Rahmat-Samii, 
“On the reflectivity of complex mesh surfaces,” IEEE 
Trans. Antennas. and Propagat., vol. AP-39, pp. 
1352-1365, 1991. 
[lo] M. W. Spencer, W.-Y. Tsai, and D. G. Long, “High 
resolution scatterometery by simultaneous rangeDoppler 
discrimination,” Proceedings of the 2000 International 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS 2000), 
Honolulu, HI, 2000. 
[ l l ]  E. Njoku, W. Wilson, S. Yueh, T. Jackson, and V. 
Lakshmi, “Soil moisture and vegetation observations during 
SGP99 using the PALS airborne microwave radiometer- 
radar system,” Proceedings of the 2000 International 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS 2000), 
Honolulu. HI, 2000. 
[12] S. Yueh, W. Wilson, E. Njoku, I;. Li, and R. West, 
“Retrieval modeling and error sources for microwave remote 
sensing of ocean surface salinity,” Proceedings of the 2000 
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Sjmposium 
(IGARSS 2000), Honolulu, HI, 2000. 
[13] E. Njoku, Y. Rahmat-Samii, J. Sercel, W. Wilson, and 
M. Moghaddam, “Evaluation of an inflatable antenna 
concept for microwave remote sensing of soil moisture and 
ocean salinity,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens., vol. 37, 
pp. 63-78, 1999. 
Eni G Njoku (M1.75-SM’X3-F’95) 
received the B.A. degree in Natural 
and Electricail Sciences from 
Cambridge University in 1972, and 
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in ’ 
Electrical Engineering from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technol- 
ogy in 1974 and 1976, respectively. 
He joined JE‘L in 1977. His 
research interests involve modeling, 
experiments and system design 
studies related to microwave sensing of land and oce& 
surfaces from space. He is a science team member for the 
Advanced Microwave Scanning Radilometer (AMSR) on 
Aqua and ADEOS-I1 to be launched in 2001 and 2002. His 
current research includes soil moisture sensing using 
combined passive and active techniques, and advanced 
technology studies of large-aperture delployable antennas for 
spaceborne microwave sensing. He has held teaching 
positions at the Institute of Management and Technology, 
Enugu, Nigeria (1 980-8 l), and Harvey Mudd College, 
Claremont, CA (1984-86). From 1986 to 1990 he was 
Discipline Scientist for Ocean and Earth Science Data 
Systems at NASA Headquarters, Waslllington, DC. From 
1993 to 1994 he served as Manager of the Geology and 
Planetology Section at JPL. Dr. N j o h  is a Fellow of the 
IEEE. He served as Associate Editor of the IEEE Transac- 
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (1985-1988), and 
was the Technical Program Chairman for the 1994 IEEE 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS’94). 
He has been a recipient of NASA Group Achievement 
Awards in 1980, 1982, and 1985, and was awarded the 
NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1’985. 
Yunjin Kim received the Ph. D. 
degree from the University of 
Pennsylvania in 1987. From 1987 
to 1989, he was with the Depart- 
ment of Electrical Engineering, 
New Jersey Institute of Technol- 
ogy, as an Assistant Professor. 
Since 1989, he has been with the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Currently, Dr. Kim is the radar 
science and engineering section 
4-1846 
manager at Jet propulsion Laboratory. He is also an millimeter-wave radiometers and radar systems for aircraft 
Associate Editor of Radio Science. His current research area and spacecraft for Earth remote sensing applications. Dr. 
includes SAR polarimetry and interferometry, SAR data Wilson is a Senior Research Scientist at JPL, a Fellow of 
calibration and processing, SAR data applications, radar the IEEE and has published more than 150 technical papers 
system engineering, electromagnetic scattering, and and reports. 
advanced radar technology development. He received the 
NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1995. 
Michael W. Spencer received the B.S. degree in Physics 
from the College of William and Mary in 1985, and the 
M.S. degree in Planetary Science from the Califomia 
Institute of Technology. Through an employer sponsored 
program, he received the M.S. degree in electrical engineer- 
ing from the University of Southem California in 1995, and 
is currently completing a Ph.D. in electrical engineering at 
Brigham Young University. He is currently employed at 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the Radar Science and 
Engineering Section. 
Wu-Yang Tsai received the Ph.D. Degree in theoretical 
physics from Harvard University, Cambridge, MA in 197 1. 
He has performed research in high energy physics, classical 
and quantum electrodynamics, electromagnetic scattering, 
propagation and radiation, high-density plasma fusion, 
high-altitude nuclear explosion phenomenology, radiative 
heat transfer, synthetic aperture radar, and currently, on all 
aspects of scatterometer design, algorithm development and 
science applications. He co-authored a graduate level text 
book with Julian Schwinger et. al, Classical Electrodynam- 
ics. He joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 
in 1987. He is currently a Principal Engineer at JPL, and is 
the Project Engineer of SeaWinds on QuikSCAT (QSCAT), 
SeaWinds on ADEOS-2 (Seawinds), and advanced 
scatterometer projects. He is also the Group Supervisor of 
the Scatterometer System Engineering Group in the Radar 
Science and Engineering Section of JPL. 
I 
William J. Wilson received his 
B.S.E.E. degree from the Univer- 
sity of Washington, Seattle, in 
1961, and his M.S.E.E., E.E., and 
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineer- 
ing from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cam- 
bridge, in 1963, 1964, and 1970, 
respectively. In 1964 he served in 
the U.S. Air Force, working on 
military communication satellites. 
In 1970 he joined the Aerospace Corporation, Los Angeles, 
CA, and was involved in the design and construction of the 
millimeter-wave receivers and radio astronomy observations. 
In 1976/1977 he was an Assistant Professor in the 
Electrical Engineering Department at the University of 
Texas in Austin. He returned to Aerospace in 1977, where 
he was involved with research in millimeter-wave radiome- 
ters and low-noise receivers. In 1980 he joined the staff of 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, and is 
the Supervisor of the Microwave Advanced Systems Group. 
At JPL, he has been working on low-noise microwave and 
Simon H. Yueh received the SB 
(1982) and SM (1984) from the 
Electrical Engineering Department 
of the National Taiwan University, 
Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree in 
Electrical Engineering in 1991 from 
Massachusetts Institute of Technol- 
ogy. He was a postdoctoral research 
associate at Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology from February to 
August, 1991. He developed 
various techniques for the calibration of polarimetric radars 
and theoretical models for the remote sensing of rough 
surfaces and vegetation. In 1991, he joined the Radar 
Science and Engineering Section at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. At JPL, he has been working on advanced 
active and passive microwave techniques for ocean surface 
remote sensing. He has been the Principal Investigator and 
Co-Investigator of numerous NASA and NPOESS projects 
on ocean surface research. He has authored four book 
chapters and published 40 refereed articles and more than 
100 conference papers. His current fields of interest include 
techniques and instrument developments for microwave 
remote sensing of soil moisture, ocean surface salinity, 
ocean winds, and polar ice and theories for active and 
passive microwave remote sensing. He received the 1995 
IEEE GRSS Transaction Prize Paper award for a paper on 
polarimetric radiometry. He also received the 1998 JPL 
Director Lew Allen Award for Excellence in recognition for 
his pioneering research of passive microwave polarimetric 
remote sensing to earth surface investigations. 
Jakob J. van Zyl (S'85-MS6- 
SM'95-F'99) was bom in Outjo, 
Namibia in 1957. He received the 
Hons. B. Eng. degree cum luude 
in electronics engineering from the 
University of Stellenbosch, 
Stellenbosch, South Africa, in 
1979, and also received the 
Siemens prize for best achievement 
in the graduating class from the 
electrical engineering department. 
He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 
engineering from the Califomia Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, in 1983 and 1986, respectively. Dr. van Zyl 
received the 1997 Fred Nathanson Memorial Radar Award 
to the Young Engineer of the Year from the IEEE Aerospace 
and Electronics Systems Society. In 1984 he was the 
recipient of a Schlumberger Foundation fellowship. He was 
teaching assistant for a course on "Physics of Remote 
Sensing" at the Califomia Institute of Technology from 
1983 to 1986. He joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, Califomia in 1986, where he worked as a research 
4-1847 
scientist (1986-1990), the supervisor of the Airborne SAR 
Group (1 990- 1995), the Manager of the Radar Science and 
Engineering Section (1995-1998), and the Deputy Manager 
of the Earth Science Flight Projects Office (1998-2000). At 
present he is the Manager of the Earth Science Flight 
Missions and Experiments Office at JPL. Dr. van Zyl 
teaches “Remote Sensing Systems from Space” during the 
fall semester at the University of Southern California as an 
adjunct Faculty Member in the Aerospace Engineering 
Department, as well as part of a Short Course “Synthetic 
Aperture Radar: Understanding the Imagery” at UCLA. Dr. 
van Zyl has contributed to ten books and published more 
than forty papers in peer reviewed journals. 
Yahya Rahmat-Samii (S’73-M’75- 
SM’79-F’85) is a Professor of 
Electrical Engineering at the 
University of California, Los 
Angeles (UCLA). He was a Senior 
Research Scientist at NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory/California 
Institute of Technology before 
joining UCLA. He was a Guest 
Professor at the Technical Univer- 
sity of Denmark (TUD) in the 
summer of 1986. He has also been a consultant to many 
aerospace companies. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. 
degrees in Electrical Engineering from the University of 
Illinois, LJrbana-Champaign. 
Dr. Rahniat-Samii was the 1995 President and 1994 Vice- 
President of IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society. He 
was appointed an IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society 
Distinguished Lecturer and presented lectures intemation- 
ally. Dr. Itahmat-Samii was elected as a Fellow of IEEE in 
1985 and a Fellow of IAE in 1986. He was also a member 
of the Strategic Planning and Review Committee (SPARC) 
of IEEE. He has been the guest and plenary session speaker 
at many national and international symposia. He was one of 
the direclors and Vice President of the Antennas Measure- 
ment Techniques Association (AMTA) for three years. He 
has been editor and guest editor of many technical journals 
and book publication entities. He has also served as 
Chairman and Co-chairman of several national and 
international symposia. Dr. Rahmat-Samii was also a 
member of UCLA’s Graduate council for a period of three 
years. 
Dr. Rabat-Samii has authored and co-authored over 450 
technical joumal articles and conference papers and has 
written fburteen book chapters. He is the co-author of two 
books entitled, Electromagnetic Optimization by Genetic 
Algorithms, and Impedance Boundary Conditions in 
Electromagnetics published in 1999 and 1995, respectively. 
He is also the holder of several patents. He has had 
pioneering research contributions in diverse areas of 
electromagnetics, antennas, measurement and diagnostics 
techniques, numerical and asymptotic methods, satellite and 
personal communications and humadantenna interactions, 
etc. (visit http://www.antlab.ee.ucla.edu). For his contribu- 
tions, Dr. Rahmat-Samii has received numerous NASA and 
JPL Certificates of Recognition. In 1984 he was the 
recipient of the prestigious Henry Booker Award of URSI. 
In 1992 and 1995, he was the recipient of the Best Applica- 
tion Paper Award (Wheeler Award) for papers published in 
the 1991 and 1993 PEEE AP-S Transactions. In 1993, 94 
and 95, three of his Ph.D. students were named the Most 
Outstanding Ph.D. Students at UCLA’s School of Engineer- 
ing and Applied Science. Five others received various 
Student Paper Awards at the 1993, 1996, 1997 and 1998 
IEEE AI’-S/URSI Symposiums. He has recently been 
selected as one of the recipients of the IEEE Millennium 
Medals. Dr. Rahmat-Samii is a member of Commissions 
A, B and J of USNUURSI, AMTA, Sigma Xi, Eta Kappa 
Nu and the Electromagnetics Academy. He is listed in 
Who’s Who in America, Who’s Who in Frontiers of Science 
and Technology and Who’s Who in Engineering. In 1999, 
he was the recipient of Distinguished Alumni Award of the 
University of Illinois, ECE. In 2000, he was the recipient of 
the IEEE Third Millennium Medal and the AMTA Distin- 
guished Achievement Award. 
Mark W Thomson is Chief 
Engineer, Deployable Antennas, 
TRW Astro Aerospace. He leads 
the design and development of 
deployable satellite antenna 
structures. He conceived and 
developed the Thuraya 12-meter and 
Inmarsat 1V 9-meter AstroMesh 
main reflecton and the 15-meter 
RadarSAT deployable SAR array. 
He holds eight patents in the field, 
and has published over twenty tech&:ai papers concerning 
deployable structures for spacecraft. 
4-1848 
