Phased-Array Antenna System for the 
MESSENGER Deep Space Mission1 
Robert E. Wallis 
The Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory 
11 100 Johns Hopkins Rd. 
Laurel, MD 20723 
240-228-3 836 
bob.wallis:2,ihuavl.edu 
Abstract - MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, 
GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) is the latest 
NASA Discovery mission managed by The Johns Hopkins 
University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL). 
MESSENGER is a mission to orbit the least explored 
terrestrial planet, Mercury. 
MESSENGER'S high-data-rate downlink will use the first 
electronically scanned phased-array antenna for a deep- 
space telecommunication application. Measured results for 
the lightweight phased-array antenna and the high- 
efficiency Solid State Power Amplifiers (SSPAs), 
developed by JHU/APL, are presented. Two functional 
amplifiers within the X-band SSPAs provide output power 
that is scalable ftom 11 to 15 watts without major design 
changes. 
Five different hybrid microcircuits, including high-efficiency 
Heterostructure Field Effect Transistor (HFET) amplifers 
and Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuit (MMIC) phase 
shifters have been developed for use within the SSPAs. A 
highIy efficient packaging approach enables the integration 
of a large number of hybrid circuits into a SSPA with a mass 
less than 450 g. The hybrids and the hermetic package are 
generic and are suitable for a wide range of space 
applications beyond the MESSENGER program. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SYSTEMOVERVJEW 
3. PHASED-ARRAY ANTENNA DESIGN 
4. POWER hlF'LIFIER DESIGN 
5. BWSBOARD TEST RESULT 
6. KA-BANDOPTION 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, 
and Ranging (MESSENGER) mission is being designed to 
orbit and study the plant Mercury. After launching in 
Sheng Cheng 
The Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory 
11 100 Johns Hopkins Rd 
Laurel, MD 20723 
sheiig.cheng6@hmpl.edu 
240-228-5 117 
March 2004, the MESSENGER spacecraft will perform 
flybys of Venus and Mercury before going .into orbit 
around the planet in April 2009. Science data collection 
concludes in April 2010. 
The inner planet trajectory of the MESSENGER mission 
results in the need for a high-gain downlink to Earth in all 
directions around the spacecraft. In addition, the extreme 
thermal environment causes distortions to the antenna 
pattern of the traditional parabolic antennas. Phased-array 
antennas have had limited application in the deep-space 
community to date but one-dimensional electronically 
scanned antennas eliminate the use of deployed 
components and gimbal dish antennas and offer benefits of 
high-gain, low mass, and graceful degradation. This paper 
provides a review of the MESSENGER telecommunication 
system being developed by The Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) with emphasis on 
the lightweight phased-array antenna system and high- 
efficiency Solid State Power Amplifiers (SSPAs). 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
MESSENGER is a three-axis, zero-biased, momentum- 
controlled spacecraft. The spacecraft uses a fixed thermal 
shade to maintain the interior of the spacecraft near room 
temperature. Spacecraft attitude control ensures that the 
s p a c e d  is oriented with the Sun shade always facing the 
Sun. During cruise phase, the spacecraft is oriented with 
the axis of the solar panels aligned with the ecliptic plane. 
Once on orbit around Mercury, the spacecraft is rotated 
about the spacecraft-Sun line to allow viewing of Mercury's 
surface by the science instruments. 
During data downlink periods the spacecraft is rotated 
again about the spacecraft-Sun line so that the one- 
dimensional scanning phased-array antennas can be pointed 
at the Earth. Two lightweight phased arrays are used for the 
high-gain downlink. Medium-gain and low-gain antennas 
are used for uplink and low-gain downlink during cruise 
phase and emergency. Figure 1 shows the coverage area for 
the array antennas relative to the spacecraft orientation. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
._- - 
-- a 1-41 
Phased Array Antenna 
Scans f 45" in One Axis sun \ 
+X 
(Top View of Spacecraft) 
Figure 1. Phase-Array Antenna Coverage 
The broadside beams of the two opposing phased arrays are 
at 4 5 O  angles fiom the spacecraft-Sun line. As shown in the 
figure each phased-array antenna provides :k 45O scan 
capability. By rotating the spacecraft about the spacecraft- 
Sun line, full 471 steradian coverage is achieved. 
The MESSENGER telecommunication system is designed 
to transmit the mission science data, receive spacecraft 
comniands fiom Earth, and provide high-precision 
navigation data. As these are spacecraft-critical functions, 
the architecture for the telecommunication system must be 
redundant and immune fiom any credible single-point 
failure. The MESSENGER RF telecommunication system 
block diagram, shown in Figure 2, uses two Small Deep 
Space Transponders (SDSTs) cross-strapped to the forward 
and aft SSPAs. The SDSTs, manufactured by Motorola, 
provide the command, telemetry, and navigation capability. 
Within each SSPA are two functional amplifiers, which 
will be referred to as the distributed and lumped power 
amplifiers. The distributed power amplifier provides 1.4-W 
nominal drive level into each of the eight array antenna 
inputs. The lumped power amplifier provides an 11-W X- 
band output to the fan beam antenna and low-gain horn 
antennas. A set of RF switches following the diplexer 
allows either receiver or lumped SSPA to be connected 
with either forward or aft fan beams or low-gain antennas. 
This architecture provides cross-strapping for all 
components except for the distributed power amplifiers 
which are dedicated to their respective phased-amy 
antennas. The distributed power amplifier provides a 
gracelid degradation in case of an amplifier element failure. 
Even if a complete array failure occurs, on board solid-state 
recorders can store the science data for later downlink with 
the other array. 
LGA 
SDST #1 (-Y) 
LGA 
(-a 
Fanbeam 
(-Y> 
Fanbeam 
(+Y) 
(+Y) 
(+Z> 
LGA 
LGA 
SDST #2 
Figure 2. MESSENGER RF Telecommunication System 
1-42 
System Performance Summary 
Table 1 provides a summary of the key characteristics for 
the JHu/ApL MESSENGER phased-array communication 
system. In the SSPA functional area, we have integrated 
phased-array modules and a conventional SSPA with the 
efficiency and mass properties of existing X-band deep 
space SSPAs. Similarly, the 2.9-kg MESSENGER antenna 
compares favorably with traditional parabolic reflector 
technology. Single-axis-gimbal dish antennas with similar 
gain to the array, gimbal drive electronics, and launch lock 
mechanisms have an estimated mass of 4.5 to 6 kg. The 
MESSENGER phased-array antenna provides a mass 
advantage without the need for deployment mechanisms. 
Given a phased array SSPA output power of 41 dBm, cable 
losses of 1.0 dB, and an antenna gain of 27 dBic, the 
effective isotropic radiated power for the system is 67 dl3m. 
Phased-array antenna 
Polarizer 
Arrav mounting date 
Table 1. Phased-Array Performance Summary 
1 Mass 1 DCpower 1 
0.58 
0.32 
1.23 
Component (kg) I 
SSPA 42 
Coax to waveguide adapters I 0.08 I 
Radome I 0.32 I 
I 1 
3. PHASED-ARRAY ANTENNA DESIGN 
The severe thermal environment requires that the fixed 
thermal shade remain pointed at the Sun at all times. This 
restriction in spacecraft orientation precludes the use of a 
fixed high gain antenna and spacecraft maneuvering to 
achieve Earth pointing. However, rotation about the 
spacecraft-Sun line is still permitted. The ability of the 
spacecraft to rotate reduces the array scanning requirement 
fkom a two-dimensional scan to a one-dimensional scan. 
Array scanning in the broad beam plane requires the least 
number of cabled connections between the power 
amplifiers and the array and thus minimizes mass 
compared to narrow beam plane scanning. The one- 
dimensional scanning in combination with spacecraft 
rotation allows an Earth downlink for all Sun-Earth- 
spacecraft angles. In addition, the extreme thermal 
environment precludes the use of active radiating elements. 
Since the uplink data rate is typically very low, the phased 
array is needed for high-data-rate downlink only. Thus, the 
design requirements allow a relatively simple narrow-band, 
one-dimensional scan with no active radiating elements. 
Figure 3 shows the brassboard standing-wave array antenna 
comprised of eight waveguide "sticks" with 18 radiating 
slots cut in the narrow walls of the waveguides. 
Approximate dimensions for this array are 2 1 1 by 8 13 mm. 
Testing of the brassboard array at broadside and 45O-scan 
was facilitated by hand-trimming coaxial cables to produce 
the desired phase shift. 
Figure 3. Breadboard Phased Array Antenna 
(Dimensions: 211 by 813 mm) 
Figure 4 shows the measured antenna pattern at broadside 
and 4 5 O  beam scan. Scan loss at 4 5 O  was within a few 
tenths of a dB of the ideal -1.5 dB. The beamwidth of the 
array is relatively large (12 x 3O), which helps to minimize 
distortion due to thermal effects. The baseline flight array 
design uses 26 radiating slots, is approximately 21 1 by 737 
mm, and has a projected mass of 580 g. 
An additional benefit of the array antenna for the 
downlink is its graceful degradation with failed amplifier 
modules. Numerical simulations have shown for a small 
number of failed modules, the effective isotropic radiated 
power (EIRP) is reduced by 20 log ( d n ) ,  where m is the 
number of working modules and n is the total number of 
modules. In the case of one failed amplifier module out of 
eight, this expression indicates a 1.16 dB reduction in 
EIRP. 
-- -> 1-43 
Measured Antenna Patterns 
JV I I 
-120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 
Angle Off Boresight (deg.) 
0 Degree Scan - - - - 45 Degree Scan I I- 
Figure 4. Breadboard Antenna Scan Pattern 
This reduction can be thought of as 0.58 dB less available 
transmit power and a 0.58 reduction in directivity or 
effective aperture area. The simulations have also shown 
that while the sidelobe levels increase with amplifier 
module failures, the direction of the beam is unchanged, 
therefore requiring no adjustment of the beam steering 
algorithm. 
The inherent polarization of the slotted waveguide array is 
linear polarization, which results in a 3-dB power loss 
when transmitting to the circularly-polarized Deep Space 
Network (DSN) ground stations. While the linearly- 
polarized array satisfies the mission science data rate 
requirements, a circularly-polarized array could double that 
data rate. To achieve this enhancement JHU/APL has 
researched techniques to produce circular polarization from 
a slotted waveguide array. Where possible we wanted to 
preserve the inherent advantages of the slotted ; m y .  These 
advantages include low mass, low loss, broad scanning 
capability, and high-temperature operation. 
We have focused our work on the design of external 
polarizers, which can be used with the slotted waveguide 
array. The baseline polarizer design uses parasitic radiating 
elements to produce circular polarization. This all-metal 
design is very tolerant of MESSENGER'S wide temperature 
range and is easily manufactured. This design has shown 
promising results for a single waveguide stick, and we are 
proceeding with a full .array implementation. Dielectric 
materials with very high operating-temperature 
characteristics have been identified for use in a meander- 
line polarizer. If significant problems are encountered with 
the parasitic element approach in the full array 
implementation, an alternative approach is the use of a 
multi-layer meander-line polarizer. 
The medium-gain antenna (MGA) uses a single waveguide 
stick, like those in the array, to form a fan beam. The low- 
gain antenna (LGA) uses an open-ended waveguide 
antenna to provide broader beam width. More information 
on the: LGA antenna is provided in [ 13. 
Radome 
The fixward phased array transmits through an opening in 
the Sun shade. A radome, mounted to the Sun shade, must 
block sunlight, have good RF transmission clharacteristics 
over a1 h45" angle of incidence, and have little performance 
change over the temperature range of -100 to +300"C. 
Finally it is highly desirable to have low polarization 
distortion to maximize the data return if circular 
polarization is implemented. This means that the horizontal 
and vertical components of amplitude and phase should 
track each other over scan angle and temperature. 
The design of the radome began with selection of thermal 
blanket materials with good transmission Characteristics. 
Thermal blankets have inherent advantages. They are 
lightweight and space-qualified materials. A three-layer 
sandwich was investigated consisting of 0.25-mm-thick 
Nextel 3 12 cloth outer layers and an inner layer of QFiber 
Felt. The felt is a low-density silica fiber material with low 
dielectric constant and loss tangent. The thickness of the 
silica fiber material is chosen to cancel reflections from the 
Nextel layers. Ideally this thickness is about a quarter 
wavelength, but this dimension is optimized with a genetic 
algorithm to provide good polarization tracking over the 
range of incidence angles. 
The chosen materials result in a very robust design. The 
dielectric constant and loss tangent of the silica fiber 
material are very low and change little with temperature. 
The thinness of the Nextel layers makes the design less 
sensitive to uncertainties or changes in its electrical 
properties. Figure 5 shows the predicted power 
transmission at 8.4 GHz as a function of the angle of 
incidence for horizontal and vertical polarization. Excellent 
loss and polarization tracking are shown for angles of 
incidence between 0 and h45". Subsequent measured data 
agreed well with the predicted data. 
4. POWER AMPLIFIER DESIGN 
As previously described, each MESSENGER SSPA 
includes two different X-band power amplitier sections, 
i.e., a lumped power amplifier with a single 11-W output 
and a distributed power amplifier with eight 1.4-W outputs. 
Only one of these two amplifiers is powered, depending on 
the antenna selected. A digital controller receives beam- 
steering commands fiom the spacecraft main processor and 
provides the phase-shifter settings for the eight distributed 
power amplifiers. 
1-44 
Lumped Amplifier I 
I 100% I 
I n  1 $98% 
i 
! MESSFNGFR Radome 
/ 90% 
! 0 20 40 60 80 1001 
I Scan Angle IDeszrees) i 
Horizontal Pol. - - - - Vertical Pol. I 1 
_____-_____ - '  
Figure 5. Radome Transmission Loss Versus Scan Angle 
This unit also transfers telemetry data from the SSPA to the 
spacecraft. A dedicated, external power conditioning unit 
(PCU) supplies approximately 42 W of secondary DC 
power to the SSPA. The SSPA is mounted inside the 
spacecraft where the base plate temperatures are expected 
to be between -30 and +65"C. This temperature range is 
achieved using the Sun shade and passive radiators. 
A block diagram of the SSPA is shown in Figure 6. A 
parallel line coupler divides the input.signa1 for the lumped 
and distributed amplifiers. The lumped amplifier consists of 
a Gallium Arsenide Monolithic Microwave Integrated 
Circuit (GaAs MMIC) amplifier, a 2.4-mm Heterostructure 
Field Effect Transistors (HFET) driver amplifier, and a 
power amplifier stage. Four MMIC power amplifiers, 
arranged in balanced configuration using a four-way 
dividedcombiner, comprise the power amplifier stage of 
the lumped amplifier section. 
The same MMIC amplifier and HFET driver amplifier are 
used in the distributed amplifier. This arrangement is 
illustrated in the block diagrams by using different colors 
for different device types. The distributed amplifier starts 
with the MMIC amplifier followed by an eight-way 
divider. At each output of the divider are an MMIC phase 
shifter, two MMIC amplifiers, a 2.4-mm HFET driver 
amplifier, and a 4.8-mm WET power amplifier. Isolators 
are used at all outputs of the SSPA to protect the power 
amplifier stages during testing as well as to ensure stable 
power amplifier performance. All active microwave 
devices used in the SSPA, including the MMICs and 
HFETs, are fiom Triquint. 
Both the lumped and the distributed amplifiers are expected 
to exhibit greater than 30% DC to RF efficiency while 
working at the specified output power level. To meet these 
requirements over the temperature range that will be 
Distributed Amplifier 
Figure 6. SSPA RF Section 
encountered, the SSPA design employs two temperature 
compensation schemes. The first scheme adjusts the DC 
supply voltage to the power amplifier stage as the 
temperature varies to compensate for the output power- 
capacity change of the power device. The other scheme 
uses a temperature-compensating attenuator to provide 
constant gain. Extensive temperature testing of the lumped 
and distributed amplifiers during the brassboard phase will 
be performed to collect data for the temperature- 
compensation design. The nominal SSPA supply voltage is 
selectable to provide easy adjustment of the SSPA output 
power within the range of 11 to 15 W. 
Power Amplifer Packaging 
The MESSENGER SSPA packaging design leverages 
proven high-reliability microwave integrated circuit (MIC) 
and hybrid construction techniques to optimize mass, 
producibility and thermal path for the active devices. 
Maintaining a good thermal path allows minimum device 
operating temperature, which enhances performance and 
reliability. GaAs MMICs and HFETs are procured in die 
form and installed in hybrid microcircuits. The use of die 
form parts, as opposed to commercially available packaged 
parts, allows a wider range of parts to be considered, and 
allows device selection for optimum SSPA efficiency. 
As the packaging design was developed, careful 
consideration was given to the manufacturing and 
screening aspects of the circuits within the SSPA. 
Screening of the circuits consists of a sequence of electrical 
and environmental tests designed to eliminate devices 
which do not meet performance requirements. The 
traditional approach of using packaged semiconductors 
places the burden and risk of screening on the device 
supplier. The use of devices in die form required JHWAPL 
. _jnt 1-45 - .-- 
to consider the screening of the devices as an integral part 
of the microwave circuit design. Two fundamentally 
different approaches referred to as multi-chip and single- 
chip hybrids were considered. Descriptions of these 
approaches and the associated tradeoffs follow. 
The multi-chip module approach consists of one large 
hybrid assembly, which includes the lumped and 
distributed SSPA functions. A laser-welde'd hermetic 
aluminum chassis contains chip-and-wire-based microwave 
circuits. This approach results in the highest level of 
integration and results in the least mass and volume. In 
addition, the number of screened hybrids and test fvrtures 
are minimized. However, with the higher level of 
integration comes increased non-recurring engineering 
(NRE) for the hermetic package and increased touch labor 
learning with a more complex hybrid. Since MEJSSENGER 
requires only two SSPAs, the reduced scrceening and 
recurring costs of this approach were outweighed by the 
increased development costs. A larger production volume 
is required for this approach to be economically attractive. 
Finally, placing the risk of screening failures at the end of 
the SSPA assembly sequence is highly undesirable in a 
schedule-critical program. 
The single-chip hybrid approach consists of single function 
hybrids containing only one active device. This approach 
requires a total of 47 hybrid circuits per SSPA. Figure 7 
shows a versatile hybrid package, designed by JHU/APL, 
that accommodates each of the five circuit designs and 
enables integration of the hybrids into a high-density 
layout. By designing a single common hermetic package, 
NRE costs for the package and associated test fixtures are 
minimized. Since the hybrids contain very few 
components, assembly and screening yields are high. Any 
defects are discovered by screening &er the rninimum in 
elapsed schedule and value-added labor. Finally, the 
JHU/APL package and single-chip hybrids are generic and 
more likely to be reused in a wide range of space 
applications beyond the MESSENGER program than the 
custom multi-chip hybrid described previously. The single- 
chip hybrid is the chosen approach. 
f I i 
~~ CeramicFeed , , I I I---- 
Throughand RF Lead , I I 11 K d i e e d  
Through and 
DC Leads 
Figure 7. Microwave Hybrid Package 
Dimensions in mm 
As part of the tradeoff analysis between the multi-chip and 
single-chip hybrid approaches, a higher level packaging 
concept was needed for the single-chip hybrid approach. 
Figure 8 shows the layout of the SSPA. The layout shows a 
highly efficient integration of the lumped and distributed 
SSPAs functions, the hybrids that comprise them, and a 
digital controller. The mass estimate for this 260 by 130 by 
13 mm assembly is 440 g. This mass compares favorably 
with the mass of existing X-band multi-chip hybrid SSPAs, 
which suggests that there need not be a mass penalty for the 
single-chip hybrid approach. 
Eight 
Lumped Distributed 
Amplifier 
r t c  J 
Figure 8. SSPA Layout 
Dimensions in mm 
Power Amplifzer Line-up 
The MESSENGER SSPA design achieves high efficiency 
and small size without custom MMIC devices. The use of 
commercially available devices with established reliability 
allowed rapid development and verification of the hybrid 
circuit designs. Available packaged devices would not 
simul1:aneously meet the efficiency and output power 
requirements of the SSPA. MMIC and discrete die devices 
provide excellent performance, but the packaging, 
fabrication, and screening issues are often a deterrent to the 
SSPA manufacturer. These issues are " i z e d  by using a 
small number of device types in the line-up and by re-using 
the devices throughout the line-up. 
The electrical design of the SSPA began by selecting 
suitable devices for the output stages, then working toward 
the inputs. Figure 9a shows the line up of one of the eight 
amplifier chains in the distributed amplifier. The output and 
driver stages are discrete MIC amplifiers, designed by 
JHU/APL, using the TGF4250 4.8-mm and TGF4240 
2.4-mm HFETs, respectively. The supplier's data sheet for 
the 4.8-mm HFET shows 34 dBm output power and 53% 
power-added efficiency with +8 V drain bias. 
1-46 
This device is operated at +6 V in order to reduce the total 
DC power consumption while maintaining high efficiency. 
Load-pull measurements were utilized when designing this 
output stage, as well as its driver. The 4.8-mm to 2.4-mm 
output to driver ratio of the amplifiers insures the driver 
stage has sufficient output power capacity when driving the 
final stage, making the amplifier less sensitive to gain 
variations versus temperatwe as well as life and normal 
device variations across the wafer lot. 
The 2.4-mm HFET is rated at 31.5 dBm output power and 
56% efficiency with +8 V drain bias. This device is 
operated at +5 V in order to maintain high efficiency at the 
required output power. Driving the 2.4-mm HFET 
amplifier are two cascaded TGA88lO MMlC amplifiers. 
These amplifiers have 17 dB of gain and 17 dBm of output 
power. The TGP6336 Mh4IC is a five-bit phase shifter with 
9-dB typical insertion loss. Only the first four most- 
significant bits of the phase shifter are necessary to provide 
less than 0.1 dB quantization loss while steering the 
phased-array antenna. These phase shifters require a single- 
ended control signal for each phase shift bit. This was 
preferred over a complementary control signal interface, 
which would have required either more control lines into 
the hybrid package or more electronics within the package. 
A fvred attenuator, integrated into the phase-shifter hybrid 
package, helps to improve the output return loss of the 
phase shifter. A TGA8810 amplifier, shown in the SSPA 
block diagram (Figure 6), is used to drive an eight-way 
divider to form the complete distributed amplser. 
Expected performance of the distributed amplifier is 12.3 
W RF power, 37.9 W DC power, and 32% efficiency. 
Figure 9b is the line-up of the lumped amplifier. The output 
amplifier is a TGA9083 MMIC amplifier capable of 8 W of 
output power and 35% power-added eficiency at +9 V. 
The initial line-up used only two of these devices in parallel 
to provide greater than 10 W combined output power. 
However, a desire to increase the output power and 
decrease the channel temperatures of these devices led to 
the current four-way combined configuration. These four 
parallel devices operate from a +7-V supply. Under this 
operating condition, the MMIC is capable of 5 W of output 
power and 40% efficiency. A TGA8810 MMIC amplifier 
followed by a TGA4240 amplifier drive the output stage. 
Expected performance of the lumped amplifier is 12.5 W 
total RF power, 37.8 W DC power and 33% efficiency. 
The most challenging part in the electrical design of the 
SSPA is achieving high efficiency, power, and gain in the 
two HFET amplifier stages. The manufacturer suggested 
output loads for high power and high-efficiency operation. 
A small signal model of the HFETs aided in the input- 
matching circuit design. Large signal models were 
unavailable, and simulation of the amplifier in large signal 
operation was not possible. Instead, input-matching and 
output-matching circuits were designed using separate 
simulations. Initial circuits were assembled and tested, 
under large signal conditions, in a load-pull system. 
TGP6336 TGA8810 TGF4240 TGF4250 
TGA88lO TGF4240 TGA9083 x4 
Figure 9. SSPA Line-up, (a) 1/8 of the Distributed 
Amplifier Chain, (b) Lumped Amplifer 
The test results were used to adjust the circuit model, and 
new matching circuits were simulated. Final circuit designs 
were created that met the power, efficiency, and gain 
requirements. This procedure was applied to both 2.4-mm 
and 4.8-mm HFET amplifier designs. 
The low gate impedance of the HFETs causes some 
difficulty in the design process. At 8.4 GHz the gate 
impedance is outside the load-pull tuner's range. Designing 
a microstrip transformer to match the input impedance was 
challenging because of the uncertainty in the gate bond- 
wire inductance. 
To reduce the number of the uncertainties in the design 
process, the initial amplifier circuits were comprised of 
input-matching and output-matching transformers and bond 
wires of a nominal length connected to the HFETs. The 
transistors were biased through external bias tees initially. 
Coarse adjustment of the circuits consisted of iterating the 
bond wire lengths. Fine-tuning was accomplished by 
removing the metalization of the microstrip transformer 
with a diamond scribe and by moving the parallel gate 
andor drain bond wires closer together or farther apart. 
After the successful tuning of the transformers and bond 
wires, other essential parts of the amplifier were 
incorporated into a new design iteration. These included the 
RF chokes for bias injection, blocking capacitors, and a 
parallel line coupler. The coupler is intended for use as a 
diagnostic aid at the SSPA assembly level. While the 
addition of these circuit elements de-tuned the amplifier 
slightly, the above tuning procedure was repeated to re- 
align the performance of the amplifier. 
Figure 10 shows the hybrid layout of the 2.4-mm amplifier. 
The differences between this and the 4.8-mm amplifier are 
the transformer dimensions and the resistor values in the 
bias networks. The drain bias circuit shown in the figure 
- 
--zzT 1-47 
presents a very high impedance to the amplifier circuit at 
the operating 8.4 GHz fi-equency. A parallel resistor- 
capacitor circuit to ground improves the low-fiequency 
stability. The gate-bias circuit is designed to present a 60 R 
load at DC to the gate and a slightly higher shunt resistance 
at 4.1 GHz to prevent sub-harmonic oscillations. All RF 
bond wires are nominally 27 mils long. 
TGF4240 
\ -_ 
,- \ 
output 
Transformer 
- -_  -2 
Figure 10. Chip Carrier Layout of 2.4-mm Amplifier 
Four Way DividerEombiner 
The design of the four-way combinerldivider circuit uses 
branch-line hybrid couplers in a two-level corporate 
configuration. The branch-line couplers provide excellent 
impedance match and amplitude balance with low loss in a 
microstrip medium. The couplers are fabricated on Rogers 
TMMlO material along with the other microstrip lines of 
the lumped amplifier. The use of a single board for these 
lines eliminates the need for tight tolerances and alignment 
of separate circuit carriers to the adjoining amplifier stages. 
Digital Controller 
The digital controller is comprised of three primary 
circuits: a 1553 remote terminal hybrid, an ACTEL field 
programmable gate array (FPGA), and an application- 
specific integrated circuit known as the Temperature 
Remote Input & Output (TRIO) chip. The digital controller 
receives the array steering information fiom the s p a c e d  
main processor via a redundant MIL-STD 1553 bus and 
provides the eight phase shifiers with a four-bit control 
word. The controller also utilizes this bus to transfer 
telemetry fiom the SSPA to the command and data 
handling system. Digital telemetry is provided to echo back 
the beam steering command. Analog telemelry data are 
converted to digital using the TRIO chip. For subassembly 
testing the phase shifters can be exercised without the 
digital controller through a separate test connector. 
5. BRASSBOARD TEST RESULTS 
At the time of this writing, the MESSENGER SSPA 
development is near the completion of brassboard evaluation 
and the beginning of engineering model fabrication. In the 
brassboard phase of the project, the hybrids are assembled in 
an open chip carrier. This chip carrier has the same form 
factor as the custom package except that there are no walls 
and no lid. This construction method leverages JHU/APL's 
rapid prototype capability to determine the required 
dimensions for the hermetic package. Additionally the chip 
carrier method allows evaluation of hybrid circuits and the 
amplikr line-ups in a configuration thatk very close to the 
final flight design. The engineering model will be a complete 
SSPA using parts, materials, and processes thait are as close 
to those envisioned for flight as possible. 
Brassboard Stages 
Several samples of each of the devices were assembled and 
tested. All MMIC devices, including the TGA8810 MMIC 
amplifiers, the TGP6336 MMIC phase shifiers, and the 
TGA9083 MMlC power amplifiers were found to perform 
in agreement with manufacturer's test data. The TGA9083 
MMIC power amplifiers were tested at both +9 and +7 V. 
The TGA4240 WET amplifiers were first tested with +8 
V drain bias to verify that the devices meet the 
manufacturer's specifications. Then, the amplifiers were 
tested with +5 V drain bias and drive conditions 
consistent with the MESSENGER application. The 
amplifiers exhibited 10 dB of gain and 35.6% efficiency 
when driven to 25.6 dBm output power level. The 
TGA4250 HFET amplifiers were tested in the same 
manner. They were also found to meet the manufacturer's 
specifications when biased at +8 V. Testing with +6 V 
drain bias, they exhibited 7 dB of gain and 55.7% 
efficiency with 32.5 dBm of RF output power. 
Distributed Amplifier Brassboard 
A single chain of the distributed amplifier, as shown in 
Figure 9a, was assembled and tested at room temperature. 
A sunmary of the test results is shown in Table 2. 
Calculated efficiency of the entire distributed amplifier is 
32% with 12.3 W total RF output power and 58.59 W total 
DC power consumption. This figure includes the single 
TGA8810 amplifier driving the eight-way power divider. 
These results for the first integrated assembly compare very 
well to the expected results. 
Table 2. Distributed Amplifier 
Single Chain Brassboard Performance 
1.5 W 
31.9 dBm RF output power: POUT 
Gain 63 POUT 36.2 dF3 
RMS gain variation 
Gain compression @ POW 
Total DC power consumption 
Efficiency 32.3 
RMS phase variation 
1-48 -_;E-- 
Brassboard Lumped AmpliJier 
Measured room temperature results for the lumped 
amplifier brassboard, shown in Table 3, also compare 
favorably to the expected results. 
Table 3. Lumped Amplifier Brassboard Performance 
12.61 W 
41.01 dBm RF output power: Pom 
I 39.5 I dB I 
Gain compression POUT 
Total DC power consumption 
Efficiency 
6.  KA-BAND OPTION 
JHU/APL has begun development of critical components 
that would enable a 32 GHz high-gain downlink [2]. 
Specifically J€€U/AF'L has designed Ka-band GaAs MMIC 
power amplifiers and phase shifters using the Triquint 
foundry process. Initial test results on these devices indicate 
power amplifier efficiency greater than 30%. This 
efficiency is sufficiently high for a viable Ka-band phased 
array. The motivation for this effort is that for the same 
antenna aperture and SSPA DC power used in the present 
X-band system, a Ka-band phased-array antenna could 
return two to three times the data rate. The projected 
improvement over X-band is despite increased atmospheric 
loss, increased radome loss, increased antenna pointing 
loss, and decreased SSPA efficiency. JHu/ApL is currently 
studying the feasibility of inserting this technology into the 
MESSENGER program. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
The first electronically scanned phased array for deep space 
telecommunication is complemented by high-efficiency 
SSPAs in MESSENGER'S telecommunication system being 
developed by JHUAPL. The one-dimensionally scanned 
phased array eliminates deployment mechanisms and offers 
a low mass solution relative to a two-dimensionally scanned 
array. A highly efficient, 11 to 15-W design has been 
developed using a modular assembly of hybrid microcircuits. 
The hybrids and the common hermetic package are suitable 
for a wide range of applications. This paper has described the 
design and provided measured data in these key areas of the 
system. The telecommunication system mass, DC power, 
and downlink data rate requirements have been met or 
exceeded because of these developments. 
Acknowledgements 
The MESSENGER program is sponsored by the NASA 
Office of Space Science. The authors wish to thank 
. -  
MESSENGER'S Principal Investigator, Dr. Sean C. 
Solomon of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, and R. 
S. Bokulic, L. A. Ellis, R. C. Mallalieu, P. M. Malouf, W. 
P. Millard, J. E. Penn, M. R Peterson, C. H. Ronnenburg, 
R K. Stilwell, D. K. Srinivasan, and J. T. Will of JHU/APL 
for their support of this work. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Reinhart, M. J., Jensen, J. R, Cloeren J. M., DeBoy. C. 
C., Fielhauer, K. B., and Schulze, R C., The CONTOUR 
Radio Communications System, EEE 2001 Aerospace 
Conference Technical Digest. 
[2] Bokulic, R. S., Reinhart, M. J., Willey, C. E., Stilwell, 
R K., Penn, J. E., Norton, J. R, Cheng, S., DeCicco, D. J., 
and Schulze, R C., Advances in Deep Space Telecom- 
munications Technology at the Applied Physics 
Laboratory, IAA 2000 Conference Technical Digest, paper 
IAA-L-1108. 
Robert E. Wallis is currently the Lead Engineer for the 
MESSENGER Phased-Arrav Svstem. He received his B.S. 
"" . .. , , , . _.., -. . , . 
)om ;he Pennsylvania State 
University in 1980 and his MS. from 
Villanova University in 1983, both in 
electrical engineering. He joined the 
JHcrAPL Space Department in 1999. 
From 1983-1999, Mr. Wallis was 
with EMS Technologies, Inc. 
formerly Electromagnetic Sciences 
Inc.) where he managed the Microwave lnjegrated Circuit 
(MC) design group and led the development of switch 
matrices and SSPAs for spacecraft applications, including 
C-band SSPAs for the TOPEX mission, X-band S P A S  for 
the Mars98 and Stardust missions, and Ku-band SSPAs for 
the International Space Station. From 1980-1 983, Mr. 
Wallis was with General Electric Space Systems Division 
in Valley Forge, 
design group. 
Pennsylvania, as a member of the MIC 
Sheng Cheng is currently the Lead 
Engineer for the MESSENGER Solid- 
State Power Amplijier. He received his 
B.S. from the National Taiwan 
University in 1982 and his MS.  from 
The Johns Hopkins University in 1989, 
both in electrical engineering. He joined 
the JHUOAPL Space Department in 1997 
as a senior microwave circuit design engineer. From 
> 1990 to 1997, Mr. Cheng worked at the Whiting School of 
Engineering of The Johns Hopkins University on the 
research and development of microwave circuit theoiy, 
design methodology and measurement techniques. Prior 
to that, Mr. Cheng was with the LKC Technologies in 
Gaithersburg, Maryland, as an electronic circuit design 
engineer. 
- " -- .a. 1-49 
