Development of Diagnostic and Prognostic Technologies 
for Aerospace Health Management Applications 
Michael J. Roemer Emmanuel 0. Nwadiogbu George Bloor 
Gregory J. Kacprzynski Honeywell Engines and Systems The Boeing Company 
Impact Technologies, LLC Phoenix, AZ 85254 P.O. BOX 3707 MC 4A-47 
125 Tech Park Drive (602) 23 1-7323 Seattle, WA 98124-2207 
Rochester. NY 14623 emmanuel.nwadiogbu@alliedsignal.com (206) 655-9479 
(716) 424-1990 
mike.roemer@impact-tek.com 
Abstract-Effective aerospace health management integrates 
component, subsystem and system level health monitoring 
strategies, consisting of anomaly/diagnostic/prognostic 
technologies, with an integrated modeling architecture that 
addresses failure mode mitigation and life cycle costs. 
Included within such health management systems will be 
various failure mode diagnostic and prognostic (DP) 
approaches ranging fiom generic signal processing and 
experience-based algorithms to the more complex knowledge 
and model-based techniques. While signal processing and 
experienced-based approaches to D P  have proven effective 
in many applications, knowledge and model-based strategies 
can provide further improvements and are not necessarily 
more costly to develop or maintain. This paper will describe 
some generic prognostic and health management technical 
approaches to confidently diagnose the presence of failure 
modes or prognose a distribution on remaining time to failure. 
Specific examples of DP strategies are presented herein that 
include Auxiliary Power Unit (MU) fuel system valves, 
APU performance degradation and hot section lifing, Power 
Take Off (PTO) ShaA and AMAD snout bearing. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
TABLE OF C0"TS 
INTRODUCTION 
GENERIC DIAGNOSTIC AND PROGNOSTIC 
TECHNOLOGIES 
RELATIONSHIP TO FAILURE MODE MODEL 
SURGE C O ~ O L  VALVE DIAGNOSTICS 
APU PFlzFORMANcE DIAGNOSTICS AND 
PROGNOSTICS 
POWER TAKE-OFF SHAFT PROGNOSTICS 
APU HOT SECTIONPROGNOSTICS 
CONCLUSIONS 
REFERENCES 
A C K " T S  
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Various health monitoring technologies have been developed 
for aerospace applications that aid in the detection and 
classification of developing system faults. However, these 
george .j .bloor@boeing.com 
technologies have traditionally focussed on fault detection 
and isolation within an individual subsystem. Health 
management system developers are just beginning to address 
the concepts of prognostics and the integration of anomaly, 
diagnostic and prognostic technologies across subsystems and 
systems. Hence, the abdity to detect and isolate impending 
faults or to predict the f b r e  condition of a component or 
subsystem based on its current diagnostic state and available 
operating data is currently a high priority research topic. In 
addition, these technologies must be capable of 
communicating the root cause of a problem across 
subsystems and propagating the up/dowmtream effects across 
the health management architecture. This paper will 
introduce some generic prognostic and health management 
(PHM) system algorithmic approaches that are demonstrated 
within various airax& subsystem components with the ability 
to predict the time to conditional or mechanical failure (on a 
real-time basis). Prognostic and health management systems 
that can effectively implement the capabilities presented 
herein offer a great opportunity in terms of reducing the 
overall Life Cycle Costs (LCC) of operating systems as well 
as decreasing the operations/maintenance logistics footprint. 
2. GENERIC DIAGNOSTIC AND PROGNOSTIC 
TECHNOLOGIES 
Prognostic and Health Management (PHM) system 
architectures must allow for the integration of anomaly, 
diagnostic, and prognostic (A/DP) technologies fiom the 
component level all the way up through the aerospace vehicle 
level. In general, ADP technologies observe features 
associated with anomalous system behavior and then relates 
these femes  to useful information. Before getting into 
some specific examples of diagnostic and prognostic 
techniques applied to different aspects of an air vehicle, a 
brief description of some of the more common technical 
approaches are given. These generic descriptions will be 
focussed more on the prognostic algorithm side because less 
information is currently published in this area than on 
diagnostics. 
&780345!%2/01/$10.00a6 2001 IEEE 
6-3139 
Prognostics simply denotes the ability to predict a future 
condition. Inherently probabilistic or uncertain in nature, 
prognostics can be applied to system/ component failure 
modes governed by material condition or by functional loss. 
Like the diagnostic algorithms, prognostic algorithms can be 
generic in design but specific in terms of application. This 
section will briefly describes five approaches to prognostics. 
Experienced-Bared Prognostics 
In the case where a physical model of a subsystem or 
component is absent and there is an insficient sensor 
network to assess condition, an experienced-based prognostic 
model may be the only altemative. This form of prognostic 
model is the least complex and requires the failure history or 
“by-design” recommendations of the component under 
similar operation. Typically, failure andor inspection data is 
compiled from legacy systems and a Weibull distribution or 
other statistical distribution is fitted to the data. An example 
of these types of distributions is given in Figure 1. Although 
simplistic, an experienced-based prognostic distribution can 
be used to drive interval-based maintenance practices that can 
then be updated on regular intervals. An example may be the 
maintenance scheduling for an electrical component or 
airframe component that has little or no sensed parameters 
and is not critical enough to warrant a physical model. In this 
case, the prognosis of when the component will fail or 
degrade to an unacceptable condition must be based solely on 
analysis of past experience or OEM recommendations. 
Depending on the maintenance complexity and criticality 
associated with the component, the prognostics system may 
be set up for a maintenance interval (i.e. replace every 
lOO(H-/-20 EFH) then updated as more data becomes 
available. The benefit to having a regularly updated 
maintenance database as happens in autonomic logistics 
applications is important for this application. Experienced- 
based prognostics using Weibull distributions is shown in 
Figure 1. 
Experiencednnspection-Based PHM 
.Weibull Formulatmn 
‘Updale Capability 
b Maintenance Action 
. /Results PDF 
In-Field MTBF or MTBI 
Legacy MTBF or MTBI 
Figure 1 - Experienced-Based Approach 
Evolutionary Prognmtics 
An evolutionary prognostic approach relies on gauging the 
proximity and rate of change of the current component 
condition (i.e. features) to known performance faults. Figure 2 
is an illustration of the technique. Evolutionary prognostics 
may be implemented on systems or subsystems that 
experience conditional failures such as an APU gas path 
degradation. Generally, evolutionary prognostics works well 
for system level degradation because conditional loss is 
typically the result of interaction of multiple components 
functioning improperly as a whole. This approach requires 
that sufficient sensor information is available to assess the 
current condition of the system or subsystem and relative 
level of uncertainty in this measurement. Furthermore, the 
parametric conditions that signify known performance related 
fault must be identifiable. While a physical model, such as a 
gas path analysis or control system simulation, is beneficial, it 
is not a requirement for this technical approach. An 
alternative to the physical model is built in “expert” 
knowledge ofthe fault condition and how it manifests itselfin 
the measured and extracted features. 
Feature/Evolutionary PHM 
Statistical Feature 
Shins over Time 
Feahue 1 
Feature 
Track and Predict Path 
Feature Space 
Figure 2 - Evolutionary Prognostics 
Feature Prograssion and AI-Bmed Prognostics 
Utilizing known transitional or seeded fault/failure 
degradation paths of measured/extracted feature@) as they 
progress over time is another commonly utilized 
prognostic approach. In this approach, neural networks or 
other AI techniques are trained on features that progress 
through a failure. In such cases, the probability of failure 
as defined by some measure of the “ground truth” which 
is required as a-priori information. The “ground truth” 
information that is used to train the predictive network is 
usually obtained from inspection data. Based on the input 
features and desired output prediction, the network will 
automatically adjusts its weights and thresholds based on 
the relationships it sees between the probability of failure 
curve and the correlated feature magnitudes. Figure 3 
shows the process of a neural network being trained by 
some vibration feature data sets where nodal weights are 
automatically assigned reflecting each feature’s 
correlation to the ground truth severity. Once trained, the 
neural network architecture can be used to intelligently 
predict these same features progressions for a different 
test under similar operating conditions. 
6-3140 
Feature/AI-Based PHM Parameter Estimation-Based PHM 
Figure 3 - Feature/AI-Based Prognostics 
State Estimator Prognostics 
State estimation techniques such as Kalman filters or various 
other tracking filters can also be implemented as a prognostic 
technique. In this type of application, the minimization of 
error between a model and measurement is used to predict 
future feature behavior. Either k e d  or adaptable filter gains 
can be utilized (Kalman is typically adapted, while Alpha- 
Beta-Gamma is fixed) within an nm-order state variable 
vector. For a given measured or extracted featureJ a state 
vector can be constructed as shown below. 
.=cf f fT 
Then, the state transition quation is used to update these 
states based upon a model. A simple Newtonian model of the 
relationship between the feature position, velocity and 
acceleration can be used if constant acceleration is assumed. 
This simple kinematic equation can be expressed as follows: 
f ( n  + 1) = f ( n )  + j . (n)t  + 1 f ( n ) t  2 
2 
wherefis again the feature and t is the time period between 
updates. There is an assumed noise level on the 
measurements and model related to typical signal-to-noise 
problems and modeled physics. The error mvatiance 
associated with the measurement noise vectors is typically 
developed based on actual noise variances, while the process 
noise is assumed based on the kinematic model. In the end, 
the tracking filter approach is used to track and smooth the 
features related to predicting a failure. Figure 4 is an 
illustration of this approach. 
Residual Fault 
Detection 6r. 
Regression 
Figure 4 - State Estimator Prognostics 
Physics-Based Prognostia 
A physics-based stochastic model is a technically 
comprehensive modeling approach that has been 
traditionally used for component failure mode 
prognostics. It can be used to evaluate the distribution of 
remaining useful component life as a function of 
uncertainties in component strengthhess or condition for 
a particular fault. The results from such a model can then 
be used to create a neural network or probabilistic-based 
autonomous system for real-time failure prognostic 
predictions. Other information used as input to the 
prognostic model includes diagnostic results, current 
condition assessment data and operational profile 
predictions. This knowledge-rich information can be 
generated from multi-sensory data fusion combined with 
in-field experience and maintenance information that can 
be obtained from data mining processes, While the failure 
modes may be unique from component to component, the 
physics-based methodology can remain consistent across 
the air vehicle. An example of a physical, model-based 
prognostic technique is shown in Figure 5 for a rotating 
blade. 
Model/Physics-Based PHM 
W”.‘.* 
Current & 
Future 
Failure 
Prediction 
Figure 5 - Physics-Based Prognostics 
6-3141 
3. RELATIONSHIP TO FAILURE MODE MODEL 
It is important for a prognostic and health management 
system must to have a direct relationship to a model 
containing the information on how components, 
subsystems, and systems interact in operation. In 
addition, this model should contain information on how 
the system failure modes, sensors, and health monitoring 
technologies are related. This is necessary so that failure 
symptoms and failure propagation can be traced back to 
root cause failures for fault isolation purposes. 
Essentially, information related to the signal and flow 
relationships between system components, failure modes 
and across system effects is linked to the sensors and 
A/DP algorithms within the system architecture. This 
captured information is what allows A/DP algorithms to 
remain as generic as possible and provides a “place 
holder” for the algorithms results. In a PHh4 system 
implementation, anomalous signals, indicted failure 
modes, diagnostic monitors or prognostic warning 
information is analyzed with this information in order to 
isolate the root cause of a problem. In addition, the 
reasoners will utilize this information to prioritize 
maintenance/operational actions that should be taken to 
prevent a failure. 
An example of how the HM system architecture functions 
within such a failure mode model representation is given 
in Figure 6. In this figure, an anomaly detection 
algorithm (A) monitors four sensors (S). If the anomaly 
algorithm detects an off nominal condition, then only 
Failure modes FM1 and FM3 are “flagged” as potential 
failure modes (FM2 is not a possibility because there is no 
connectivity within this model). 
Figure 6 - Generic Representation of Failure Modes, Sensors 
and HM Technologies 
In Figure 6, items to the left of the Mure modes (FM’s) are 
health monitoring aspects that attempt to detect the Mure 
modes before they occur. Things to the right of the failure 
modes are the effects (E) of the failure mode or HM aspects 
that attempt the isolate which failure mode has already 
occurred. 
Diagnostic Monitors (D) can either function as traditional BIT 
(Built In Tests) with 0 or 1 outputs denoting that a failure 
symptom or effect has been observed or they can provide 
“grayscale” measures of the confidence and severity of a 
symptom or effect. Continuing with the example, if a 
Diagnostic Monitor (D) were to obsewe a symptom of FM3, 
then the HM reasoner would then have some additional 
collaborative information to say that FM3 has the higher 
potential to have occurred The Prognostic Monitor (P) on 
FM3 will provide the Mean Time to Failure @ITIF) with 
confidence bounds for that failure mode. 
Let’s imagine that Figure 6 represents the failure modes 
for a rolling element ball bearing. A physics-based 
prognostic model of the bearing (P) could calculate the 
current probability of a failure for failure mode (FM3) 
and project the future probability of failure based on 
speed and temperature (from sensed parameters) only. 
However, in this example, imagine that a diagnostic 
algorithm (D) uses data from a vibration transducer (S) to 
determine an unbalance or misalignment condition and 
uses vibration features (spike energy or kurtosis) to detect 
when significant spalling (FM3) of the outer race has 
occurred. For the majority of the life of the bearing, the 
diagnostic algorithms do not make any diagnostic reports 
and the physics-based prognostic model goes about 
evaluating remaining useful life. However, when the 
diagnostic elements diagnose higher than normal 
unbalance, the prognostic model would utilize this 
information and determine that life is being accumulated 
at a faster than expected rate. The HM system reasoners 
would then be capable of putting together these pieces of 
evidence to alert the maintainers to examine the bearing at 
an appropriate time. A prognostic module like this is 
presented later in this paper. 
Now that the concepts for generic HM system 
technologies and their relationship failure mode models 
have been introduced, the remainder of the paper will be 
focussed on some specific model-based diagnostic and 
prognostic algorithms developed for different aerospace 
applications. Keep in mind that the output from these 
dedicated algorithms are processed within a failure mode 
model by the HM reasoners so that operations and 
maintenance decisions can be made with knowledge 
coming from all aspects of the system. A diagnostic 
algorithm for detecting unhealthy surge control valve 
operation and performance degradation associated with an 
APU is presented first. Next, prognostic algorithms for 
predicting when an APU will reach an EGT (exhaust gas 
temp.) limit or hot section remaining useful life limit is 
presented. The final example provides a prognostic 
model for a PTO (power take-off) shaft and associated 
bearings. 
6-3142 
4. SURGE CONTROL VALVE DIAGNOSTICS 
Diagnostics is often defined as classification of 
anomalous system behavior to known fault conditions. 
While generic algorithms are sometimes capable of 
performing diagnostics, faults must be identified a-priori 
within an integrated modeling architecture that links 
anomalous conditions to particular failure modes. Often a 
more direct approach is to develop a specific fault 
classifier to diagnose a critical failure mode. Model- 
based diagnostic approaches are often implemented for 
these situations and they utilize knowledge (i.e. models) 
of a given system and compare expected outcomes to 
measured ones in order to help classify a fault condition. 
It is always important to identify the sensory data that can 
enable a model-based diagnostic algorithm. Due to the 
fact that the failure mode model allows for a clear vision 
of inter-system relationships, the data required for 
diagnostics may already be present if the system is 
viewed on the whole. When existing or intra-system 
sensory data can be utilized for shared diagnostic 
purposes, the benefits of implementing such an approach 
becomes great and the expense of additional sensors is 
avoided. That was indeed the case for the surge control 
valve (SCV) diagnostic approach developed and 
described next. 
In this case, the sensor information ftom the APU was 
used to diagnose the health of the surge control valve. 
Specifically, the response characteristics of the APU 
speed and EGT sensors after the surge control valve was 
commanded were used to predict the response time of the 
SCV and then infer the health condition. Figure 7 shows 
some of the data that was used to develop a Neural-Fuzzy 
classifier for diagnosing Surge Control and Load Control 
Valve sticking in a military fighter Auxiliary Power Unit 
(APU). To diagnose the health of the SCV or LCV 
(based on whether they were sticking or failed 
opedclosed) a Neuro-Fuzzy classifier was trained on 
normal and faulty response characteristics of the APU 
responses to the valves being commanded. When the 
valve is sticking, the AF'U response characteristics are 
different in a predictable way (i.e. less overshoot in the 
EGT and speed responses). 
Figure 7(a) - Response in AF'U Speed and EGT Mer Surge 
Control Valve Command 
Akl Response 
EGT - 
Speed 
I LaQEGT 
SN im" I 
L N  Uassher 
7- 
m 
LCV command 
Figure 7(b)-Moc 
-IBIEIIc(- 
1-Based SCV Fault Diagnosis 
A back-propagation neural network was trained on the 
overshoot levels and associated timing after either valve 
was commanded. A combination of laboratory results 
and modeling was used to develop the training data for 
healthy and faulty valve conditions. Based on these 
overshoot levels and timing, the valve response time is 
predicted by the neural network as shown in Figure 6. A 
healthy response time for the valves was in the range of 
0.1 to 0.2 seconds, and anything greater than that would 
be suspect to sticking. Based on the valve response 
prediction of the neural network, a fuzzy logic reasoner 
translated the response time to a health measure of the 
valve. A value close to 1.0 was considered healthy and 
values lower than 0.75 would start to indicate a potential 
valve-sticking situation. It is important to note that the 
diagnostics achieved in this example was the result of a 
thorough understanding of the inter-component 
relationships captured in the modeling environment 
previously discussed. Also, in this case, prognostics was 
not feasible because of the highly unpredictable nature of 
6-3143 
this failure mode. 
health of the valve 
Hence, this module only diagnosed the 
~ and did not attempt to predict a MTTF. 
5. mu PERFORMANCE DIAGNOSTICS AND 
PROGNOSTICS 
The next example was specifically developed for monitoring 
the performance degradation of an APU and includes both a 
diagnostic and prognostic component. The combined 
algorithm is probabilistic in nature and utilizes statistically 
significant shifts in key APU performance parameters to 
diagnose a current level of degradation and then performs a 
multi-parameter, exponentially weighted projection to predict 
fbture degradation. This technique would be considered an 
evolutionary prognostic technique and is illustrated in Figure 
2. 
This feature-based diagnostic and prognostic approach relies 
on gauging the proximity and rate of change of the current 
system condition to known performance faults. This multi- 
parameter, evolutionary technique has already been shown to 
be capable of identifying degraded performance in propulsion 
systems (Roemer and Ghiocel, 1998). This approach requires 
that suflicient sensor information be available to assess the 
current condition of the system in terms of shifted trends in 
parameters from a baseline condition. Modeling and 
measurement uncertainty is accounted for with this technique 
utilizing the distributions on the current parameter shifts and 
model-based fault conditions. While a physical model, such 
as a gas path analysis or control system simulation, is 
beneficial, it is not a requirement for this approach to work. 
An alternative to the physical model is built in “expert” 
knowledge of the fault condition. 
This generic, probabilistic, featurebased diagnostic and 
prognostic process involves assigning non-normal or normal 
Probability Density Functions (PDF’s) to performance error 
patterns associated to known faults in N-dimensional space. 
Similarly, the current error exists as a PDF in the parameter 
space as well. The probability that the current condition (C, 
measured parameter shifts), may be attributed to a given fault 
(F, identified known fault conditions) is determined by the 
“overlap” (i.e. multi-dimensional integration) of their 
respective joint probability density functions. Figure 2 shows 
how this is done in 2-dimensional parameter space. If C and 
F can be assumed to be normally distributed (not a necessary 
assumption however), the probability of association (Pa) with 
a given fault condition F can be found using: 
F - C  
p ,  =2@(- 
(3) 
the standard deviation of the F 
and C distributions 
- 
Of,Oc -
The function CP( ) is the standard normal cumulative 
distribution and the p is denoted as the reliability index. 
The p represents the Euclidean distance between the 
current conditional distribution (C) and a given fault 
distribution (F). Hence, this approach performs 
diagnostics by evaluating the likelihood of the current 
conditions to known fault conditions and prognostics by 
extrapolating a fault-weighted, evolutionary path. 
The evolutionary prognotics approach was applied to 
APU degradation data on an Auxilary Power Unit for a 
military fighter aircraft. APU model simulations of 
performance degradation were utilized along with test cell 
data to identify known parameter shifts to particular 
performance faults. Incremental effeciency degradation 
of the turbine and compressor sections, which simulated 
the effects of seal leakage or fouling, were used to build 
the fault paths for compressor and turbine degradation in 
5-dimensional feature space. This feature space was 
defined by deviations from the normal parametric curves 
for Compressor Discharge Pressure and Temperature, 
Exhaust Gas Temp, Speed, and Fuel Flow which are all 
derivable from information on the aircraft’s data bus. 
The results of the evolutionary diagnostic and prognostic 
algorithm is shown in Figures 8 and 9. At each time 
interval, the degree of overlap of the current error pattern 
is compared with compressor and turbine efficiency 
faults. In this case, the fault initially looks equally like a 
turbine or compressor efficiency fault but then continues 
to evolve to confidently identify a compressor fault. The 
blue bars in the left chart of figure 8 represent the 
confidence of identifying a compressor degradation and 
the red bars represent the confidence associated with a 
turbine degradation. The 3-D plot on the right of Figure 8 
represents the mean shifts of all three parameters (CDT, 
N1 and PCD) as a function of the APU degradation. The 
red line shows that the actual degradation is moving along 
side the model-based prediction of compressor 
degradation, hence giving it a higher confidence. 
where: 
F,C = the mean of the distributions F 
and C respectively 
6-3144 
I OiiNominal I 
100 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Figure S(a) - Confidence Level in APU Compressor and 
Turbine Diagnosis 
- Actual Deg 
2 
Figure 8(b) - Mean Degredation Path for Turbine and 
Compressor Faults 
Figure 9 illustrates the concept for the prognostics 
algorithm in terms of what is important to predict 
associated with APU degradation. From an O&M point 
of view, any type of degradation that will lead to 
grounding the aircraft or putting the aircraft in danger is 
important to prognose. In this case, reaching an EGT 
limit that will prevent a main engine start (MES) will 
keep the aircraft on the ground and reduced air bleed from 
the compressor that effects the avionics cooling is also a 
concern. Predicting system-wide functional failure as 
opposed to just isolated LRU failures raises the standard 
for intergrated Health Management systems. Note that the 
expected to time to reach these critical events is displayed 
along side the actual time predicted to reach the event. In 
this case, these are the mean number of flight hours to No 
Main Engine Start (MES) and the point at which Avionics 
would overheat due to insufficient airflow. In Figure 9, 
the difference between the expected and actual MTTF (no 
MES) is shown as 23 1 APU operating hours. A threshold 
is typically set up a priori to alert maintenance personnel 
that accelerated degradation is occurring in the APU 
which will result in an EGT limit that would prevent the 
main engine from starting. 
Figure 9 - Demonstration of Evolutionary Prognsotic 
output 
6. POWER TAKE-OFF SHAFT PROGNOSTICS 
Figure 10 shows a model-based prognsotic concept for a 
Power Take Off (PTO) shaft and AMAD snout bearing. In 
this prognostic module development, the first step is to relate 
processed per-rev vibration signals to different levels of PTO 
unbalance or misalignment. This inference (fiom measured 
vibration to unbalance/misalignment) is performed based on 
rigorous testing of vibrations measured on an AMAD 
gearbox under Werent levels of unbalance and misalignment 
on the PTO shaft. During the testing, Werent levels of 
unbalance were applied to a militavy fighter a i r d  PTO shaft 
from 0.01 to 0.10 oz-in. Based on incremental levels of 
unbalance, the 1X vibration amplitudes were monitored and 
related to the level of unbalance. Some of the results from 
this testing are shown in Figure 11, with vibration spectrums 
associated with 0.01 and 0.05 02-in unbalances shown. A 
simple back-propagation neural network was trained to 
represent this non-linear relationship between the 1X 
amplitudes and the unbalance level in oz-in. 
Next, the unbalance prediction was applied to the 
rotordynamics (critical speed) model of the PTO staR 
including bearing stifhesses. This model was run off-line 
under several different unbalance scenarios to obtain model- 
based estimates of the associated radial forces on the bearings 
under these conditions. A look-up table was then developed 
from which the real-time prediction of bearing radial forces 
are deked as a function of measured shaft unbalance 
(infemd from the 1X amplitudes). Based on these real-time 
predicted radial forces, the bearing model was utilized to 
assess the remaining B-10 life. A plot of the results from the 
bearing model are shown in Figure 12. From this figure, the 
B-10 bearing life can be accumulated based on the current 
level of unbalance force. The prognostic aspect of this model 
simply regresses the predicted radial bearing forces and 
applies them to the model to predict when the useful life of 
the bearing wil be used up. Finally, the difference between 
the expected MlTF (under normal loading) was compared to 
the actual IvfITF (predicted based on the actual operating 
conditions) to trigger an alarm if this difference becomes to 
large. In the case shown in Figure 10, the actual MTTF of the 
snout bearing was predicted to be 37,843 hours and the 
expected M'ITF is 43,000 hours, resulting in a difference of 
over 5000 hours. This difference has triggered the PTOS 
prognostic monitor to report to the HM architecture 
6-3145 
discussed previously. Note, the expected and actual ~ F ' s  
are distributions as shown in the figure. Based on the severe 
consequences of a PTOS failure, only a small risk in the 
confidence interval of the distribution is acceptable and 
therefore the threshold of 5000 hours was choosen. 
Raw SDbctraI Data . 
Figure 10 - Model-Based Prognostics for PTO Shaft and 
Bearings 
Figure 11 - Vibration Spectrums for 0.01 and 0.05 oz-in 
PTO Shaft Unbalance 
Figure 12 - B-10 Bearing Life Predictions for Various Radial 
Loads 
7. APU HOT SECTION PROGNOSTICS 
As a final example, a prognostic module was developed for 
the hot section blading for a military fighter APU. This hot 
section prognostics module is a simple extension of the 
OEM's life usage monitor for this APU. First, the module 
used the structural model to determine the creep fatigue 
damage done to the blading under various APU operating 
modes such as Main Engine Start, Landing Gear, Weapons 
Loading etc., as a function of speed, Turbine Met Temp 
(TIT) and Exhaust Gas Temperature (EGT). The OEM has 
developed event specific operating prosles that the APU is 
expected to see over the l ie  of the APU. If this operating 
profile is adhered to, this Hot Section prognostic module will 
produce an actual MTlT probability distribution that is the 
same as the Expected MTlT; however, this is rarely the case. 
A particular APU may experience more Main Engine Starts 
(MES) than expected or have higher than expected TJT and 
therefore accumulate damage at a higher than expected rate. 
The inherent uncertainty in the remaining life is a function of 
many characteristics ranging fiom the material properties to 
the operating profile. Hence, the predicted probability of 
failure at some future time is pdormed by statistically 
sampling fiom these uncertainties in a probabilistic analysis. 
This aspect is shown in Figure 5 within the modeling block 
and the use of the operating profile statistics is shown as input 
to this model. 
The fundamental concept of this, and other "lifmg-based" 
prognostic modules, is that a maintainer or auto-logistics 
system can simulate a future mission profile (based on 
past operating statistics), look at a risk-sorted list of 
components with potential failure modes for the mission, 
and be aware of all downstream effects if a failure does 
occur. In this manner, informed maintenance decisions 
may be made and aircraft readiness and availability may 
be assessed. 
This probabilistic, model-based approach can be used to 
evaluate the distribution of remaining useful component 
life as a function of uncertainties in component 
strengthhtress or condition for a particular fault. The 
results fiom such a model can then be used to create an 
autonomous system for real-time failure prognostic 
6-3146 
predictions. Other information that could be used as input 
to the prognostic model includes diagnostic results, 
current condition assessment data and operational profile 
predictions. 
Finally, the implementation of this APU hot section is shown 
in Figure 13. As illustrated, the prognostic module utilizes 
the speed, EGT and calculated TIT as inputs to the model. As 
in the case of the PTO shaft model, the hot section model was 
run off-line under various design and off-design scenarios and 
a look-up table generated that related APU events at specific 
operating conditions to accumulated damage (in this case 
stress rupture due to creep). Based on this table and the 
monitored operating conditions, current levels of damage are 
continuously evaluated. The prognostic aspect utilizes the 
distribution of APU events specific to this APU to project 
future usage rates. As in the case of the other prognostic 
modules, this output produces two distributions on MTTF, 
one for the expected normal operation and one based on the 
actual operation. If this particular APU begins to experience 
high levels of hot section life, than the prognostic monitor 
threshold will warn the maintainem of signiscant differences 
between the actual and expected MTIF’s. 
Figure 13 - APU Hot Section Prognostics Module 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has discussed many concepts associated with next 
generation prognostic and health management systems for 
aerospace applications. First, a generic PHM architecture was 
presented that emphasized the integration of anomaly 
detection, diagnostic and prognostic reasoners through the 
use of an integrated model of the entire system. Next, direct 
links fiom the anomaly, diagnostic and prognostic algorithms 
were identitied that trigger specific attributes in the integrated 
model for superior .fault isolation and reasoning. With this 
type of overall algorithm integration across the system, 
system level reasoners can process collaborative evidence 
about particular failure modes more effectively so as to 
reduce the need for additional sensors. A few specific 
diagnostic and prognostic algorithmic approaches were also 
presented to illustrate how the results fkom these techniques 
are process by the integrated model and HM architecture. 
9. REFERENCES 
[l] Roemer, M. J. and Kacprzynski, G.J., “Advanced 
Diagnostics and Prognostics for Gas Turbine Engine Risk 
Assessment,” Paper 2000-GT-30, ASME and IGTI Turbo 
Expo 2000, Munich, Germany, May 2000. 
[2] Roemer, M. J., and Ghiocel, D. M., “A Probabilistic 
Approach to the Diagnosis of Gas Turbine Engine Faults” 
Paper 99-GT-363, ASME and IGTI Turbo Expo 1999, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, June 1999. 
[3] Roemer, M. J., and Atkinson, B., “Real-Time Engine 
Health Monitoring and Diagnostics for Gas Turbine 
Engines,” Paper 97-GT-30, ASME and IGTI Turbo Expo 
1997, Orlando, Florida, June 1997. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Lany Howard and Gabor Karsai of 
ISIS for their contribution to the reasoner development. Also, 
many thanks to Robin Smith at Boeing for supporting data for 
validation and demonstration of some of these models. 
Dr. Michael J .  Roeiner is the 
Director of Engineering at Impact 
Technologies in Rochester, NY and 
Adjunct Professor of Mechanical 
Engineering at the Rochester 
Institute of Technology. He was 
formerly a Vice President of 
Engineering at STI Technologies 
prior to joining Impact Technologies. 
Mike has a Ph.D. in Mechanical 
Engineering, MS. in Systems Engineering and B.S. in 
Electrical Engineering, all fiom the State Universily of New 
York at Bufalo. He has over 14 years experience developing 
real-time, automated health management technolqies for 
complex systems, including large steam and gas turbines, gas 
turbine engines, rotury/fid-wing aircraj? subsystems and 
naval propulsion systems. He has developed several 
diagnostic and prognostic capabilities for complex systems 
utilizing probabilistic methods that are directly linked to 
maintenance planning and system operation. He is the 
author or co-author of more than 50 technical papers in these 
subject areas. He is currently the Chairman of the Machinery 
Failure Prevention Technology (MFPT) Society, a Division 
of the Vibration Institute, and Prognosticls Lead for the SAE- 
E32 Engine Condition Monitoring Committee. 
6-3147 
