   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 Integrating Model-Based Transmission Reduction into a 
Multi-Tier Architecture 
Jeremy Straub
 Department of Computer Science 
University of North Dakota 
3950 Campus Road, Stop 9015 
Grand Forks, ND 58202-9015 
+1-701-777-4107 
jeremy.straub@my.und.edu 
 
Abstract— A multi-tier architecture consists of numerous craft 
as part of the system, orbital, aerial, and surface tiers.  Each 
tier is able to collect progressively greater levels of 
information.  Generally, craft from lower-level tiers are 
deployed to a target of interest based on its identification by a 
higher-level craft.  While the architecture promotes significant 
amounts of science being performed in parallel, this may 
overwhelm the computational and transmission capabilities of 
higher-tier craft and links (particularly the deep space link 
back to Earth).  Because of this, a new paradigm in in-situ data 
processing is required. 
Model-based transmission reduction (MBTR) is such a 
paradigm.  Under MBTR, each node (whether a single 
spacecraft in orbit of the Earth or another planet or a member 
of a multi-tier network) is given an a priori model of the 
phenomenon that it is assigned to study.  It performs activities 
to validate this model.  If the model is found to be erroneous, 
corrective changes are identified, assessed to ensure their 
significance for being passed on, and prioritized for 
transmission.  A limited amount of verification data is sent 
with each MBTR assertion message to allow those that might 
rely on the data to validate the correct operation of the 
spacecraft and MBTR engine onboard. 
Integrating MBTR with a multi-tier framework creates an 
MBTR hierarchy.  Higher levels of the MBTR hierarchy task 
lower levels with data collection and assessment tasks that are 
required to validate or correct elements of its model.  A model 
of the expected conditions is sent to the lower level craft; which 
then engages its own MBTR engine to validate or correct the 
model.  This may include tasking a yet lower level of craft to 
perform activities.  When the MBTR engine at a given level 
receives all of its component data (whether directly collected or 
from delegation), it randomly chooses some to validate (by re-
 processing the validation data), performs analysis and sends its 
own results (validation and/or changes of model elements and 
supporting validation data) to its upstream node.  This 
constrains data transmission to only significant (either because 
it includes a change or is validation data critical for assessing 
overall performance) information and reduces the processing 
requirements (by not having to process insignificant data) at 
higher-level nodes. 
This paper presents a framework for multi-tier MBTR and 
two demonstration mission concepts: an Earth sensornet and a 
mission to Mars.  These multi-tier MBTR concepts are 
compared to a traditional mission approach. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
2. BACKGROUND ................................................... 2 
3. INTEGRATING THE MULTI-TIER APPROACH 
AND MODEL-BASED TRANSMISSION REDUCTION3 
4. COMMUNICATIONS PARADIGM FOR A MBTR 
HIERARCHY / MULTI-TIER MISSION ................... 4 
5. EVALUATION OF THE MBTR HIERARCHY 
CONCEPT .............................................................. 5 
6. DEMONSTRATION MISSION CONCEPTS ........... 5 
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK ................. 6 
REFERENCES ......................................................... 6 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Numerous applications exist that can benefit from a group 
of heterogeneous robots operating collaboratively.  Some of 
these applications require that the robots collect data across 
a wide area of unknown status.  While craft with a single 
movement-approach (e.g., ground-based craft) could 
conceivably collect the requisite data, their performance 
would be less than satisfactory when compared with an 
approach that integrated multiple craft with alternate 
movement characteristics.  The Multi-Tier Autonomous 
Mission Architecture (MAMA) [1] is one approach that can 
facilitate this collaboration.  MAMA coordinates the efforts 
of multiple craft across orbital, aerial, surface and other 
tiers.  These craft exchange data and collaborate to achieve 
mission goals. 
Craft coordination and collaboration can be task-based or 
goal-based.  Under a task-based approach, a controller 
defines a desired objective (e.g., imaging a desired area) and 
the MAMA-member craft autonomously determine the most 
effective way to achieve this goal.  However, in many cases, 
while the desired outcome is known, the exact tasks that are 
required to perform the outcome are not.  In this case, goal-
 based control is implemented.  With goal based control, a 
well-defined (generally broad) goal is provided to the 
collaborating craft which then take actions to assess the 
requirements of goal attainment and perform those actions.  
For example, it may be desirable to find locations 
containing a particular resource (either on Earth or another 
body), ensure that an area that troops will be traversing is 
free of landmines and other threats or determine the validity 
of a scientific principle.  In these cases, significant data will 
be collected; however, most of it is not relevant to 
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 2
 controllers.  In these cases, controllers are interested in an 
assertion – and the data to back it up. 
Model-Based Transmission Reduction (MBTR) [2] is an 
effective way of managing inter-craft and craft-controller 
communications in cases where investigations or 
assignments are goal-driven.  Under MBTR, a result and 
supporting data are conveyed to controllers.  When MBTR 
is combined with a MAMA, this can be performed 
hierarchically: several lower-level assertions may be 
combined to prove or refute a higher (composite) assertion. 
2. BACKGROUND  
Pristine-Class Missions 
Most planetary science missions have consisted of a single 
large spacecraft. [3, 4, 5, 6]  In some cases, a sub-craft has 
been deployed (e.g., a lander), or two craft have worked 
together to achieve a goal (e.g., the GRAIL mission).  
However, no mission to-date has utilized a large collection 
of heterogeneous craft, despite the advantages that this 
approach may provide in certain circumstances.  The trend 
on Mars has been towards progressively larger lander craft 
(e.g., the current Mars Science Laboratory is car-sized).  [7]  
However, the growing size of these craft is pushing the 
boundaries of what can be easily and safely landed on the 
planet’s surface (given its atmospheric conditions); the Mars 
Science Laboratory (MSL) required an intricate set of 
maneuvers for this safe landing, which (while ultimately 
successful) increased mission risk.  
Earth-orbiting missions are also comparatively large.  The 
Hubble-sized Earth-observing spacecraft recently provided 
to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) by the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) 
exemplify the scale of the spacecraft that are used for these 
applications. [8]  While these craft can provide an exquisite 
level of detail of a target area, they lack the ability to 
provide significant breadth of coverage.  Acknowledging 
this capability shortfall, the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) has undertaken to provide a 
quick-response capability, SeeMe, which aims to provide a 
short duration between capability request and delivery. [9] 
Multi-Tier Approach 
Fink [10, 11] and others [12, 13] suggest an approach that 
combines the efforts of multiple, comparatively smaller, 
craft with different breadth and depth of coverage 
capabilities.  Fink’s “tier-scalable” approach implements 
top-down control of multiple craft, utilizing the significant 
computing resources located on the orbital craft, in 
particular, to coordinate the efforts of the lower-level craft. 
[1, 10, 11, 14] 
A multi-tier approach, proposed in [15] and expanded upon 
in [1, 16] provides goal-based tasking from the higher-tier 
craft; however, the lower-level craft are left to determine the 
appropriate method for achieving the tasked goals.  A 
computing task hand-off method allows analysis tasks that 
exceed the computational resources of a lower-level craft to 
be performed by a higher-level craft; the results of the 
analysis are then returned to the lower-level craft for 
incorporation in decision-making. 
The multi-tier approach also incorporates effective ways of 
dealing with several specialized circumstances that require 
greater coordination.  The first is a collaborative task (e.g., a 
task that requires coordinated movement in order to be 
successful).  For example, if two robots were erecting a 
structure, movement-level coordination would be required 
to place a beam successfully into location.  In this case, a 
script, which includes checkpoints (where the craft wait 
until all others required to proceed are done), is created by a 
group or task controller and disseminated to all participating 
craft. 
MAMA also contemplates cases when it may be desirable to 
share resources between different groups within the same 
mission or even across missions.  A craft hand-off and 
tasking mechanism exists for this.   
Model-Based Transmission Reduction 
MBTR is a multi-faceted approach to reducing the amount 
of data that is required via increasing the value of each byte 
of data.  In [2], four levels of MBTR are presented: model-
 based data transmission, model-based data analysis, model-
 based result transmission and model-based findings 
transmission.  Each subsequent level builds on the value of 
the lower levels to create a more value-rich data product that 
is transmitted.   
Model-based data transmission (MBDT), demonstrated with 
image data in [2, 17], compares collected raw data to a 
model of what is expected.  Discrepancies, above a 
threshold minimum difference value (if specified), are 
transmitted to Earth-based controllers to refine the original 
model.  Discrepant data can also be priority-ordered for 
transmission. 
Model-based data analysis (MBDA) uses context-aware 
assessment to prioritize data for transmission.  While 
MBDT would choose data based on the largest discrepancy 
from the model (e.g., the largest color/shade different for 
image data), MBDA utilizes its contextual understanding of 
the data to determine the importance of model updates.  For 
example, MBDA could be instructed to prioritize data that 
crosses a threshold (e.g., well-performing versus under-
 performing crops) over data that indicates a quantitatively 
larger discrepancy from the model. 
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 3
 Model-based result transmission (MBRT) enhances MBDA 
by formulating a prospective conclusion based on the data 
under assessment.  Data is then prioritized based on its level 
of support or refutation of the conclusion under 
consideration (with data that provides either strong support 
or refutation prioritized over data that is of lesser value). 
Model-based findings transmission (MBFT) is the highest-
 value level of MBTR.  Under MBFT, the spacecraft’s 
onboard computing software autonomously evaluates a 
model of a phenomenon of interest and evaluates the 
observed data in light of this model.  The software updates 
the model, based on the observed data.  It the selects sample 
data elements to send back in conjunction with the updated 
model for verification purposes. 
3. INTEGRATING THE MULTI-TIER APPROACH 
AND MODEL-BASED TRANSMISSION REDUCTION 
The integration of the MBTR and MAMA architectures 
necessitates several changes to the basic forms of both 
architectures to ensure interoperability.  While the 
architectures are comparatively synergistic, some of the 
control logic of the multi-tier architecture must be replaced 
with an MBTR-compatible approach.  Similarly, the MBTR 
approach (based on MBFT) must be revised to trigger 
additional lower-tier data collection. 
Changes Required to the Multi-Tier Architecture 
A typical MAMA mission begins with the tasking of the 
orbital or system-level craft (the system-level craft is 
utilized to coordinate the efforts of multiple mission-specific 
orbital craft) with a high level objective.  The orbital (or 
system) craft sub-divides this task into sub-tasks for one or 
more subordinate craft.  These tasks are assigned to the sub-
 craft, which review the assigned tasks, possibly further sub-
 dividing the tasks into tasks for their subordinate craft.  At 
each level, the craft may opt to collect data itself (for 
verification, etc.) before tasking its subordinates.  This is 
where the prototypical mission concept comes from: an 
orbital craft takes imagery, which is used to assign targets to 
a UAV, which is used to deploy and task ground rovers. 
The incorporation of MBTR requires that the MBTR 
analysis engine be running on each involved craft.  Instead 
of just sub-dividing tasks to effect their completion, the 
MBTR engine sub-divides research goals into component 
goals.  For example, the assertion that a route is safe might 
be subdivided into several assertions covering areas of the 
route – or assertions covering safety from various types of 
dangers.  The former would be based on craft movement 
capabilities; the latter on craft sensing capabilities.  Each 
craft must perform (or have performed for it, using the 
processing job off-tasking functionality) data analysis to 
determine whether it possesses sufficient data to respond to 
the research goal that it is pursuing.  If not, it must collect or 
arrange for the collection of this data.  If sufficient data is 
not obtainable, it must assert and defend this assertion. 
Changes required to Model-Based Transmission Reduction 
The MBTR approach will need to be modified to work in 
collaboration with the multi-tier architecture.  MBTR, at 
present, presumes that it is operating on a single craft as a 
single process.  Further, it is not resource-consumption 
Figure 1–Typical Multi-Tier Mission Hierarchy 
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 4
 aware.  A typical MAMA/Multi-Tier hierarchy is shown in 
Figure 1.  However, when operating in the resource-limited 
space (or remote planetary) environment, resource usage is a 
key consideration.  This is further intensified by the fact that 
the MBTR process, under the multi-tier MBTR approach, 
may be commanding vehicular movement.  Given the 
limited amount of fuel and risk associated with this activity, 
the MBTR process must make resource-conscious 
decisions.  Specifically, it must project the possible value of 
the data that could be collected by a requested action and 
compare that to a projected cost.  A heuristic is used to 
determine whether to command the action immediately or to 
store it as a candidate task to be compared with other 
possible data gathering activities. 
An MBTR Hierarchy 
Figure 2 shows the data collection process of a MBTR 
hierarchy.  The process begins with a task assignment.  The 
MBTR software determines the appropriate collection of 
craft to assign the task to.  This may include the current craft 
(e.g., the orbital craft which may need to take a high-area-
 of-coverage image to begin with).  After this initial data 
collection is conducted, one or more craft may be tasked to 
make (or refute) the assertions required to confirm (or 
refute) the high-level objective.  As Figure 2 shows, a craft 
may task its subordinate (e.g., craft 4, in the example) to 
collect additional data that is required to confirm or refute 
the assertion.   
Once the data is returned to the orbital craft, it attempts to 
confirm or refute the assertion.  In many cases (presuming 
correct projection of the data required), this may be 
immediately possible.  However, in others (as shown in the 
figure) additional data collection may be required.  In the 
specific example depicted in Figure 2, craft 2 is tasked to 
collect additional data that is deemed necessary.  The data 
sufficiency analysis is conducted again and, presuming 
sufficient data is available, the controller is notified of the 
identified result. 
4. COMMUNICATIONS PARADIGM FOR A MBTR 
HIERARCHY / MULTI-TIER MISSION 
Previous work [18] presented a basic inter-robot control 
methodology for sending tasks between robots.  This 
approach, however, is not suitable in its current form for a 
combined MAMA/MBTR mission.  The message format, 
however, was designed to be extensible.  This basic four 
message format is expanded to provide the foundation for 
the MAMA/MBTR inter-craft communications. 
Existing Message Format 
The basic approach from [18] consists of four messages: a 
command message, query message, data transmittal 
message and an exception message.  The command message 
is utilized to convey a tasking assignment.  The query 
message is utilized to obtain status / health information, 
performance data, task progress data or stored data.  The 
data transmittal message is used to transmit raw data 
between the various system nodes (craft).  Finally, the 
exception message is used by a subordinate craft to advise 
its superior that an error condition has occurred or that it 
will (or that it appears plausible that it will) fail to meet a 
performance milestone. 
Extended Message Format 
The extension of each basic message type will now be 
presented.  These messages are still compatible with the 
messaging framework discussed in [18]. 
 
Figure 2 – Process Flow for MAMA/MBTR Mission 
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 5
 Command Message–The command message, in the base 
format, is designed to assign an object of interest for 
assessment.  This message contains an object identifier, 
approximate coordinates, a prioritization and a type 
descriptor.  This message is extended via adding additional 
type identifiers.  Instead of referring to a single object, a 
command message can now refer to a phenomenon.  If the 
phenomenon is of global interest, the coordinate fields are 
left blank.  For localized phenomenon, coordinates can be 
supplied.  Message body space is used to describe, in a 
machine-readable format, the assertion that the command 
message confirmation or refutation of. 
Query Message–The base query message contains a globally 
unique query identifier and either a task identifier or an 
action type identifier.  The task identifier would correspond 
to the command’s identifier for task assignment.  This 
message is not changed; however, additional space in the 
message body is used to send back the current belief values 
for the assertion that the robot is trying to confirm or refute. 
Data Transmittal Message–The data transmittal message 
was designed to be a free-form message to accommodate 
numerous data types that a robot might need to send (e.g., 
graphics, binary sensor data, etc.).  It begins with a query or 
task ID, corresponding to the query or task that the data 
relates to.  For the MAMA/MBTR approach, the body of 
this message utilizes the MBTR model description language 
to describe the proposed changes to the model that the robot 
is proposing.  Further, it forwards (in a second message) the 
data that is required for the superior robot to confirm or 
refute the assertion that it is making. 
Exception Message–The base exception message is used to 
convey robotic failures and mission-performance-related 
exceptions.  This message is used as-is, with the addition of 
the additional type descriptors discussed, previously, in the 
context of the command messages. 
5. EVALUATION OF THE MBTR HIERARCHY 
CONCEPT 
A qualitative evaluation of the MAMA/MBTR approach has 
been performed.  The key consideration was how the 
combined framework performed relative to a normal 
MAMA mission or single-craft MBTR implementation. 
Several considerations were identified; however, these could 
not be quantified, as they are heavily reliant on 
implementation-specific details.  First, it is unclear as to the 
effect that the incorporation of the MBTR software onboard 
the lower-level craft would have on the performance of their 
onboard control software.  In the worst case, the processing 
requirements might completely overwhelm the capabilities 
making the combined mission unfeasible (or requiring 
additional investment in hardware to make the mission 
possible).  Also problematic is the fact that the combined 
approach may operate, but in an inefficient way.  The real-
 time control needs of the robot and the long-duration 
processing needs of the MBTR evaluation process may be in 
constant conflict for the limited processing capabilities 
onboard the spacecraft.  These scenarios will need to be 
tested for during the mission implementation process. 
Second, it is clear that the MAMA/MBTR combined 
framework is not an optimal solution for all mission types.  
Missions that are not data-collection and processing driven 
would not be candidates for the combined approach.  This 
raises an obvious question: what is the optimal approach for 
a mission with multiple objectives.  A Mars mission, for 
example, might have significant data-driven aspects; 
however, there may be construction and other requirements.  
Further testing is required to see if the MBTR aspects of the 
combined framework can be successfully made dormant to 
allow performance during non-data-collection-driven 
mission aspects to perform at the level of the base MAMA 
approach. 
6. DEMONSTRATION MISSION CONCEPTS 
Two demonstration mission concepts are presented to aid in 
the understanding of the implementation of the 
MAMA/MBTR architecture.  The first of these missions, an 
Earth sensornet application, would be an excellent test case 
for the second, a Mars survey mission.  The use of MAMA 
for a Mars mission has been discussed previously in [16]; 
this is extended, herein, to incorporate the MBTR 
technology, making the mission more versatile, reducing 
mission communications requirements and increasing 
mission autonomy and utility. 
An Earth SensorNet 
An Earth sensornet application would be an excellent test 
case for the MAMA/MBTR architecture.  The Earth 
sensornet (depicted in Figure 3) consists of a lead (pristine-
 class) orbital tier member, four smaller orbital craft (in this 
case 3-U CubeSats are presumed), three aerial craft (UAVs 
are presumed) and six ground craft.  It is presumed that the 
ground craft start the mission in a proximal position to their 
corresponding aerial craft. 
The CubeSat-class spacecraft, while orbital-tier members, 
 
Figure 3–Earth SensorNet Application 
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 6
 are not hierarchal superiors to the aerial craft.  They can be 
used, however, to relay messages from the orbital lead 
satellite to the aerial and (if necessary) ground craft. 
A weather phenomenon is an excellent test case for this 
application.  In the case that a severe weather instance was 
detected, orbital imaging could be utilized to obtain a high-
 field-of-view imagery to localize the scale and location of 
the phenomenon.  The UAVs could (presuming that their 
safe operation could be assured, depending on the type of 
the weather phenomenon) then be deployed to the region to 
collect additional visual sensing data.  Moreover in 
applications where wind speed was a significant interest 
(e.g., a tornado or hurricane) the difference between the 
craft’s believed flight speed and GPS-derived movement 
could be utilized to characterize the winds aloft at each 
altitude level that the UAV could fly at for this purpose. 
In the case where the UAVs could not be safely deployed, 
or conditions where additional on-ground data collection 
(e.g., damage assessment) or higher resolution data was 
required, the ground-based craft could be deployed to 
collect additional data. 
A Mars Mission 
A MAMA/MBTR Mars mission is also considered.  In this 
application, with a smaller number of craft, two aerial craft 
are deployed from the orbital lead satellite (which is also the 
interplanetary spacecraft that carried the other six craft to 
Martian orbit).  These aerial craft will deploy the ground 
rovers to the surface in the instance of their first use. 
This mission contemplates two sets of complementary 
objectives.  First, the craft will perform exploratory 
activities across the Martian surface.  Second, a science 
station will be erected on the surface.  The ground craft in 
the left group (under aerial craft 1) are larger and have 
additional manipulation capabilities to effect this goal.  
They must be deployed in close proximity to the drop point 
of the science station (which is deployed, similar to the 
MSL’s deployment method [7], directly to the surface).  To 
ensure that the craft that will erect the structure are located 
by its drop location, aerial craft 1 will survey the area and 
locate the station before deploying the craft to the area.  
These craft will participate in construction activities initially 
(when not needed, they will perform local characterization 
activities).  Once construction is complete, they will move 
progressively further from the science station to investigate 
phenomenon identified by the orbital lead craft and/or aerial 
craft 1.  The science station has capabilities that any ground 
craft can utilize for additional sample processing (in 
addition to its ongoing independent activities).  
8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The aforementioned presents a vision for the combination of 
two previously independent research efforts.  It appears that 
the two technologies present a significant synergy, when 
implemented in conjunction.  This initial work has focused 
on the combination of the two technologies and the 
resolution of several areas where the two technologies 
implement aspects of the control and other processes in 
different ways.  Future work will focus on its 
implementation in the Earth sensornet application discussed 
in section 6 as a precursor for the Mars application (and 
other possible applications). 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] J. Straub and R. Fevig, “Multi-Tier Planetary 
Exploration: A New Autonomous Control Paradigm,” 
Proc. AIAA Space 2012 Conference, Sept., 2012. 
[2] J. Straub, “Reducing Link Budget Requirements with 
Model-Based Transmission Reduction Techniques,” 
Proc. 26th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small 
Satellites, Aug., 2012. 
[3] J. Straub, “A Review of Spacecraft AI Control 
Systems,” Proc. 15th World Multi-Conference on 
Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics, 2011. 
[4] P. Ulivi and D. Harland, Robotic Exploration of the Solar 
System: Part I: The Golden Age 1957-1982, New York: 
Springer/Praxis, 2007. 
[5] P. Ulivi and D. Harland, Robotic Exploration of the Solar 
System: Part 2: Hiatus and Renewal, 1983-1996, New 
York: Springer/Praxis, 2008. 
[6] P. Ulivi and D. Harland, Robotic Exploration of the Solar 
System, Part 3: The Modern Era 1997-2009, New York: 
Springer/Praxis, 2012. 
[7] Steltzner, A.; Kipp, D.; Chen, A.; Burkhart, D.; 
Guernsey, C.; Mendeck, G.; Mitcheltree, R.; Powell, 
R.; Rivellini, T.; San Martin, M.; Way, D.; , "Mars 
Science Laboratory entry, descent, and landing system," 
Aerospace Conference, 2006 IEEE , vol., no., pp.15 
pp., 0-0 0, doi: 10.1109/AERO.2006.1655796. 
[8] T. Malik, “U.S. Spy Satellite Agency Gives NASA 2 
Space Telescopes,” June 4, 2012, [online] 
http://www.space.com/16000-spy-satellites-space-
 telescopes-nasa.html 
[9] Launchspace Staff Writers, “DARPA's SeeMe Program 
Has Arrived,” May 17, 2012 [online] 
http://www.spacedaily.com/reports/DARPA_SeeMe_Pr
 ogram_Has_Arrived_999.html 
[10] W. Fink, et al., "Tier-Scalable Reconnaissance 
Missions for the Autonomous Exploration of Planetary 
 
Figure 4–Mars MAMA/MBTR Mission
   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 7
 Bodies," Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, 2007. 
[11] W. Fink, "Generic Prioritization Framework for Target 
Selection and Instrument Usage for Reconnaissance 
Mission Autonomy," Proceedings of the 2006 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 
pp. 11116-11119, 2006. 
[12] K. D. Prasad, and S. Murty, "Wireless Sensor 
Networks – A potential tool to probe for water on 
Moon," Advances in Space Research , pp. 601-612, 
2011. 
[13] E. Vassev, M. Hinchey, and J. Paquet, "Towards an 
ASSL specification model for NASA swarm-based 
exploration missions," Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 
symposium on Applied computing, 2008. 
[14] W. Fink, et al., “Robotic Test Bed for Autonomous 
Surface Exploration of Titan, Mars, and Other 
Planetary Bodies,” Proc. 2011 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, 2011. 
[15] J. Straub, “Multi-Tier Exploration Concept 
Demonstration Mission,” Proc. 2012 Global Space 
Exploration Conference, 2012. 
[16] J. Straub, “Multi-Tier Exploration: An Architecture for 
Dramatically Increasing Mission ROI”, Proc. AIAA 
Space 2012 Conference, Sept., 2012. 
[17] J. Straub, “Model Based Data Transmission: Analysis 
of Link Budget Requirement Reduction,” 
Communications and Network, Vol. 4, No. 4, 2012. 
[18] J. Straub, “A Modular, Application-Agnostic 
Distributed Control Framework for Robotic 
Applications,” Proc. International Conference on 
Information and Communication Technologies and 
Applications, 2011. 
 
 
Biographies 
Jeremy Straub is a PhD student in the Department of 
Computer Science at the University of North Dakota.  He 
currently serves as the Student Program Director for the 
North Dakota Space Robotics Program.  His research is 
presently focused on artificial intelligence for space 
applications.  Before returning to pursue doctoral studies, 
Mr. Straub held progressively responsible positions in 
industry.  He has over 10 years professional experience in 
developing and managing the development of cutting-edge 
commercial systems, including North America’s first 
commercial traffic-adaptive navigation system.  Jeremy 
holds a BS in Information Technology, a BS in Business, a 
graduate certificate in Space Studies, an MBA and an MS in 
Computer Systems and Software Design.  He is a member of 
the AIAA, IEEE, SPIE and SSPI. 
 
