987-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
Dual-Use System Architecture for a Space Situational 
Awareness System in Japan 
Yasuo Otani 
Keio University 
Graduate School of System Design 
and Management 
2-1-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku 
Yokohama, Japan 
otani@a5.keio.jp 
Naohiko Kohtake
 Keio University 
Graduate School of System Design 
and Management 
2-1-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku 
Yokohama, Japan 
kohtake@sdm.keio.ac.jp 
Yoshiaki Ohkami
 Keio University 
Graduate School of System Design 
and Management 
2-1-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku 
Yokohama, Japan 
ohkami@sdm.keio.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The use of outer space plays a vital role in both 
defense and civil fields. Since the separation of space activities 
between civil and defense applications is extremely inefficient, 
the Dual-Use concept has been considered fundamental for 
promoting the effective use of space. To the best of the authors’ 
knowledge, most previous studies on Dual-Use focused on the 
technological aspects, and very few on a system engineering 
approach to Dual-Use. This left some important issues 
untouched such as the operational aspects of a system of 
systems, which need to be understood in a more generic context. 
This paper presents the results of a conceptual study, system 
design and management analysis of Dual-Use system 
architecture. First, an outline of the Dual-Use concept will be 
described and a definition of Dual-Use given. The effectiveness 
of applying the Dual-Use system concept to Space Situational 
Awareness (SSA) for both defense and civil users as a system of 
systems will then be discussed and investigated with a 
stakeholders analysis, context diagram and design structure 
matrix method. It has demonstrated that there is a need for a 
Dual-Use SSA Data Center which works as a binder between 
defense and civil systems as well as a data policy for constructing 
a Dual-Use SSA system. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION .................................................1 
2. CONCEPT OF DUAL-USE SYSTEM .....................2 
3. STAKEHOLDERS ANALYSIS ...............................3 
4. CONTEXT DIAGRAM AND ENTITY 
REQUIREMENTS ....................................................4 
5. SIMULATION BY DATA CATEGORIZING ...........5 
6. DESIGN STRUCTURE MATRIX (DSM) FOR A 
DUAL-USE MODEL ...............................................6 
7. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK........................7 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT .............................................7 
REFERENCES .........................................................7 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Background of Defense Space Use in Japan 
Worldwide the use of space for national security purposes has 
evolved in recent times. The use of satellites covers many 
diverse fields, such as command and control, reconnaissance, 
meteorological observation and navigation, because space has 
the characteristics of simultaneity and is widespread. In 
recent years, space has become a link for strengthening the 
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, 
Identification, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) 
function. The United States and European countries have 
actively developed defense using outer space. In contrast, the 
Japanese use of space for defense is different from other 
countries. It has been limited to general usage such as 
commercial communication, meteorological and global 
positioning satellites, and information gathering. In the 
political environment, the limitation on military use of space 
has continued for decades. Consequently, the civil field has 
driven Japanese space development and use [1]. 
In 2008 the Basic Space Law was enacted, and in the next 
year the Basic Plan for Space Policy was established by the 
strategic headquarters for space policy in Japan [2]. This law 
aims to work strongly in a comprehensive and systematic 
manner on the use of space in the area of national security 
while maintaining an exclusively defense-oriented policy in 
accordance with the principle of pacifism enshrined in the 
Constitution of Japan. It is expected to activate defense use 
especially in the field of military C4ISR. At the same time, 
the future model for defense use has some challenges and 
should be organized for both defense and civil purposes as a 
totally optimized system because the construction of separate 
systems inevitably leads to partial optimization. To use the 
national budget and human resources more efficiently and 
effectively, it is necessary for space systems to shift to a 
totally optimized system with an overarching perspective. 
Therefore, it is important for the Japanese use of space to 
develop a different type of utilization model from the defense 
oriented utilization model adopted by the US or European 
countries. This paper introduces the defense and civil “Dual-
 Use” concept as an important tool for the total optimized use 
of space. 
SSA for Debris Monitoring and C4ISR System 
Originally, the Space Situational Awareness (SSA) system 
was developed as part of a ballistic missile defense system 
that was dedicated to military activity. The Ballistic Missile 
Defense (BMD) system is a system of systems that includes 
systems for radar, optical sensors, intercontinental ballistic 
missile detection, and command and control. Some of these 
spin-out technologies and systems have been applied to SSA, 
and their activities have been to observe satellites or space 
debris, correct data and create a database. In Japan, the Japan 
 2
 Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) has mainly been 
concerned with SSA activities [3]. To develop an optimal 
SSA system in the future, it would be highly desirable to 
consider the integration of the defense system with the civil 
system. 
In a 2007 paper, Shar et al. proposed a SSA system that 
characterized the interaction between international 
stakeholders by modeling the technical and social elements 
[4]. Their study also identified a SSA system as a system of 
systems through the use of game-theoretical cooperation 
archetypes and system dynamics modeling. However, in past 
studies, there was little interest in constructing a SSA system 
that combined both defense and civil requirements or in the 
aspects that are appropriate for operating such a Dual-Use 
system. SSA activities have not been considered in a Dual-
 Use system from an operational viewpoint. 
 
2. CONCEPT OF DUAL-USE SYSTEM 
Key Aspects of a Dual-Use System 
The purpose of this paper is to develop a totally optimized 
Dual-Use SSA system based on system architecture. First, the 
concept of Dual-Use is defined in terms of the national and 
international SSA situation. The stakeholders are defined 
using a context diagram and the relationship between them is 
clarified. For the purpose of carrying out a system design 
with system engineering methods, the simplified Dual-Use 
SSA model is evaluated using the design structure matrix 
method. Finally, it is demonstrated that the SSA Data Center 
is the binder between defense and civil applications. The data 
policy as an entity requirement for a Dual-Use SSA system is 
also discussed. 
In general, Dual-Use means that the device or the system has 
been designed for or is to be used by more than two interested 
parties. In this study, Dual-Use implies that the device or the 
system has been designed for or is to be used by defense and 
civil users. 
To construct a Dual-Use system, it is necessary to harmonize 
both defense and civil requirements and demands. The most 
characteristic aspect of civil systems is the necessity to 
disclose the data belonging to a customer. In particular, it is 
vital to operate the commercial system economically, which 
sometimes implies that performance must be sacrificed for 
economy. In contrast, the characteristics of a defense system 
are high performance, high data accessibility, assured service 
availability, data security certification and the level of 
vulnerability in an emergency situation. These are usually 
considered more important than profits. The integration of 
these contradictory characteristics in a Dual-Use system is 
critical. In constructing a Dual-Use system, the key issue is 
assuring both users of its purposefulness. 
Dual-Use System for Outer Space 
Conventional use of space for civil fields usually involves 
design as a partially optimized system. Conversely, Dual-Use 
systems consist of many defense and civil components, so to 
construct a totally optimized system, it is necessary to assess 
designs in terms of quality, cost and delivery (QCD). If some 
of the civil application’s objectives, functions and physical 
capabilities are the same as for defense, it is possible to 
reduce the costs by sharing or integrating their common 
functions. These cases typically initiate the total optimization 
for the defense and civil sectors. Further, it should be possible 
to construct the system in a shorter period because of the 
effective allocation of their combined but limited human 
resources. 
However, the defense applications often involve higher 
specifications for their operational needs which are more 
performance- than price-oriented. There is also a requirement 
for strict control of information related to national security. 
Therefore it is important to design and manage the Dual-Use 
space systems with military-specific considerations in terms 
of information leakage prevention. A data policy is 
considered to be an effective means of information 
management. The details of such a data policy will be 
discussed later. 
Dual-Use System for Space Situational Awareness 
The use of space involves various types of functions in both 
defense and civil fields. Table 1 shows the comparison of 
defense and civil use and relevant applications. 
 
Table 1 - Comparison of defense and civil uses 
 
For example, the early warning satellite system for missile 
detection and tracking has infrared technology. This 
technology shares its usefulness with weather observation 
technology, but the satellite itself is used for defense purposes 
only. Thus the early warning system is not used as a Dual-
 Use system. Another example is a communication satellite 
system. This is often used by both defense and civil users. 
The Japan Self Defense Force has leased one of the 
communication satellite transponders to be operated by a 
private company. The Global Positioning System (GPS) was 
used only by the US military in the early stage of its 
operations. However, since the US government decided to 
open the GPS signal to the public, users are spread all over 
 3
 the world. This case shows that the civil area would be able to 
use the military applications. In the Dual-Use SSA system, 
however, each defense and civil area uses the other’s 
applications ensuring interoperability between defense and 
civil. 
The status of the present SSA system 
The experiment on the destruction of a ballistic missile by a 
Chinese satellite in January 2007 and the collision of the 
orbiting satellites of the United States and Russia in February 
2009 caused a large amount of space debris. The volume of 
debris is expected to increase further from chain collisions of 
debris in the future. In these circumstances, it is particularly 
important to increase the operational or technological level of 
debris monitoring for the preservation of the space 
environment. This requires observation of the space objects to 
understand the population of the debris, and make efforts to 
limit its generation. 
The main objective of SSA is to understand the location of 
objects such as space debris or satellites in orbit. SSA 
activities include detection, identification, tracking, 
cataloging of debris and space assets, a database, analyzing 
collision prediction, risk avoidance reporting, and data 
sharing. Among these, obtaining data on orbital debris and 
satellites is of prime importance for providing information on 
collision avoidance or to protect space assets from anti-
 satellite attack. To understand the debris population, Japan 
conducts observation of debris using space observation 
facilities that are currently retained by JAXA and other 
organizations. These data are required for both defense and 
civil purposes. The United States continues to observe debris 
and satellites in orbit, and has created a database of SSA 
information. The SSA data, called two line elements (TLE), 
have been delivered throughout the world via the internet. 
More recently, the US government has conducted a trial 
service for satellite operators which identifies the risk of 
collisions. Information sharing worldwide and the 
architecture of SSA systems that are integrated or coordinated 
by many countries is an urgent issue for all countries 
concerned with space. 
Defense SSA system in Japan 
As previously mentioned, Japan’s defense space activity has 
been inadequate in the past, so we need to assess what can be 
done with present defense assets. In the context of acquiring 
an offensive capability as represented by the Chinese ASAT 
demonstration experiments, the concept of space control has 
become widespread in the defense world. To protect the 
satellite responsible for defense missions in the future, it is 
necessary not only to detect and identify debris and satellites, 
but also to monitor the presence of hostile missiles and 
satellites. At present, the Japan Self Defense Forces have not 
defined any mission related to SSA, so they do not have 
dedicated applications for SSA. The Japan Air Self Defense 
Force (JASDF) has the main mission of air defense and is 
equipped with the C4ISR system called the Japan Aerospace 
Defense Ground System (JADGE). This system enables the 
central command and control of air defense information. One 
of the latest Japanese air defense radars is called the J/FPS-5, 
which is used for air and ballistic missile defense. Figure 1 
shows the appearance of J/FPS-5 radar. The size is about 
30 m ? 30 m ? 25 m (Height ? Width ? Depth). 
 
Figure 1 - J/FPS-5 radar 
This radar facility operates in the L-band frequency range. A 
total of four J/FPS-5s are located in Japan. This radar had 
originally been developed to detect air threats, but has the 
added capability of detecting, identifying and tracking 
ballistic missiles that come from outer space. Thus, J/FPS-5 is 
useful as a Dual-Use SSA system. In constructing the SSA 
system, it is beneficial to share military and civil functions. 
 
3. STAKEHOLDERS ANALYSIS 
It is necessary to consider the stakeholders involved in the 
Dual-Use SSA system. This section clarifies the scope for 
defense and civil users. Figure 2 shows the classification of 
the users in the Dual-Use system. Defense users consist of the 
defense authorities (e.g. the Ministry of Defense and Japan 
Self Defense Forces (JSDF)), crisis management agencies and 
intelligence community. They have similar requirements for 
security certification or information classification. Civil users 
are subdivided into three different types, namely public, 
academic and commercial users. Public users are represented 
by the Ministries, public agencies, including the Japan 
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), and other 
institutions. Academic users imply the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports and Science (MEXT), and universities. 
Commercial users imply private companies. The stakeholders 
of the Dual-Use system include all of these. 
 
 
Figure 2 - Classification of Users in the Dual-Use system 
 4
  
Table 2 is adapted from Shah’s study. It provides an overview 
of Dual-Use SSA stakeholders and their relevant issues. The 
stakeholders in this table are organized according to the 
functions of the SSA system. Information required for service 
providers is based on the system. This table shows how 
accumulating and supplying the SSA information from each 
sensor are key issues. For this, it is necessary to have a 
stakeholder who has the responsibility for managing the 
database. Generally, the key criteria in building the system 
include monetary, information, Public Benefits and service or 
goods. As for the SSA system, obtaining the information 
itself would be the most important aspect. To obtain the 
information, radar and optical sensors, data analysis 
techniques and the services providing data are important 
elements. By considering these factors, a detailed 
interdependency model can be created using the context 
diagram as follows. 
 
Table 2 - Stakeholders of a Dual-Use SSA system 
 
 
4. CONTEXT DIAGRAM AND ENTITY 
REQUIREMENTS 
Data Center as the information binder 
An important consideration, when constructing a Dual-Use 
SSA system, is how the information should be shared and 
connected between the defense and civil users in the system. 
A suitable solution is to establish a type of data management 
center, namely the Dual-Use SSA Data Center. The functions 
of this center include a database containing the SSA raw data, 
analyzed debris and satellite orbits, collision avoidance data, 
and even an advisory role on avoidance. The stakeholder 
handling these data functions would be located at the center 
of the Dual-Use SSA system. Figure 3 shows the context 
diagram of the relationship between defense and civil 
stakeholders. In this figure, the dashed lines show the “not yet” 
existing elements, and the dotted lines show the classified 
information flows. 
This figure shows how the Dual-Use SSA Data Center plays 
the binding role for defense and civil stakeholders. If the data 
covers only unclassified data, even the civil sector, such as 
private enterprises, can be established users in the Dual-Use 
SSA model. However if the Data Center needs to handle 
classified data or information with limited access within the 
government, the Data Center should be retained within the 
defense or at least the government’s jurisdiction. It would be 
the considered approach to providing the service on the 
gathered information. Retaining the Data Center in this 
environment would be a significant issue. A detailed study for 
this type of service retention is not contained in this paper. 
When private sectors have to handle classified data, an 
appropriate filter would be needed during the connection 
between the JADGE system and the Data Center. Providing 
and enforcing the information management rules are key 
aspects of the Dual-Use system. 
Entity Requirements and Data Policy 
For a Dual-Use SSA system, the entity requirements are 
obviously divided between defense and civil requirements. 
The defense requirements for a SSA system would include 
ensuring satellite and debris surveillance capability for 
responding to anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons, and the 
protection of space assets which belong to both the defense 
and civil areas. Conversely, the civil requirements for a SSA 
system would include service continuity for the service 
provider and receiving the service safely and securely for the 
service users. 
To achieve these requirements, along with the data managed 
in the data center, the entity is required to inform the service 
provider of the analysis for predicting satellite collision 
avoidance. However it is possible for the Data Center itself to 
hold these requirements. As for other stakeholders, SSA 
related capabilities exist and previous studies have identified 
their requirements. For example, the Japanese SSA sensors 
located near 135° east longitude are suitable for contributing 
to the SSA data. It is desirable to share the SSA data between 
countries, and to obtain more accurate information of the 
debris orbits from the Japanese sensors. 
There is a constraint on the Dual-Use SSA system when 
different mission requirements arise simultaneously from 
both the defense and civil users. For example, suppose that a 
private company needed detailed observations for avoiding a 
collision with their satellite that was predicted and had been 
provided with an avoidance warning. At the same time the 
international situation became tense and the dedicated radar 
system had to be focused on defense missions such as air 
defense or ballistic missile defense. This case illustrates a 
conflict for SSA system operation. In such a situation, 
prioritization in advance about the operation of the function is 
required. Furthermore, it is also necessary to clarify the 
operational manner for the observation-request on the sensor. 
This type of problem is treated as a data policy issue. Data 
 5
 policy is usually complex because it affects the interests of all 
the organizations. For the Dual-Use SSA system, data policy 
and management are essential because it is possible data will 
be directly connected to national security. The data policy is 
one critical prerequisite for efficient Dual-Use system 
operation. According to Rathgeber’s paper, data policy 
comprises the rules and procedures for handling and 
distributing information gained by sensors (raw data) or 
manipulated/refined by subsequent system stages (processed 
data) as well as the mechanisms to control and enforce 
compliance with these rules and procedures [5]. Defense or 
intelligence satellites usually require the ability to deal with 
classified data. To ensure this requirement, both space assets 
and ground control/communication systems must be equipped 
with the classification system. This would also apply to the 
Dual-Use system. Accordingly, the data policy should contain 
several functions such as prioritization and data classification. 
 
5. SIMULATION BY DATA CATEGORIZING 
The SSA data, which are obtained from optical or radar 
sensors, include data to be protected for the national security 
reasons. Providing a hierarchy according to the security levels 
and defining the management of the users simplifies the data 
treatment. To simulate the feasibility of the system, it is 
necessary to verify the data flow in each level of hierarchy in 
the SSA system context diagram. First, three levels of the 
hierarchy are defined for data treatment. These are described 
as: 
Class 1: Non-classified data that can be treated by anybody. 
Class 2: Classified data such as trade secrets that can be 
treated by any organizations with the government’s or 
specified companies’ authentication. 
Class 3: Classified data that can be treated only by the 
organizations concerned with national security. 
The input of raw SSA data can come from the civil and 
defense sensors, and the US space fence through JSpOC. 
However, it is difficult for the sensor itself to manage the data 
and to distinguish between non-classified raw data and 
classified data. The management and discrimination of the 
mixed data would be carried out by the data receiving facility. 
For example, the data from a civil sensor could be classified 
by the data integrators or data center, and the data obtained 
from defense applications by the JADGE system operators. It 
is efficient for all classified and unclassified data acquired 
outside Japan to be obtained through one Japanese point of 
contact. In this case, it is desirable for the data center or 
JADGE system to have these functions. Therefore for defense 
users, all the defense stakeholders are able to handle Class 3 
data. For civil users, the data integrators and data center are 
able to handle this type of data. The data center would gather 
and analyze the SSA raw data. After providing the SSA 
information service, only Class1 and 2 data would be needed 
for the civil services. Therefore clarifying this segment is 
needed to avoid confusion in data distribution or data sharing. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 - Context Diagram of a Dual-Use SSA System 
 6
 6. DESIGN STRUCTURE MATRIX (DSM) FOR A 
DUAL-USE MODEL 
Design Structure Matrix for a Simple Model 
When constructing a Dual-Use system it is important to 
establish the interdependency between the defense and civil 
elements. Figure 4 shows a simple dependency model 
between defense and civil use. Defense use and civil use 
maintain a mutually dependent relationship by using 
complementary human and physical resources for achieving 
their objectives. This relationship is defined as an 
interdependent type. A design structure matrix chart is one of 
the ways of simplifying complex engineering tasks to make 
them more efficient. According to Eppinger et al [6], the 
DSM is a network modeling tool used to represent the 
elements comprising a system and their interactions, thereby 
highlighting the system’s architecture or designed structure. 
DSM is particularly well suitable to applications in the 
development of complex engineering systems and has to date 
primarily been used in the area of engineering management. 
 
 
Figure 4 - Dependency of the Elements 
 
Table 3 shows the interdependency using a DSM, in which 
each off-diagonal element that is non-zero can cause a risk of 
rework compared with the case for constructing the system 
separately.  
Table 3 - Design Structure Matrix (Mutually Independent 
Model) 
 
 
Design Structure Matrix for Independent Model and Dual-
 Use Model 
Table 4 shows that the DSM is block diagonal and that the 
civil use (upper-left block) and the defense use (lower-right 
block) are separated each other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 - Design Structure Matrix for Independent Model 
  
Table 5 shows, on the other hand, that the DSM includes off-
 diagonal block indicating mutual interactions. Viewing from 
the defense side, the upper right off-diagonal block means 
profits in the sense that civil organizations provide 
information to the defense side. However, the lower-left off-
 diagonal block indicates a sort of risks in that information 
may be used by unidentifiable organizations through the civil 
sectors. 
In the Table 4 and 5, the abbreviations stand for as follows, 
 
RLP:   Rocket Launch Providers 
DASP:  Debris Avoidance Service Providers 
SOs:  Satellite Operators 
JAXA:  Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (Data 
Integration) 
BSGC:  Bisei Space Guard Center (Optical 
Telescope System) 
KSGC:  Kamisaibara Space Guard Center (Radar 
System) 
SSUs:  Satellite Service Users 
SSPs:  Satellite Service Providers 
DUSD:  Dual-Use SSA Data Center 
JADGE: Japan Aerospace Defense Ground System 
JFPS5:  J/FPS-5 radar system 
USAF:  US Air Force 
ANs:  Allied Nations 
 
All of these abbreviations are expressed by the context 
diagram of a Dual-Use SSA system in Figure 3, and their 
activities are also provided in this figure. 
 
 
 7
  
Table 5 - Design Structure Matrix for a Dual-Use Model 
 
 
Profits and Risks of Dual-Use SSA System architecture 
Compared with single system architecture, the benefits and 
risks of Dual-Use SSA system architecture from the defense 
viewpoint are described below. 
[Benefits] 
(1) Cost – it is possible to reduce the cost in accordance with 
system development and operation. Moreover there is less 
investment in the defense area through the use of civil 
human resources. 
(2) Shortening of the development period – by using the 
existing facilities and/or equipment, the development 
period will be shortened. 
(3) Activation of the aerospace industry and enhancing the 
potential for space use. 
(4) Rapid and easy exchange of SSA information with other 
countries because of the clarification of the counterpart 
facilities and classification of information protection 
 [Risks] 
(1) Classified data exposure – there could be data loss or 
cyber-attacks when providing data externally using 
systems that handle the confidential data. 
(2) Limiting a purpose to achieve other purposes – the 
purpose could possibly be inhibited or there could be a 
conflict of interest. 
 
7. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposes a SSA system which introduces the 
concept of Dual-Use space utilization. The results show that 
sharing information is an important factor in a Dual-Use SSA 
system. It is suggested that there is a need for establishing the 
data center as a binder between defense and civil users. It is 
necessary to clarify the data policy to achieve their respective 
objectives and the interdependent relationship between the 
defense and civil users. It is also shown that classifying the 
data in a hierarchical manner would be beneficial. 
In the future, since a SSA system will be needed to share 
information between many allied countries, it will be 
necessary to construct further complex systems for data 
sharing between multiple nations. In which case it will be 
beneficial to study using the parametric and graphical 
representation method together with the system modeling 
language (SysML) which is a useful system design method. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A part of this research was carried out with the support of the 
MEXT Global COE Program “Center for Education and 
Research of Symbiotic, Safe and Secure System Design”. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] S. Aoki, “Military Use of Outer Space: Law and Policy in 
Japan,” 21st International Symposium on Space and 
Technology and Science, ISTS 2004-r-32, June 2004. 
[2] Japan Strategic Headquarters for Space Policy. (2009, June 
2). Basic Plan for Space Policy [Online]. Available: 
http://www8.cao.go.jp/space/pdf/basic_plan.pdf 
[3] C. Hirose, Y. Taromaru, M. Kameyama, S. Aoki and S. 
Isobe, “Overview of JAXA Space Debris Surveillance 
Operations,” in Space Operations: Mission Management, 
Technologies, and Current Applications, AIAA, Inc., 
Virginia, 2007, pp. 293-303. 
[4] N. B. Shar, M. G. Richards, D. A. Broniatowski, J. R. 
Laracy, P. N. Springmann and D. E. Hastings, “System of 
Systems Architecture: The Case of Space Situational 
Awareness,” AIAA Space 2007 Conf., Sep. 2007. 
[5] W. Rathgeber, “Key Aspects of a European Space 
Situational Awareness,” 25th International Symposium on 
Space and Technology and Science, ISTS 2008-r-3-04, June 
2008. 
[6] S. D. Eppinger and T. R. Browning, Design Structure 
Matrix Methods and Applications, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 2012. 
 8
 Biographies 
Colonel Yasuo Otani received a 
master’s degree in Aerospace 
Engineering from the National 
Defense Academy in Japan. He has 
been a Japan Air Self Defense 
Force engineering officer for more 
than 20 years. He currently holds 
the position of Head, Aeronautics and Avionics Section, 
Development Department, Air Staff Office (ASO), 
Ministry of Defense. Prior to the ASO, he was an 
instructor in the National Security Strategy Course in the 
Air Staff College. He has experience in formulating the 
Space Policy at the Secretariat of Strategic Headquarters 
for Space Policy, Cabinet Secretariat. He has worked on 
a variety of military aircraft development programs and 
projects, including the XF-2 fighter aircraft flight test 
program at Gifu AB, the Advanced Technical 
Demonstration Aircraft (ATD-X) research project in the 
Technical Research and Development Institute and 
Uninhabited Air Vehicle program. He is also currently in 
the doctoral course at Keio University Graduate School 
of System Design and Management. His interests include 
system design and management for space systems, system 
of systems analysis, space policy and Dual-Use strategy 
on military activities. 
Dr. Naohiko Kohtake is an 
Associate Professor, Keio 
University. He was engaged in 
research and development on 
avionics systems for H-IIA rocket at 
Japan Aerospace Exploration 
Agency, and ubiquitous computing 
systems at Keio University. He was 
also involved in research for on-board software at 
European Space Agency and user interface at Sony 
Computer Science Laboratories as a visiting researcher. 
After working on software independent verification and 
validation for satellites and the international space 
station as an associated senior engineer at Digital 
Innovation Center in Japan Aerospace Exploration 
Agency, he is in charge of space system engineering and 
intelligent system as a director of Smart Systems 
Laboratory, Keio University. 
Dr. Yoshiaki Ohkami obtained Dr. 
Engineering in Control Engineering 
from Tokyo Institute of Technology 
and worked for National Aerospace 
Laboratory as a research engineer 
on spacecraft attitude control and 
large space systems (1968-1992).  
During this period, he worked as a visiting researcher at 
UCLA under NASA/MSFC Contract and Deputy Director 
for Space Station Program of Japan. He became a 
professor at Tokyo Institute of Technology (1992-1999), 
and at Keio University (1999-2005) while serving as 
Research Inspector at JAXA Space Center. Now he serves 
as Executive Advisor after finishing the Dean of Graduate 
School of Systems Design and Management, Keio 
University. Major fields of his research include the 
Strategic Systems Engineering, Dynamics and Control of 
Mechanical Systems, and Field Robotics. He is a fellow of 
Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers and the INCOSE, 
and life members of IEEE and Japan Society for 
Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He is awarded 
Academic Prizes from JSME, SICE, and others. 
 
