 
 
Analyzing Text-based User Feedback in e-Government Services 
Using Topic Models
 Dahlan Nariman
 Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University
 dahlan@apu.ac.jp
 Abstract
 In providing e-Government services, it is necessary to 
conduct a user-centric evaluation periodically, to 
improve the usability, accessibility, and effectiveness of 
e-Government services for citizens. In a qualitative 
evaluation, gathering user’s opinions and 
recommendations to the e-Government services are 
commonly used to get a real feedback from the citizens.
 However, such the user feedback commonly is containing 
a big text data from diversity of the citizens. It is 
necessary to do a text mining to assist an analyzing to 
find out quickly the point of what the citizens 
recommended. This study proposes an application of 
Topic Models to do analysis of the big text datasets of the 
user’s feedback. Based on the qualitative analyses 
approach, the study analyzes user’s opinion and 
recommendation to the e-Government services. The 
paper also describe designing evaluation sheet, data 
collection and analysis strategies of a case study in 
e-Government portals evaluation.
 Keywords: e-Government, user-centric evaluation, 
text-mining, topic models, LDA, qualitative analysis
 1. Introduction
 A critical factor of success in today’s governments is 
to effectively communicate their messages to citizens 
and build strong alliances with them by empowering 
their participation in the decision making process. Some 
countries have established promising e-Government 
initiatives with the objective of enhancing the 
accessibility of government services and information for 
their citizens. Since e-government can improve 
government management efficiency, it is very important 
to improve the public service by the public’s need to
 e-government’s development.  
However, the e-government website design mainly 
concentrates on website features that would enhance its 
usability with the government centric approach. The 
governments tend to design and launch online services 
based on their understanding of what citizens need 
without actually measuring what increases citizens’ 
willingness to adopt the e-Government services. 
E-Government services should be the maximum from 
the needs of the public, based on the interests of the 
public as the center design services, and improve 
service efficiency, reduce service costs, improve service 
quality, providing the public with the largest service 
efficiency. Government public services need to attach 
importance to the principle of demand-oriented and then 
carry out all system construction and services work. To 
achieve this goal, government institutions and the public 
must be interactive with information on the public 
information needs and study the real need of public.
 This process needs to do the public opinion collections. 
However, such the user feedback commonly is 
containing a big text data from diversity of the citizens.
 The big data of the user’s feedback is about turning 
imperfect, complex, often unstructured data into 
actionable information. This implies leveraging 
advanced computational and analytical tools such as
 text mining tools, to reveal trends and correlations 
within and across large data sets that would otherwise 
remain undiscovered.
 This study proposes an application of Topic Models to 
do analysis of the big text data of the e-Government 
user’s feedback. The topic models are a popular method 
for modeling the term frequency occurrences in text 
documents. Based on the qualitative analyses approach, 
the study analyzes user’s opinion and recommendation 
to the e-Government services. The paper also describe 
designing evaluation sheet, data collection and analysis 
strategies of a case study in e-Government portals 
evaluation.
 2. Research Purposes 
The study of this project aimed primarily to investigate 
the effects of cultural, social politic situation and other 
country-specific factors on the development and 
diffusion of e-government. Specifically, the project 
aimed to:
  Providing a model of evaluation for e-government 
services.
  Examine the willingness and capability of Indonesia 
people to use e-government to improve quality of 
resources and services of e-government sites.
  Provide assistance to Indonesia’s e-government 
project by providing a socio-technical, theoretical 
framework to adoption within which new initiatives 
might be evaluated.
 The study of this paper addressed three questions;
 1. What are the citizens’ needs in e-government
 services?
 2. How to find priorities of the services that truly 
2013 Seventh International Conference on Complex, Intelligent, and Software Intensive Systems
 978-0-7695-4992-7/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
 DOI 10.1109/CISIS.2013.129
 720
 
 
reflect the needs of the citizens?
 3. How do the peoples fell about the utilization of 
e-Government services?
 3. Related Research Work
 3.1. Evaluating e-Government Services
 Many studies were conducted to evaluate 
e-government provision of services through the Web. 
Those studies generally fall in two categories, those that 
borrow lessons and suggestions from the evaluation of 
the web characteristics with contents of services and 
performance approach; and those that concentrate on the 
characteristics of the web with web structural and 
network analysis approach. Both of the categories are 
focusing on measuring the rating of services to evaluate 
the website source, services and/or characteristics of the 
web. An evaluation model based on a rating of services 
and user needs/expectancy to evaluate user satisfaction 
of resources and services are never used in those studies.
 The work of Wood et al [1] is a study that tries to 
utilize lessons and experiences from evaluation of a web 
site services performance. The authors suggested use of a 
multidimensional Web evaluation strategy, which 
includes methods such as usability testing, user feedback, 
usage data, and Web and Internet performance, etc. that 
are common in the evaluation of commercial Web sites. 
A study of Wang et al [2] was aimed to develop and 
evaluate a model for e-government services that focuses 
on how characteristics of site interact with both the 
services and citizens to influence the efficient delivery 
services. It was also aimed to help answer why a 
government websites designed to be citizen-centric in 
service delivery succeeds or fails. A research was done 
by Wangpipatwong et al [3] is a study to investigate 
factors that influence the adoption of e-Government 
websites directly from citizens. This work typically 
focused on characteristic of information quality and 
system quality of the e-government websites. The 
authors suggested that characteristics of information 
quality significantly influence the adoption of the 
e-Government websites. The study concluded that 
efficiency, accuracy, relevancy and completeness are 
more significance factors than timeliness and precision 
of the information in the e-Government websites. The 
work of Hasigawa et al [4] is a typical study to examine 
the e-government progress level based on questionnaire 
survey. The authors suggested use three progress levels 
(input, output, and outcome) in measuring the 
e-government achievement. The authors considered that 
the progress level is high with achieving the outcome. 
Those studies are focusing on measuring the rating of 
services, without evaluate user needs/expectancy to the 
resources and services.
 Researches by Kojima et al, and Patricek et al, 
represent the second approach to evaluation of 
e-Government Web sites. The work of Kojima et al [5] 
proposed a method of websites grouping based on link 
structure in order to compose the whole structure of a site 
by considering semantically related pages as one virtual 
document. The work of Patricek et al [6] is a study that 
tries to improve e-Government evaluation using arrange 
of techniques from web metric and social networks 
analysis. The authors examined two forms of structural 
characteristics of the websites: internal structure that is 
indicative of navigability of a site, and external structure 
that is indicative of hubness and authority of a site. 
Above studies are focusing on measuring the 
characteristics of the web with web structural and 
network analysis approach, without evaluate user 
needs/expectancy to the services.
 This paper presents a case study of Indonesian central 
government institutional e-Government services. Studies 
regarding Indonesia e-Government evaluation are still 
rare [7]; the Author found a few research studies. 
Research performed by Sarosa [8] evaluated the level of 
e-Government adoption in Yogyakarta. Another research 
study was performed by Wahid to evaluate the content 
focus and quality of e-Government websites at the 
districts/cities level [9]. Author also already conducted 
previous study to evaluate the status of development and 
information quality and services, user preferences and 
behaviors of the Indonesia central government’s 
e-Government portals [10, 11, 12, 13]. However, 
information regarding user preferences and actual factors 
improving user to access the e-government services is 
very important but currently still not clearly understood. 
This study presents an evaluation based on a quantitative 
analysis approach of the Indonesian central government 
institution’s e-Government services.
 3.2 Topic Models for Text Mining
 Topic models are a probabilistic generative model for 
discrete data, where each user has a probability 
distribution of selecting each topic, and each topic has a 
probability distribution overall data. An early topic 
model was proposed by Hofmann [15] who developed 
probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). Blei et al 
[16] introduced Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
 model which is a Bayesian mixture model for discrete 
data where topics are assumed to be uncorrelated. In 
LDA, the generation of a document collection is 
modeled as a three step process. First, for each 
document, a distribution over topics is sampled from a 
Dirichlet distribution. Second, for each word in the 
document, a single topic is chosen according to this 
distribution. Finally, each word is sampled from a 
multinomial distribution over words specific to the 
sampled topic. The Correlated Topics Model (CTM) is 
an extension of the LDA model where correlations 
between topics are allowed [17].
 Topic models have previously been used for a variety 
of applications, including information retrieval [18], 
geographical information retrieval [19], and analyzing 
log data of human behavior such as web usage [20], 
news article reading [21] as well as purchasing behavior 
721
 
 
[22]. This study proposes an application of Topic Models
 to analyze of the big text data set of the user’s feedback.
 4. Research Methodology
 The general research framework of this study adopted 
a problem-based research cycle presented by Levy, et al. 
[23]. In Levy’s research cycle, a research endeavor might 
best be viewed as a structure that incorporates a number 
of distinct but related elements, including the research 
problem that drives the research, along with the goals, 
research questions, literature review, methodology, 
results, and conclusions. The research problem serves as 
the starting point for the research, and is a unifying 
thread that runs throughout all of the elements of the 
research endeavor. Research goals essentially detail what 
the research study intends to do in order to address the 
problem, thereby answering the question: “What will this 
study do?” 
Figure 1 shows the general framework of this study. To 
achieve the study goals described in Section 3, this study 
addresses the indicated research questions (Section 2). 
This study employs both qualitative and quantitative 
data analyses to produce and explore new findings. 
Qualitative analysis and literature review is conducted 
to support and validate all of the issues.
 This paper presents an evaluation based on the concept 
of a public value methodology for e-Government portal 
evaluation. This concept is a new approach for 
performing an analysis and evaluation of governance 
quality. The key points of this concept were developed in 
the mid-90 [24]. This concept takes its root in public 
administration practice, as a basis for monitoring the 
efficiency of administrative reforms and the 
development of public service quality standards. Such 
purposes are perhaps most clearly identifiable in respect 
of universal entitlements such as health, education, 
housing and sanitation, personal security, and justice. 
Moore argues that public values must relate to citizens’ 
desires and perceptions. 
One of the modern applications of this concept is the 
analysis and evaluation of various services and tools of 
governance quality improvement. Today, one of the most 
effective tools of government quality improvement is the 
development of e-Government. The Author has adapted 
and extended this concept to address e-Government, with 
application to the case study of Indonesia. 
The Public Value can be defined as the value created 
by government activities, and the added value arising 
from these activities can be interpreted as the difference
 between the benefits received from and resources given
 to the government by society. In mapping the territory of
 what it is the public value, Kelly et al. [25] identify three 
categories; (1) public services, (2) public policy 
outcomes, and (3) public trust. By these three elements, 
the public value concept is closely interrelated with the 
good governance principles developed by the United 
Nations, and also with the governance quality criteria 
used by the World Bank to calculate GRICS 
(Governance Research Indicator Country Snapshot)
 indices. The public value concept enabled an analysis 
and systemization of the characteristics used by different 
researchers to evaluate the level of development and 
quality of e-Government portals, which resulted in the 
specification of five major indicators for assessing 
regional government portals [26]: (1) Openness, (2) 
Transparency, (3) Interactivity, (4) Citizen-centricity, 
and (5) Usability. The Author has adopted and extended 
this concept to evaluate e-Government in Indonesia.  
 
Figure 1: A General Research Framework
 5. Data Collection and Analysis 
The study mainly used three types of data collections; 
e-mail, online website, and in-person interview. Online 
data collection was undertaken trough mailing list of 
Indonesian societies, and government institution 
websites. In-person interview was conducted to the 
citizen in some area of Indonesia (Jakarta, Bandung, 
Surabaya, Malang, Gresik, Yogyakarta, Balikpapan, 
Samarinda, Makassar, etc). The online data collection 
took place between the beginning of August 2012 and the 
end of December 2012. The data collection in some 
internet cafés started on 10 August and finished on 25
 August 2012. More than 320 opinions from citizens 
were collected from the survey.
 Table 1: Statistics of the collected text datasets
 Respondents 320 Total of words 19,804
 Docs 320 vocabulary 1,032
 Empty docs 4 characters 172,712 
Docs (<=5 words) 0 paragraph 1,528
 Docs (> 5 words) 316 lines 6,749
 722
 
 
Table 1 illustrates statistical characteristic of the 
collected datasets. After the questionnaires have been 
completed, coded paper questionnaires are entered into 
Excel’s CSV spreadsheet. The respondents’ ID, Age 
and opinion data are entered into first, second and third
 column of the sheet. We used Stanford Topic Modeling 
Toolbox (TMT) to perform analysis of the collected 
datasets that have substantial textual component [27].
 The Stanford TMT provided some features that give 
ability to do Topic Models Analysis, and the study
 utilized the following features:
 1. Importing text datasets from cells in Excel’s 
CSV spreadsheets.
 2. Using LDA model to create summaries of the 
text datasets.
 3. Selecting parameters for training LDA model,
 such as the number of topics, number of top 
words in the each topic, filtering most common 
words and selecting the column containing the 
text datasets.   
4. Slicing the LDA topic models output and 
converting it into rich Excel-compatible outputs 
for tracking word usage across topics and 
respondent categories.
 Figure 2 shows script source used to train the LDA 
topic model. The data was imported from a CSV file 
with name “survey-data.csv”. The program is set to read 
terms with more than 4 characters, because some terms
 and conjunctions commonly used in Indonesian 
language wrote in 3 or 4 alphabet characters. For 
example; saya(me), kamu(you), yang(be-,that), dan
 (and), etc. The number of topics was set to categorize
 the datasets into three topics. Table 2 shows a summary 
of the topic model after finishing the data training. The 
table represents the top-ten terms in the each topic.
 Table 3 shows how many times the terms of topic have 
occurred in the each group of respondents. 
Figure 2: A part of scripts code and its parameters for 
the LDA topic model analysis
 Table 2: A summary of the top-ten terms in the topics
 Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2 
online terkini memuat
 layanan forum terkini
 administrasi diskusi pasar
 database memuat indikator-indikator
 dokumen berita-berita investasi
 regulasi pengaduan berita-berita
 kegiatan pendapat regulasi
 pengumpulan pengumpulan lelang
 pendapat online transaksi
 akses ruang Pengumpulan
 Online services 
and database
 up to date 
information and 
public opinion 
gathering
 Economy business 
and online 
transaction
 Table 3: Frequency the each topic occurred in the text
 datasets
 Group 
ID 
Documents
 Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2
 under 20 8.6326 11.3897 31.9777 
21-30 36.9365 12.8886 90.1749 
31-40 37.9289 7.0932 42.9779 
41-50 12.7829 0.0019 3.2152 
50- 8.0401 0.0690 3.8909 
Total 104.3210 31.4424 172.2366 
Ratio 33.9% 10.2% 55.9%
 Figure 3: Ratio of each topic from collected data sets
 Table 4: Ratio of the topics in the groups of the 
respondents’ age category
 Group 
ID 
Number of 
Respondent
 Ratio of Document
 Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2
 under 20 52 16.60% 21.90% 61.50%
 21-30 144 25.70% 9.00% 62.60%
 31-40 88 43.10% 8.10% 48.80%
 41-50 16 79.90% 0.00% 20.10%
 50- 12 67.00% 0.60% 32.40%
 723
 
 
Figure 4: Characteristic of the proportion of each topic 
in the group of the respondents’ age category
 6. Findings
 The result on the table 2 shows that the respondents 
feel that the e-Government services should make benefit 
for citizen. In this analysis, the datasets were 
categorized into three topics. Base on the summary of 
the top-ten of most frequency occurred terms in each 
topic, terms of the topic 0 represent the importance of
 providing online services and database. The topic 1
 shows the identification of need to provide up to date 
information from the government institutions and the 
importance of public opinion gathering. Topic 2 indicate 
that the e-government services should provide 
information of economy and business circumstances, 
such as economic indicators, the government’s 
regulations on such businesses, opportunities for 
investor, bidding information and online transaction. 
Base on the ratio of the topics, 55.9% of the 
documents is close to the content of the topic 2. Its 
indicate most of the respondents feel that the 
e-government services should provide online transaction 
services and up to date information related to the 
economy and providing information of business chance
 with the government institutions. The topic 0 was 
described in the 33.9 % of the documents. The 
importance of providing online services and database 
was represented in the one-third of the respondents’ 
opinions. Only 10.2% of the respondents’ opinion said 
the importance of providing the most up to date 
information of government institution activities and the 
necessity of the concrete actions to provide public 
opinion gathering services through online public forum
 and a consultation service corner for citizen.  
Table 4 and Figure 4 illustrate the characteristics of 
the each group of respondent category to choose a topic
 for their opinion on e-Government services. The 
respondents with a group of younger than 20 years old 
and between 21 to 31 years old make their opinion 
choice to the topic 2. The result indicates that most of 
young respondents want to take economically benefit on 
e-Government services like utilization of online 
transaction for effectiveness of the government services. 
The middle age respondents made a trend to choose 
their opinion to the topic 0. Around 80% of the middle 
age and 67% of the old age groups argued about the 
providing an online services and database on the 
e-Government services is very important. Only 20% of 
the middle age and 32% of old age respondents feel the 
importance of providing online transaction on
 e-Government services. It can be said that the middle 
and old age groups of citizens suggest providing online 
services and database in the administration processes of
 government institutions.
 7. Conclusions
 The LDA topic models can be used to assist an 
analyzing of a big text datasets of the citizens’ opinion 
and recommendation to identify and find out quickly the 
point of what citizens recommended in. The citizen
 recommendation can be indentified from the categorized 
topics and most frequency occurred terms in the each 
topic. The data analyses of this case study was used a 
number of parameter to categorize the topics into three 
different topics. More than three topics categorizing is 
also needed to be analyzed and compared with each 
others. 
By slicing the topics and the groups ID, The LDA 
topics models also can identify the characteristics of the 
each group of the respondents. The study experimented 
to show the characteristics of each group of 
respondents’ age category with their proportion in the 
each topic. The experiment shows that the different of 
the trend in each group of respondents can be shown 
clearly. In this study, the category of age was divided 
into only five groups. To analyze and show much more 
precisely the characteristics, it is needed more specific 
age categories. Identification of the characteristics of the 
citizens’ opinions and recommendation is also needed 
on various type of groups of citizens such as area that 
the citizens live in, education, income, type of internet 
connection, and so on.
 The government should do frequently evaluation of 
what are the services needed. To improve the usability, 
accessibility, and effectiveness of e-Government 
services for citizens, it is necessary to conduct the
 services’ impacts evaluation, periodically. The resulting 
gathered information represents important feedback and 
opinions from the users. The e-Government website 
developers will then need to reflect such feedback in the 
redesign and reengineering of e-Government services. To 
make much clearer the current status of e-government
 services and its impacts for the citizen, author consider 
that it is necessary to conduct other studies with different 
frameworks and parameters, such as level of 
infrastructure, users terminal system, internet providers, 
access speed, scale of database, category and type of 
contents released, web user interface and so on. It is also 
required to conduct analyzing some factors with broader 
socio-economic framework such as social status and 
demographics parameters. 
724
 
 
References: 
1. Wood, F.B., Siegel, E. R., LaCroix, E., Lyon, B. (2003) 
“A practical approach to E-government Web 
evaluation,” IT Professional, May June 2003, pp. 
22-28.
 2. Wang L. Bretschneider, S., Gant,J., (2005), 
“Evaluatiang Web-based e-government services with a 
citizen-centric approach”, Proceeding of IEEE the 38th
 Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
January 2005, pp.129b-129b.
 3. Wangpipatwong S. S., Chutimaskul, W., Papasratorn, B.
 (2005), ”Factors Influencing the Adoption of Thai 
eGovernment Websites: Information Quality and 
System Quality Approach”, Proceeding of the Fourth 
International Conference on eBusiness, November 
2005, pp. 14.1-14.7.
 4. Higashigawa T., KuBo S., Shimada T.,(2006) 
“Empirical Study of e-Government progress level on 
local government”, The Japan Association for Social 
Imformatics Studies, 2006.
 5. Kojima S., Atsuhiro, T., Adachi (2002), “Structural 
Analysis and Grouping of Web pages”, The Journal of 
Japan National Institute of Informatics, No.4, March 
2002, pp.23-35.
 6. Patricek V., Escher, T., Cox, I. J., Margetts, H.(2006), 
“The web structure of e-Government – Developing a 
Methodology for Quantitative Evaluation”, Proceeding 
of ACM International Conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW 2006), May 2006.
 7. Agung, Joko, interview by Dahlan N. Indonesia 
e-Government Review , August, 2008.
 8. Sarosa, Samiaji, and Jenjang Sri Lestari. (2006). "The 
level of e-Government Adoption: The Case of 
Jogjakarta's Local Government." Proceedings of 
International Conference on Information Integration 
and Web-based Applications & Services ( iiWAS).
 Yogyakarta, pp. 485-492.
 9. Wahid, Fathul. (2008). "Evaluating Focus and Quality of 
Indonesia e-Governmnet Websites." Seminar Nasional 
Aplikasi Teknologi Informasi 2008. Yogyakarta: SNATI, 
pp. h39-h43.
 10. Dahlan, N. (2008). "An Evaluation of Information 
Quality of e-government in Indonesia." Proceedings of 
the 4th International Conference on e-government.
 RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia: Academic 
Publishing International, 2008.
 11. Dahlan, N. (2008). "Development of e-government in 
Indonesia: A Strategy Model and Its Achievements." 
Ritsumeikan Journal of Asia Pacific Studies 24: pp. 
35–46.
 12. Dahlan, N. (2009). "Evaluating Websites Services with a 
Political-Economic Approach." IEEE Computer Society, 
The 3rd International Conference on Complex, 
Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems. Fukuoka, 
Japan: IEEE Computer Society.
 13. Dahlan, N. (20011). “Evaluating User Expectancy and 
Satisfaction of e-Government Portals.” IEEE Computer 
Society, The 4th International Conference on Complex, 
Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems, 
Seoul-Korea: IEEE Computer Society.
 14. Dahlan, N. (20012). “Assessing the impact of 
e-Government on Users: A Case Study of Indonesia.” 
IEEE Computer Society, The 5th International 
Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software 
Intensive Systems, Palermo-Italia: IEEE Computer 
Society.
 15. Hofmann T (1999). “Probabilistic Latent Semantic 
Indexing." In SIGIR'99: Proceedings of the 22nd 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 
pp. 50-57. ACM Press.
 16. Blei DM, Gri_ths TL, Jordan MI, Tenenbaum JB 
(2003a). “Hierarchical Topic Models and the Nested 
Chinese Restaurant Process." In S Thrun, LK Saul, B 
Scholkopf (eds.), Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 16. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
 17. Blei DM, La_erty JD (2007). “A Correlated Topic 
Model of Science." The Annals of Applied Statistics, 
pp.17-35.
 18. Wei X, CroftWB (2006). “LDA-Based Document 
Models for Ad-Hoc Retrieval." In SIGIR'06:
 Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval, pp. 178-185. ACM Press, New 
York.
 19. Li Z, Wang C, Xie X, Wang X, Ma WY (2008). 
“Exploring LDA-Based Document Model for 
Geographic Information Retrieval." In C Peters, V 
Jijkoun, T Mandl, H Muller, D Oard, A Pnas, V Petras, 
D Santos (eds.), Advances in Multilingual and 
Multimodal Information Retrieval, volume 5152 of 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 842-849. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
 20. Jin X, Zhou Y, Mobasher B (2004) “Web usage mining 
based on probabilistic latent semantic analysis. 
Proceeding of International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2004), pp 197–205. 
21. Das AS, Datar M, Garg A, Rajaram S (2007). “Google 
news personalization: scalable online collaborative
 filtering.” Proceeding of The 16th International World 
Wide Web Conference (WWW2007), May 2007, pp. 
271-280.
 22. Iwata T, Watanabe S, Yamada T, Ueda N (2009). 
“Topic tracking model for analyzing consumer 
purchase behavior.” Proceeding of The International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2009, July 
2009, pp 1427–1432. 
23. Levy, Timothy J. Ellis and Yair. (2008). "Framework of 
Problem-Based Research: A Guide for Novice 
Researchers on the Development of a Research-Worthy 
Problem." Informing Science: the International Journal 
of an Emerging Transdiscipline: Vol 8, pp. 17-33.
 24. Moore, M. (1995). "Creating Public Value Strategic 
Management in Government." Harvard University 
Press. 
25. Kelly, G., G. Mulgan, and S. Muesrs. (2002). "Creating 
Public Value: An analytical framework for public 
service reform. London." Strategy Unit discussion paper, 
Cabinet Office. London.
 26. Golubeva, A.A. (2007), "Evaluation of regional 
government portal on the basis of public value concept: 
Case study from Russian Federation." International 
Conference on Electronic Governance, pp. 394-397.
 Macao: ACM press.
 27. http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tmt/tmt-0.4/
 725
