   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 OPALS: An Optical Communications Technology 
Demonstration from the International Space Station 
Bogdan V. Oaida1, Matthew J. Abrahamson, Robert J. Witoff, Jessica N. Bowles Martinez, Daniel A. Zayas
 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
818-354-5517 
1Corresponding author: bogdan@jpl.nasa.gov  
 
Abstract—Optical communication using space borne lasers has 
long promised to increase the amount of science data 
transmitted down to Earth. A first step in achieving 
operational capability is demonstrating the fundamentals of 
the optical link in an equivalent environment. The 
International Space Station, with its vast capability, is well 
suited to accommodate payloads aimed at advancing the 
readiness of such technologies.  
The Optical PAyload for Lasercomm Science (OPALS), to be 
launched to and operated on the ISS in late 2013, will attempt 
to downlink a short video to an optical ground station in 
California using a 1550 nanometer, 2.5 watt laser, over the 
course of a 90 day mission.  To achieve this, in addition to 
designing and building the ISS payload, the OPALS team has 
increased the capability of the existing ground station, as well 
as developed the interface to the ISS infrastructure that will 
allow operators to command it.  
This paper will discuss the drivers and constraints created by 
designing to existing interfaces (ISS flight, ISS operational, 
ground system) while following a Class D payload 
implementation (NASA NPR 8705.4). The paper will also 
provide some specific examples of programmatic and technical 
areas that have been shaped by these drivers and constraints.  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
2. OPALS ARCHITECTURE .................................. 2 
3. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS ................................ 6 
4. ISS INTERFACE ................................................. 9 
5. DRIVERS, CONSTRAINTS, AND RESULTING 
IMPLEMENTATION .............................................. 12 
6. CONCLUSIONS ................................................. 18 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ....................................... 19 
REFERENCES ....................................................... 19 
BIOGRAPHIES ...................................................... 19 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Space-borne scientific instruments increasingly require 
higher communication rates to transmit their gathered data 
back to Earth or to support high-data rate applications (e.g., 
high-definition video streams) [1]. Optical communication 
(also referred to as ‘lasercomm’) is an emerging technology 
in which data is modulated onto lasers to transmit 
information. Because laser beams are significantly narrower 
than radio-frequency (RF) beams, optical communication 
offers, among other things, the promise of delivering much 
higher power density, and thereby achieving much higher 
data rates than the state of the art with RF beams [2]. 
However, because laser beams are very narrow, the 
spacecraft must be able to very accurately point the laser 
beam to the receiving telescope on Earth as it travels across 
the sky, which is one of the primary challenges of 
lasercomm [3]. 
The Optical PAyload for Lasercomm Science (OPALS) is a 
technology demonstration project that aims to address some 
of these challenges by downlinking a video over an optical 
channel from the ISS to the Table Mountain optical ground 
station in California. Its implementation approach is tailored 
to be consistent with a low-cost project, and it has adopted 
the Class D risk posture specified in NPR 8705.4 [4]. When 
it is launched in the second half of 2013, OPALS will 
become the first JPL-built space-borne lasercomm 
technology demonstration, the first JPL-built unpressurized 
ISS payload, the first JPL payload to fly on the SpaceX 
Falcon9 Dragon vehicle, and the first Flight Releasable 
Attachment Mechanism (FRAM) cargo to fly on the Dragon 
capsule. It will also be among the first FRAM-based 
payloads to undergo robotic extraction from the Dragon 
cargo trunk. 
OPALS is being developed as part of JPL’s Phaeton 
Program, a training program with the objective to rapidly 
train and grow early career professionals (ECPs) by 
providing hands-on experience developing small, flight 
payloads [5]. Phaeton projects are staffed and managed by 
ECPs, with strong mentorship and guidance from senior 
managers and engineers. The implementation approach for 
the Phaeton projects provides the ECP participants 
experience with all phases of a typical NASA project and 
allows them hands-on experience throughout their lifecycle. 
Upon delivery of the payload for final ISS interface testing 
and launch vehicle integration, OPALS will be launched and 
operated as a NASA payload [6].  
This paper starts with a description of the OPALS 
architecture in section 2, followed by the concept of 
operation in section 3. It then breaks down the project’s 
interactions with the ISS Program (section 4) into its three 
major areas. Finally, section 5 addresses some of the 
architectural and design changes that ensued as a result of 
internal and external drivers and constraints. This includes 
 
 2
 the challenges and advantages, both technical and 
procedural, of being implemented as a Class D payload. 
Technical case studies will address the use of Commercial 
Off-The-Shelf (COTS) electronics, a novel forced 
convection cooling approach, and safety-critical aspects of 
the design. Systems engineering processes discussed will 
include requirements flow-down from a known interface, 
scope and size of verification and validation program, 
technical margin management. Lastly, the conclusions are 
discussed in section 6. 
2. OPALS ARCHITECTURE 
OPALS is more than just the hardware that will be 
externally mounted to the ISS. In addition to the payload 
Flight System (FS), OPALS includes a dedicated Ground 
System (GS) and Mission Operations System (MOS). 
Furthermore, it interfaces with the Marshall Space Flight 
Center for commanding the payload, and SpaceX, the 
launch vehicle provider, for ensuring physical compatibility. 
Schematically, the architecture is depicted in Figure 1.  
Optical Communication Design 
As a low cost and high risk experiment, OPALS was never 
intended to improve the state-of-the-art of optical 
communications.  Instead, its focus has been on increasing 
the understanding in a few of the challenging areas of the 
field [7]. It will attempt to do so by downlinking a short-
 duration, DVD quality video at a relatively modest data rate 
of 30-50 Mbit/sec (state-of-the art optical communication 
systems can support > 1 Gbit/sec links [8]).  The areas of 
focus for OPALS include: 
• Atmospheric turbulence characterization, including 
obtaining downlink aperture-averaged fading statistics 
by recording received power, and uplink scintillation 
statistics by recording beacon power on the FS 
• Link availability and how it is impacted by geometry, 
atmospheric & environmental changes, and day vs. 
night effects.  
• Pointing performance of the ground system’s open loop 
tracking and the FS acquisition, tracking, and stability.  
Key design parameters for the optical links are summarized 
in Table 1. 
Flight System Overview 
The flight hardware of the OPALS ISS payload is referred 
to by the team as the Flight System (FS). It is generally 
broken down into three major components: (1) the drum-
 shaped sealed container (SC) housing the avionics, laser, 
and support electronics; (2)  the two-axis gimbal supporting 
the optical head (OH) containing the camera and laser 
collimator; (3) the top half of the FRAM—called the 
Express Pallet Adaptor (ExPA)—which provides the 
mechanical and electrical interface to both the ISS and the 
SpaceX Dragon launch vehicle and was provided to the 
project free of cost by the ISS Program as contractor-
 furnished equipment (CFE). The FRAM used by OPALS 
was manufactured by SpaceX using NASA designs. It is the 
 
Figure 1: The OPALS architecture contains elements beyond the ISS payload itself, all necessary to successfully 
launch and operate it 
 
 3
 first one SpaceX has delivered to a payload developer. 
Sealed Container—The most prominent component of the 
FS is the oil drum-sized sealed container and its roughly 
7.25 square-foot radiator (Figure 2). Measuring 22 inches in 
diameter, and forged out of aluminum, the sealed container 
protects the COTS avionics from the harsh vacuum of space 
by providing a room temperature environment at one 
atmosphere. The avionics provide the functionality needed 
to control all aspects of the FS and communicate with the 
MOS via the ISS interface. The avionics include 
commercial FPGAs and processors hosted in a modified 
COTS PXI chassis. All of the components are laboratory-
 grade, National Instruments-type electronics available 
commercially. Figure 3 provides an overview of the makeup 
of the FS and the components’ pedigree. 
The SC also houses a ruggedized military-grade laser unit, a 
custom-built power distribution and conditioning board, two 
COTS motor drivers for controlling the bi-axis gimbal, and 
various telemetry-gathering instrumentation such as 
thermocouples and pressure transducers. All of these 
components are mounted on wire rope isolators to provide a 
more benign launch environment. All electrical and optical 
conduits are routed through the SC wall via vacuum-rated 
feedthroughs to the various connectors on the FRAM, the 
gimbal, and optical head.  
OPALS is not the first ISS payload to employ such a COTS-
 driven design. The HICO payload, launched in 2009 and 
operating from the Japanese Experiment Module Exposed 
Facility (JEM-EF), has demonstrated success employing a 
very similar approach [9], [10]. 
Gimbal & Optical Head—Sharing the real estate on the 
FRAM with the SC is the two-axis gimbal (Figure 2), which 
points the optical transceiver towards the Ground System. 
Actuation is performed by two microstepping motors whose 
range of motion is limited to an 110˚ x 40˚ field of regard 
(FOR) by hardstops.  An early, cost saving decision was to 
forgo the use of motor encoders in favor of a dead reckoning 
approach to gimbal pointing determination that counts 
commanded motor steps. As a consequence, the gimbal 
must be calibrated prior to each use to define axis reference 
points and to ensure accuracy and precision are preserved.  
The approximately three-pound optical head (OH), mounted 
on the elevation axis, houses a commercial camera sensitive 
at 976 nanometer used in acquiring and tracking the ground 
beacon, and a custom collimator used to beam the 1550 
nanometer, two-watt laser towards the ground station. Like 
the gimbal, the OH was designed and built at JPL specific to 
this application using flight rated parts capable of 
withstanding the space environments. The mass and mass-
 distribution of the OH were tightly controlled throughout 
the lifecycle to allow it to be perfectly balanced on the 
gimbal so that locks would not be required to keep it in 
place during launch. Instead, the gimbal uses the backdrive 
torque created by shorting the actuators’ coils to effectively 
keep it immobilized when not in use. 
Ground System Overview 
The Table Mountain Facility, located about 60 miles east of 
JPL in Wrightwood, CA, is home to the Optical 
  
Figure 2: OPALS Flight System consists of the ISS-
 provided FRAM, a sealed container, and a two-axis 
gimbaled optical transceiver (cabling not shown) 
Table 1: Design parameters of the OPALS optical links 
DOWNLINK CHARACTERISTICS 
SIGNALING Parameter Units 
Modulation OOK - 
Uncoded BER 1.00E-04 - 
ECC Reed-Solomon - 
Modulation Rate  30-50 Mb/s 
TRANSMITTER 
Downlink wavelength 1550 nm 
Beam Divergence (1/e^2) 1.0 - 1.6 mrad 
Average laser power 2.5 W 
Power transmitted from FS >0.833 W 
POINTING 
Pointing Bias 150.0 µrad 
Pointing Jitter (RMS) 125.0 µrad 
LINK GEOMETRY 
Max Zenith Angle 65 deg 
Max Range 700 Km 
BEACON CHARACTERISTICS 
Uplink wavelength 976 nm 
Average Laser power 5 W 
Beam divergence 1.7 mrad 
Power transmitted from 
OCTL 1.26 W 
 
 4
 Communications Telescope Laboratory (OCTL), which will 
be the ground receiver for the OPALS optical downlinks. 
OCTL will host the OPALS Ground System (GS). In 
OPALS parlance the Ground System (GS) refers to all the 
hardware and software that is required to provide the optical 
uplink beacon and to receive the optical downlink from the 
Flight System. It does not include any of the hardware, 
software, or people that will operate the FS as well as the 
GS.  
While leveraging the significant existing infrastructure at 
OCTL, OPALS has also developed a significant amount of 
hardware and software to enable it to be used as a Ground 
System (Figure 4). Behind the one meter aperture of the 
main OCTL telescope, OPALS is implementing a set of 
optics to condition the 1550 nanometer light coming down 
from the ISS so it can be focused on a detector and to 
provide a 1.7 milliradian-wide beacon centered at 976 
nanometer for the FS to lock onto and track.  
Behind the optics, the detector turns photons into electrons 
which are then processed to recover the clock and the signal 
modulated on the downlink beam. The resulting bit stream 
is then passed to a software decoder, which reconstructs the 
file to its pre-transmission form. The GS also contains an 
Ethernet interface to mission operations to ensure adequate 
data transfer. 
OPALS has also been able to leverage the existing OCTL 
three-tier laser safety system. This system disables the 
ground laser beacon when low flying objects, commercial 
air traffic, and sensitive satellites are overhead. The 
combination of hardware, software, and procedures already 
in place there will ensure that the laser beam emitted by the 
GS does not interfere with local air traffic. 
Mission Operations System 
The Mission Operations System (MOS) is a ground-based 
system consisting of all personnel, processes, facilities, 
hardware, software, and networks required to support the 
successful operation of the payload and the optical ground 
station. For OPALS, the MOS is tasked with commanding 
the FS, processing telemetry, and displaying the 
reconstructed file within 10 minutes of receipt by the GS. 
These mission objectives must be accomplished within the 
operational constraints imposed by the OPALS project and 
project partners to ensure safety of ISS personnel and 
OPALS hardware throughout the operational lifetime.   
The OPALS MOS includes several components. For 
personnel, there is a flight operations team and a ground 
operations team. Hardware and software consists of four PC 
workstations equipped with software for command builds, 
telemetry receipt, telemetry display, telemetry query, 
ephemeris management, sequence builds, camera frame 
viewing, engineering log parsing, and configuration 
management. Lastly, operational processes documentation 
includes activity procedures, flight rules, and operational 
interface agreements to ensure proper remote operation of 
the FS and GS.  
The MOS has major interfaces with the Payload Operations 
Integration Center (POIC) at Marshall Space Flight Center 
in Huntsville, AL, for operation of the Flight System and 
with the Optical Communications Test Laboratory (OCTL) 
in Table Mountain, CA, for storage and operation of the 
 
Figure 3: Flight System Functional Block Diagram showing component pedigree 
 
 
Ground System. As shown in Figure 
interfaces between the OPALS MOS and t
 file transfer protocol (FTP), voice-over-IP
 private network (VPN) for comman
 telemetry query and database download,
 protocol (UDP) for one-way real-time telem
 The network interfaces between the Fl
 Ground MOS include VOIP for voice conn
 for file transfer. The MOS also interfaces w
 Investigator, who receives activity reconst
 from the MOS and provides recommenda
 technology investigations using the OPALS
 The flight operations team is responsible f
 execution of Flight System activities
 commanding and flight product builds. Fil
 as command sequences, configurations fil
 files, are uplinked to the payload prior to 
and real-time commands are sent to t
 immediate execution.  
The flight operations team, located at JPL, 
progress via the Health and Status telemet
 real-time in 768 Byte packets at 1 Hz—a
 engineering log from the FS for a post-acti
 Figure 4: The OPALS Ground System
 5
 5, the network 
he POIC include 
 (VOIP), virtual 
d transmission, 
 and user data 
etry streaming. 
ight MOS and 
ections and VPN 
ith the Principal 
ruction products 
tions for future 
 payload. 
or planning and 
 via real-time 
e products, such 
es, and pointing 
major activities, 
he payload for 
monitors activity 
ry—streamed in 
nd retrieves the 
vity assessment. 
Uplink products reach the OPALS
 band transmission, while downlin
 over the Ku-band via the Tracking 
System (TDRSS) network.  
The flight operations team is also re
 and management of ISS trajectory 
trajectory data from Johnson S
 determine pass opportunities over
 activity scheduling with the ISS Pro
 downlink event, the team will retr
 products to determine the final pas
 pointing prediction products for 
prediction products are known as 
and the Blind Pointing Table. Si
 dependent, each prediction file wil
 local clocks at OCTL and on the ISS
 The primary software tool used by t
 for commanding and telemetry vie
 Resource Kit (TReK) provided by 
provides the capability to generate
 patterns to the FS via the POIC
 telemetry in real-time to the flight o
 interface is a simple point-and
  leveraged the existing OCTL infrastructure and also
 specific hardware 
 payload via the ISS S-
 k products are relayed 
Data and Relay Satellite 
sponsible for processing 
products. The team uses 
pace Center (JSC) to 
 OCTL and coordinate 
gram. Prior to an optical 
ieve the latest trajectory 
s timing as well as build 
the GS and FS. These 
the OCTL Pointing File 
nce both files are time 
l be correlated with the 
.  
he flight operations team 
wing is the Telescience 
the POIC [11]. This tool 
 and send command bit 
 and display received 
perations team. The user 
-click architecture that 
 
 developed mission-
 
 
enhances ease of use during nominal opera
 providing lower-level capabilities to mo
 definitions and build enhancements for dat
 display. TReK is currently serving as the
 interface during OPALS integration and te
 thus, will enable a smooth transition to orbit
 The ground operations team is responsible 
execution of Ground System activities.  S
 System is physically located at OCT
 operations team will be staffed there a
 workstations to operate it directly. This tea
 the GS for receipt of the optical communic
 will retrieve and display the final reconstruc
 Both operations teams must be trained to
 nominal activities and exercise sound judgm
 of anomalies. This training is accomplished
 readiness tests (ORTs), which exercise 
processes in a flight-like, real-time en
 anomalies, or “green cards,” inserted into
 various points in the timeline.  
3. CONCEPT OF OPERATIO
 The OPALS concept of operations is high
 bi-directional line of sight between the Flig
 ISS and the Ground System at OCTL. Th
 when this condition is met is defined as the
 The most important aspect of the Demonstr
 Figure 5: The OPALS MOS interface wit
 6
 tions while also 
dify bit pattern 
a processing and 
 FS operational 
st activities and, 
al operations.  
for planning and 
ince the Ground 
L, the ground 
nd use the GS 
m will initialize 
ations signal and 
ted video. 
 safely execute 
ent in the event 
 with operational 
nominal MOS 
vironment with 
 the exercise at 
NS 
ly dependent on 
ht System on the 
e period of time 
 Demonstration. 
ation is ensuring 
accurate pointing of the optical com
 the FS to the GS receiver. A pointin
 of 300 ?rads (1?) is required to en
 received on the ground receiver to
 Predictions for the position and atti
 over the Demonstration period are 
level of accuracy, so an active, clos
 is required.  
The OPALS project achieves accur
 laser beacon radiated from the G
 feedback control tracking system i
 This pointing architecture is typic
 communications links as it fac
 tracking of the ground station [8].  
Figure 6 depicts OPALS implemen
 the sequence of events during the D
 Initially, the OCTL telescope point
 the FS and continues to track the I
 the Demonstration. Unlike the FS, t
 not perform active tracking and rel
 throughout the pass to track the ISS
 25° elevation in the sky, the FS b
 laser beacon using a set of pointin
 called the Blind Pointing Table, u
 prior to each pass. The Blind Poin
 ISS trajectory and attitude predictio
 the OCTL surface location. Since t
 h the Flight System, Ground System, and the ISS payl
 munications signal from 
g accuracy on the order 
sure sufficient power is 
 reconstruct the signal. 
tude of the ISS platform 
insufficient to meet this 
ed-loop pointing system 
ate pointing by use of a 
S toward the FS and a 
mplemented on the FS. 
al of near-Earth optical 
ilitates acquisition and 
tation of this design and 
emonstration.  
s a laser beacon toward 
SS over the duration of 
he OCTL telescope does 
ies on orbital predictions 
. As the ISS rises above 
egins searching for the 
g predictions of its own 
plinked to the payload 
ting Table is built using 
ns as well as a model of 
he flight camera field of 
 
oads operations center. 
 
 
view is fairly wide at 7˚ by 9˚, it is ant
 ground beacon will be present in the came
 given the uncertainties assumed in the pred
 FS detects the laser beacon on the flight 
computes the centroid location of the beac
 the two-axis gimbal to draw the beacon to 
CCD and minimize future deviations f
 location. The feedback control system 
Proportional, Integral, and Derivative (PID
 tuned to ensure adequate tracking perform
 ISS flight profile and platform disturba
 transmit and receive optical paths are co-al
 optical head, this tracking system enables a
 of the optical communications signal to the 
While the Flight System continues track
 beacon, the laser signal is modulated with
 over the optical channel. The modu
 continues to loop the video through
 Demonstration to build in robustness to tem
 cloud obscuration of the signal.  
At the end of the Demonstration period, th
 executes a post-Demonstration sequence of
 safely powers down the laser and stows 
Ground System then attempts to reconstruct
 on the data collected at the receiver.   
A Day-in-the-Life 
The OPALS day-in-the-life scenario 
operations activities required to exec
 Demonstration. It does not describe plannin
 Figure 6: Co
 7
 icipated that the 
ra field of view 
ictions. Once the 
camera CCD, it 
on, and actuates 
the center of the 
rom the center 
is governed by 
) gains that are 
ance given the 
nces. Since the 
igned within the 
ccurate pointing 
ground receiver. 
ing the ground 
 the video data 
lation sequence 
out the entire 
porary fades or 
e Flight System 
 commands that 
the gimbal. The 
 the video based 
describes the 
ute a nominal 
g and scheduling 
activities, but instead the activ
 operations teams on the Demonstra
 path of the ISS fixes the time of 
operations activities are driven by 
the Demonstration start with a se
 activities and the need to retrieve 
shut down the payload with a se
 activities. Figure 7 depicts the FS st
 exercised during a typical Dem
 activities occurring in, and transi
 demonstration state—which are l
 time-sequence driven—all other ac
 a ground-in-the-loop commanding m
 The pre-Demonstration activities in
 and configuring the major payload 
gimbal, camera, and laser, f
 Demonstration. The activities begi
 28V Operational Power input to th
 power source initializes the OPAL
 flight software into safe state, which
 operation where the hardware and 
and stable configuration, and restri
 FS. While in safe state, the operat
 health assessment by analyzing 
telemetry arriving at 1 Hz. Onc
 confirmed, the FS is commanded i
 accepts all commands except gimb
 power commands. While in this sta
 file uplink of configuration files, se
 files that may require an update.  
 
ncept of Operations for a typical Demonstration 
ities executed by the 
tion day. Since the orbit 
Demonstration, OPALS 
the need to prepare for 
t of pre-Demonstration 
payload data and safely 
t of post-Demonstration 
ates and state transitions 
onstration. Except for 
tions to and from, the 
argely autonomous and 
tivities are performed in 
anner. 
volve safely initializing 
subsystems, such as the 
or the start of the 
n with activation of the 
e OPALS payload. This 
S avionics system and 
 is defined as a mode of 
software are in a known 
cted commanding to the 
ors can perform a quick 
the Health and Status 
e the system health is 
nto the idle state, which 
al movement and laser 
te, the operators perform 
quence files, or pointing 
 
 
 8
 The transition from idle state to gimbal activity state 
requires use of a set of critical commands to disable the 
gimbal safety inhibit. This inhibit prevents inadvertent 
operation of the laser during external crew or robotic 
activities by preventing actuation of the gimbal pointing. In 
order to disable the inhibit, a pair of two commands, one 
“arm” and one “fire”, must be sent in succession to the 
flight software. Following receipt of these commands, the 
gimbal can be commanded to move away from the stow 
position and away from the limit switches that bound the 
range of motion.  
Upon movement of the gimbal, the Flight System enters 
gimbal activity state. The primary operations activity within 
this state is the gimbal calibration, which defines the 
reference points for each axis. This activity is a sequence of 
movement commands that drive the gimbal through its full 
range of motion and establish reference points at the edge of 
each axis by measuring where the limit switches are 
actuated. Since the actuators lack encoders, the gimbal can 
only determine its position by counting commanded steps. 
The transition from gimbal activity state to laser enabled 
state requires additional critical commands to be sent to the 
FS to disable the laser safety inhibits. The laser arm/fire 
critical commands disable the inhibit preventing closure of 
the 28V power relay to the laser. In order to decentralize the 
laser activation process for safety purposes, independent 
commands must be sent from the OPALS MOS and the 
POIC for 28V power to be routed to the laser. Each of the 
commands closes an independent power relay along the 28V 
power path on the FS power board. Once the 28V power is 
provided to the laser, the FS enters “laser enabled” state. 
The major activities in this state are the powering on of the 
flight camera and the powering of the flight laser unit to full 
power. The latter involves activating a 5V power relay to 
the laser booster, which is controlled by its own inhibit that 
requires an additional arm/fire command pair to be sent. 
Once these major activities are complete, the FS can be 
commanded to point toward the first entry in the Blind 
Pointing Table, at which point, the FS is configured for 
Demonstration. 
The FS enters demonstration state upon execution of the 
commence_demo command. Since this transition must be 
set to occur at a specific time determined by the ISS 
trajectory, this command will be scheduled in a command 
sequence. The Flight System restricts all commands during 
this state except for the abort_safe command to transition 
the entire payload to safe state, should an anomaly occur. 
The sequence of activities in the demonstration state follows 
the description in the first part of section 3.  
The post-Demonstration activities involve safely powering 
off the laser, driving the gimbal to stow, and re-enabling all 
inhibits. These activities are accomplished by a post-demo 
command sequence that executes automatically upon 
nominal exit of demonstration state. Once all inhibits are 
 
Figure 7: Flight System states diagram 
 
 
enabled, the Flight System is returned to id
 begin downlinking  accumulated engine
 camera frames from the file system via t
 Once all products are downlinked and a fina
 made, the 28V power is removed from the
 the Flight System activities. Figure 8 show
 in-the-life timeline which includes som
 assumptions about the durations required to
 tasks. 
4. ISS INTERFACE 
The ISS interface is multifaceted and in
 connections, software, and communicatio
 teams at the various NASA centers. If
 interfaces are considered, a number of as
 significant influences on a project, directly
 throughout its lifecycle may be missed. G
 interface can be thought of as having thre
 interaction: programmatic, technical, an
 remaining of this section provides a discu
 them. 
Programmatic Interface 
For over 11 years, the International Space 
(ISSP) has continuously maintained a hum
 low Earth orbit with constant operationa
 around the globe.  After 14 years of co
 visiting vehicles and integration of 390 met
 qualified equipment, the ISS is the large
 created in space. Supporting such a ma
 requires a daunting number of engineers, to
 thousands. 
In 2011 STS-134 delivered the A
 Spectrometer to the ISS marking the end
 States’ primary assembly phase of the ISS
 completion the ISSP has undergone a swe
 from an assembly centric organization to a
 one. Supporting this new focus, the ISSP
 amongst 15 primary offices representing th
 expertise. OPALS’ primary five offices o
 shown Figure 9. 
The Research and Integration Office (OZ) h
 responsibilities for managing and interfacin
 like OPALS.  Systems engineers with br
 Figure 8: Day-in-the-life activities ar
 9
 le state and can 
ering logs and 
he ISS RF link. 
l health check is 
 payload, ending 
s a typical day-
 e conservative 
 perform various 
cludes physical 
n with all the 
 only technical 
pects that exert 
 and indirectly, 
enerally the ISS 
e major areas of 
d safety. The 
ssion of each of 
Station Program 
an presence in 
l support from 
nstruction, 140+ 
ric tons of space 
st outpost ever 
ssive operation 
taling well in the 
lpha Magnetic 
 of the United 
.  Following this 
eping transition 
 payload centric 
 is now divided 
e breadth of ISS 
f interaction are 
olds the primary 
g with payloads 
oad experiences 
reside within this office to expertly
 the rest of the program. On an as-ne
 and Integration Office has aided d
 with over 300 individuals across 30
 Despite well planned standardizatio
 human interface between payload 
is necessary to facilitate the exchan
 hundreds of engineers and th
 specifications. 
Technical Interface 
The Station’s massive supporting o
 support its technical complexity
 complexity can amount to 694 
across 11 disciplines.  These discip
 electrical, command and dat
 environmental, materials, marking, 
astronaut and software interfaces.  
To both standardize and simplify, a
 connections are provided by a Fligh
 Mechanism (FRAM), highlighted 
come in many sizes and varieties 
cargo or instrument they support. 
Express Pallet Adapter (ExPA). 
The physical interface occurs in
 translation, and operation. The fi
 OPALS integrated into the trunk o
 stack ascending to orbit.  The laun
 e scheduled and performed relative to the beginning o
 Figure 9: Simplified org chart o
 JSC offices that OPALS has inte
 points in its life
  direct payloads through 
eded basis, the Research 
irect OPALS interaction 
 supporting teams.  
n and documentation, a 
developers and the ISSP 
ge of information across 
ousands of pages of 
rganization is scaled to 
.  For payloads, this 
interface requirements, 
lines include structural, 
a handling, thermal, 
maintainability, robotic, 
ll physical interfaces and 
t Releasable Attachment 
in Figure 10. FRAMs 
to suit the need of the 
OPALS has chosen an 
 three phases: launch, 
rst of these phases has 
f a Falcon 9 and Dragon 
ch on which OPALS is 
 
f a Demonstration  
 
f the primary ISS and 
racted with at various 
cycle 
 
 
manifested will mark the third SpaceX fligh
 Commercial Resupply (CRS) contract and m
 first SpaceX CRS flight extensively rede
 external cargo.  These modifications includ
 updated Falcon 9 (v1.1) and a Dragon
 providing a suite of launch characterist
 vibro-acoustic environmental ones, which 
characterized.  Since the OPALS System
 Review (SRR) in early 2010, the ongoing
 of these interfaces has led to a net change o
 ISS requirements and essentially 100% ch
 Dragon requirements, including updates
 deletions. 
Following a successful berth with the ISS
 phase to OPALS’ operational destinat
 Utilizing the capable Mobile Servicing Sy
 the Mobile Berthing System, Special Pu
 Manipulator (SPDM), and Space S
 Manipulator System (SSRMS) robotic 
operators on the ground will extract O
 berthed Dragon and again mate OPALS’ FR
 to a power-providing element (the En
 Replacement Unit Temporary Platform, o
 SPDM.  After a nearly two-day robotic
 SPDM will again install OPALS onto 
FRAM, this time at its intended operationa
 nadir, port side-facing ELC 1 FRAM 8 
correctly utilize these robotic component
 Figure 11: OPALS orientation
 10
 t under NASA’s 
ore notably, the 
signed to carry 
e a significantly 
 block upgrade 
ics, particularly 
are not yet fully 
 Requirements 
 characterization 
f 37% of the 694 
ange of the 117 
, additions and 
, the translation 
ion can begin.  
stem—including 
rpose Dexterous 
tation Robotic 
elements—ISS 
PALS from the 
AM underbelly 
hanced Orbital 
r EOTP) on the 
 translation the 
another Passive 
l location on the 
(Figure 11). To 
s, 222 interface 
requirements are provided, the 
verified by use of a certified st
 performed, OPALS will be the first
 type of robotic transfer. 
In the event of a robotic contingen
 astronauts to intervene and acc
 transfer towards final installation o
 standardized FRAM handholds on
 could manipulate OPALS if the n
 interface is made possible wit
 implications for OPALS, though op
 as orientation and timing, do exi
 contingency crew member interac
 Figure 10: The FRAM provides a
 the LV, the robotic arm and the
  
 relative to the ISS at its operational location on ELC
 majority of which are 
andard FRAM.  When 
 payload to undergo this 
cy, capabilities exist for 
omplish the remaining 
f OPALS.  By using the 
 the ExPA, astronauts 
eed were to arise. This 
hout additional design 
erational concerns, such 
st.  To implement this 
tion, up to 2 weeks of 
 common interface for 
 ISS mounting points 
 1, FRAM 8 
 
 
unallocated planning would be required. 
Finally, in the third interface phase, the OP
 installed and ready to operate on its ELC, w
 its full suite of interfaces available. They in
 avionics and software interfaces, which 
operations to commence. 
OPALS will be the first payload installed o
 Even with a standardized specification, 
means many questions, capabilities, and i
 addressed for the first time in parallel w
 development and in collaboration with I
 engineers. 
Safety Interface 
JPL engineers regularly design complex 
sent far into space never to interact wit
 launch.  As a result, the human safety co
 OPALS responded to have introduced ne
 every aspect of the design.   This experien
 only learning how to navigate the pro
 approval from the technical experts on the
 Review Panel (PSRP) on the design, but 
solve engineering problems from a safety p
 not compromising technical goals. 
The formal interaction between the payl
 such as the OPALS project, and the PSRP 
series of Flight Safety Reviews (FSRs)
 reviews the project and the panel ident
 hazards created by the payload and dec
 controls to keep those hazards from causin
 either personnel or the ISS.   A safety 
submitted 45 days prior to a formal FSR 
review and comment. The submission is
 presentation and hazard report walk-throu
 takes a full day or two as all safety concern
 are discussed and addressed.  
The first meeting with the PSRP was a 
which focused on identifying applicab
 verifying that the appropriate requireme
 referenced.  OPALS started at a time whe
 Figure 12: OPALS project milestones rel
 11
 ALS FS will be 
here it will have 
clude electrical, 
will enable full 
n this new ELC, 
a new interface 
ssues have been 
ith the OPALS 
SS and SpaceX 
systems that are 
h humans after 
nsiderations that 
w challenges in 
ce involved not 
cess of gaining 
 Payload Safety 
also learning to 
erspective while 
oad developers, 
occurs through a 
 [12]. In these 
ify all potential 
ide on a set of 
g any damage to 
data package is 
for the PSRP to 
 followed by a 
gh, which often 
s and comments 
Phase 0 review 
le hazards and 
nts were being 
n documentation 
was transitioning from shuttle requ
 documents so the initial meeting 
which standards are applicable to th
 initial hazard assessment with the
 some potential hazards the proje
 Additionally, it helped guide the
 choices that later could have snow
 would have been difficult to 
progressed toward the more formal 
OPALS’ Phase 1 review was se
 project’s PDR and reflected a fair
 time leading up to this review the p
 class 4 laser that required the h
 classification (catastrophic) and i
 controls for all possible operationa
 the safety review OPALS discusse
 with various members of the PRSP
 design approaches for controls r
 hazards from actualizing.  These 
meetings were essential leading in
 the design then required minimal ch
 1 review. This preparation had th
 developing a strong relationship b
 members and the OPALS team.  
The Phase 2 review typically foll
 Design Review (CDR).  OPALS
 formal technical interchange meetin
 to review its hazards and solidi
 method of controlling them. With 
identified and most of the control
 debate, the Phase 2 review covered
 testing and the supporting docu
 particularly strong focus on veri
 avionics and the hazard controls 
computer system controls a haza
 Control System (CBCS) Matrix m
 outlines the requirements for that 
meets the requirements, and the 
demonstrate compliance [13].   The 
into the high-level software archite
 level registers and memory mana
 reviewed by the Computer Safety 
ative to the safety milestones outlined in NSTS 13830 
and Data Submittal Requirements 
irements to ISS-specific 
focused on establishing 
e OPALS payload.   The 
 PSRP helped identify 
ct had not considered. 
 project’s early design 
balled into hazards that 
change as the design 
Phase 1 review. 
veral months after the 
ly mature design. In the 
roject settled on using a 
ighest level of hazard 
dentified a number of 
l scenarios.   Going into 
d these choices in depth 
 to identify options and 
equired to prevent the 
earlier discussions and 
to the formal review as 
anges to pass the Phase 
e additional benefit of 
etween the safety panel 
ows a project’s Critical 
, however, requested a 
g (TIM) with the PSRP 
fy concurrence on the 
the hazard sources well 
s requiring little further 
 the details of hardware 
mentation and had a 
fication of the OPALS 
it governs.   When a 
rd, a Computer Based 
ust be developed that 
system, the design that 
verifications planned to 
completed matrix delves 
cture as well as the low-
 gement. This system is 
Panel (CSP) and if the 
Payload Safety Review 
 
 12
 panel chair agrees with the approach he or she recommends 
it for approval to the PSRP. After many tweaks and focused 
discussion outside of the full PSRP the OPALS CBCS 
matrix was approved for Phase 2.    
As Phase 3 approaches, all agreed-to verifications of hazard 
controls must be performed, documented, and submitted.  
Any deviations from the agreed-to verifications must be 
documented and approved by members of the PSRP. 
In addition to the Flight Safety Reviews (FSRs), a Ground 
Safety Review schedule is also negotiated and a package is 
submitted.  This process is very similar to the PSRP one, but 
the scope of the hazards is limited to ground operations at 
the launch and processing facilities.  
The key to successfully passing the FSRs has been constant, 
early, and open communication with the PSRP. It has 
allowed for the quick identification of hazards and it has 
prevented the project from locking itself into designs that 
either could have adversely impacted safety or could have 
made compliance significantly more difficult. The PSRP 
and everyone involved in the safety side of the interface 
have shown great flexibility in allowing OPALS design 
freedom to ensure its mission success while enforcing a high 
standard for the safety of the ISS and those inhabiting it. 
5. DRIVERS, CONSTRAINTS, AND RESULTING 
IMPLEMENTATION 
OPALS is no exception when it comes to facing the typical 
challenges that most space flight projects have to overcome 
throughout their lifecycle. Cost and schedule always seem 
insufficient. The workforce is sometimes stretched thin. All 
these challenges create constraints, end up driving the 
decision-making process and inescapably shape the final 
product. There are, however, many aspects that set OPALS 
apart from the average space borne instrument, and they too 
came with their own drivers and constraints.  
Overall, the drivers and constraints can be classified as 
internal and external, with each category further divided into 
process- or technically-flavored. This section is dedicated to 
examples, spanning each of those categories, of drivers and 
constraints that have in one way or another influenced the 
implementation of the project. 
Internal, Process-Derived Drivers and Constraints 
The aspects falling under this section refer to those whose 
common denominator is the internally-mandated JPL 
process. The most influential and prevailing of these 
processes are documented in the JPL Design Principles and 
JPL Flight Project Practices. These documents provide 
guidelines on everything from cost, schedule reserves and 
technical margins to the pedigree of the parts and 
components used by the flight article and the level of 
documentation required. 
Class D—The biggest impact on the project, second only to 
the stringent cost cap, was the decision to implement it as a 
Class D payload risk classification per NASA NPR 8705.4. 
This decision was less of a constraint than it was a driver, 
and it ultimately gave the project more flexibility in making 
decisions. The ramifications of this decision are many, 
including the risk posture of the project in parts selection, 
sparing philosophy, hardware handling requirements, 
qualification program, fault protection, and extent of formal 
verification of requirements.  
Early on in its lifecycle, the project sought to define the 
Class D implementation approach within the guidelines set 
by NASA procedural requirements. Specifically the project 
was allowed to: 
• Build one proto-flight model with limited engineering 
models (EMs). The only subsystem to have a full EM is 
the avionics. Other EMs include the acquisition camera, 
one motor driver, and the in-house developed power 
board 
• Limit parts sparing to long-lead items only. The project 
only purchased one spare actuator and a few of the 
avionics cards. There are no spares for the laser, power 
board, camera, or any structural components. 
• Use COTS hardware wherever possible. This aspect is 
discussed in further detail in a subsequent section. 
• Forgo radiation or parts support. The extensive usage of 
COTS components implies, to a large extent, the 
absence of radiation susceptibility data, along with 
other environmental information. Thus, as early as the 
Mission Concept Review, the project and its 
stakeholders have accepted the potential mission-
 ending risk of unrecoverable single event upsets. 
• Limit hardware and software Quality Assurance prior to 
system level integration and test. Typically, HQA/SQA 
involvement begins early in subsystem development, 
well in advance of system I&T. 
• Limit flight tech support to final torqueing and high risk 
procedures. The philosophy here is similar to the 
HQA/SQA involvement.  
Requirements and V&V—Likely the most unglamorous 
aspect of producing a space-worthy payload is developing 
the set of requirements that govern its function and 
behavior. While Class-D status does not give the project a 
pass on developing requirements, it can shape the way the 
process is conducted and the extent to which requirements 
are developed.  
For example, higher-class projects typically develop 
requirements down to level five or six, and bin them in 
dozens, if not hundreds of sets or modules. By contrast, 
OPALS currently only has 782 requirements spread over 33 
modules, with none of them containing more than 105 
items. Of the 694 ISS requirements only 376 are applicable 
to OPALS, accounting for 48% of the total OPALS set. 
Similarly, of the 117 launch vehicle requirements, only 58 
are levied on OPALS. This means that the project has only 
 
 
348 project-specific requirements that it int
 verify. Figure 13 breaks down the 
requirements, including ISS and launch
 residing at the various levels. 
OPALS, however, is no poster child f
 development as it fell into the same trap th
 projects—regardless of size and risk 
verification and validation (V&V) time: it 
unnecessary requirements.  
At CDR time OPALS realized that 
requirements it was signing up to verify d
 and testing, totaling almost 1300 (796 OPA
 LV), had become unmanageable given
 schedule and cost-to-go. Shortly therea
 embarked on a months-long, project-
 evaluating its requirement set with the goa
 down to those that it couldn’t justify not ver
 By the time the Test Readiness Review ca
 later, the project had achieved an overall r
 (Table 2) in the number of items it deem
 verification.  
Once again leveraging its Class D status, 
from JPL management, the project decided 
796 requirements it had written on itself—
 the ISS and launch vehicle ones—provided
 others when it came to verification. D
 explicitly verify a requirement meant one of
 1. The statement was deemed to be, in 
of a requirement and more of procedu
 on how something was to be done, 
less of an instruction on how well s
 work and more of a documentation
 Without engaging in a detailed sema
 the project changed the status of these
 requirement to policy. This meant th
 still had to be implemented, but it di
 formally verified.  
Figure 13: Two-thirds of the 782 OPALS
 reside at the level 4 FS subsystem level. 
the ISS and launch vehicle requir
 13
 ends to formally 
distribution of 
 vehicle ones, 
or requirements 
at cripples many 
posture—come 
developed many 
the number of 
uring integration 
LS + 529 ISS& 
 the remaining 
fter, the team 
wide effort of 
l of trimming it 
ifying explicitly. 
me nine months 
eduction of 37% 
ed important for 
and with buy in 
that some of the 
which excludes 
 less value than 
eciding not to 
 two things: 
some cases, less 
ral specification 
while in others, 
omething had to 
 on the design. 
ntics discussion, 
 statements from 
at the statement 
d not have to be 
2. The statement remained a re
 not be explicitly verified at t
 written as the state-of-pra
 Instead, its verification woul
 parent at a higher level was 
order for a requirement to be 
a higher level it had to meet o
 criteria:  
• It is enveloped by a large
 at a higher level; e.g. 
flowdown, such as mass, 
• Functionality/performanc
 higher level test(s) AN
 requirement will be app
 level tests. Put another 
cannot be verified at a hi
 meet that requirement wo
 in higher level test, then
 requirement cannot be mo
 This process was a very time-inte
 number of individuals on the te
 thought to have saved the project as
 and money in Phase D when the ma
 takes place.  
There were, however, two exceptio
 applied to externally-levied ISS
 requirements, and those requireme
 safety standards to be followed.  
It is important to point out that the
 421 requirements which were ev
 verification via this process should
 but rather that the mission risk of 
one the project was willing to
 underperformance of the system 
higher level testing. In doing so, h
 had to accept an increased cost 
problems that might have been cau
 caught until later during system
 significantly more expensive to fix. 
 requirements 
These include 
ements. 
Table 2: Reduction achieved betw
 number of requirements needin
 Set CDR 
L1 1 
L2 (all) 283 
L3 (all) 216 
L4 GS 66 
L4 FS IRDs 158 
L4 FS STR 188 
L4 FS FSW 167 
L4 FS Other 218 
OPALS TOTAL 1296 
ISS Total 468 
LV Total 59 
quirement, but it would 
he level at which it was 
ctice usually dictates. 
d become implicit if its 
successfully verified. In 
allowed to be verified at 
ne of the following two 
r ‘capstone’ requirement 
part of an allocation 
pointing budgets. 
e can be rolled into 
D failure to meet the 
arent in higher, system-
 way, if a requirement 
gher level OR failure to 
uld not become apparent 
 the verification of that 
ved to a higher level. 
nsive one for a limited 
am, but it is generally 
 a whole significant time 
jority of the V&V effort 
ns to this process which 
 and launch vehicle 
nts which specified the 
 argument is not that the 
entually descoped from 
 not have been written, 
not verifying them was 
 accept because any 
would be identified in 
owever, the project also 
and schedule risk that 
ght earlier, would not be 
 I&T when they are 
 
een CDR and TRR in 
g explicit verification 
TRR % Change 
1 -0% 
230 -19% 
138 -36% 
28 -58% 
61 -61% 
101 -46% 
109 -35% 
158 -28% 
823 -37% 
411 -12% 
39 -34% 
 
 
Internal, Technically-Derived Drivers and C
 Equally instrumental in shaping the outcom
 were those decisions that were driven b
 aspects over which the project had decision
 In the same way that certain policy dec
 subsequent ones (see Class D), early technic
 a cascading effect throughout the design, pa
 Flight System.  
COTS Usage—The most clear and pervasi
 the decision to utilize COTS parts whereve
 of the early conceptual architecture and desi
 was inherited from aircraft-borne system
 operated by JPL as recently as 2011.  In an
 cost and complexity, the use of COTS c
 considered an attractive option for the avion
 risk of latent failure and unfamiliarity wi
 was essentially traded against the extreme
 short lead times made possible by ordering
 While the FS would evolve over time to
 custom JPL-built boards and compone
 implementation has left an indelible mark on
 Traditional spacecraft and instrument electr
 on strong conductive coupling to a tempe
 interface to maintain safe operati
 Ruggedization is also common practi
 reliability in the vibration- and ra
 environments of launch and low-Eart
 practices, however, are often impractical or
 with COTS avionics, where the cost o
 ruggedizing for flight would surely dwarf
 components themselves. The OPA
 implementation, for example, comprises a 
and electrical components that are desig
 forced-convection cooling in a ro
 environment. They have relatively little or 
Figure 14: Cross-sectional view of flight
 container showing arrangement of c
 14
 onstraints 
e of the project 
y the technical 
-making control. 
isions impacted 
al decisions had 
rticularly for the 
ve example was 
r possible. Much 
gn of the project 
s designed and 
 effort to reduce 
omponents was 
ics design – the 
th the hardware 
ly low cost and 
 “off-the-shelf.”  
 include several 
nts, the COTS 
 the FS design.  
onics boxes rely 
rature-controlled 
ng conditions.  
ce to improve 
diation-intensive 
h orbit. These 
 even impossible 
f modifying or 
 the cost of the 
LS avionics 
series of boards 
ned to receive 
om-temperature 
no tolerance for 
extreme temperature, humidity, or
 thus present significant technical c
 thermal control. 
The ISS in particular poses an add
 and constraints owing to the na
 payloads are installed and operat
 docking at the ISS, OPALS is remo
 SpaceX Dragon trunk.  During this
 points throughout the subsequent ro
 attach site on ELC1, the FS must a
 loss of power for up to six h
 architecture is therefore built 
maintaining a “laboratory envi
 operations.  The flight avionics sub
 critical components like the la
 distribution circuitry, is contai
 cylindrical enclosure that maintain
 environment throughout the nomina
 highlighted in Figure 14, 120mm D
 found in everyday desktop comput
 the air across the avionics compone
 heat exchanger assembly.  By rec
 fashion, waste heat is transferred
 avionics boards and components, th
 and into the heat exchanger where i
 external radiator.  Further, the loss 
from a loss of electrical power to 
effective means of insulating the 
loss during said periods – gas c
 dominant, though negligible, mode
 microgravity environment provid
 natural convection.  
The decoupling of heat transfer 
structural interfaces renders stand
 finite volume heat transfer c
 necessitates an iterative analy
 CAD/CAE and computational fluid
 to solve for characteristics of the flu
 of the OPALS avionics enclosure (
 envisioned a cuboid structure with
 heated air from the electronics 
assembly.  Early rounds of CFD an
 unacceptable pressure losses in th
 turning and relatively narrow cros
 the duct.  Over time, the iterated
 streamline the flow path, resulti
 between the fans and heat exchan
 cable routing to eliminate as man
 main flow path as possible. This it
 results in a design that is comp
 cheaper to analyze, as well as more 
build. Figure 16 shows a velocity 
final design. 
The relatively severe vibration e
 launch vehicle posed yet another 
avionics – most of which do 
 
 system sealed 
omponents 
 vacuum operation, and 
hallenges in maintaining 
itional set of challenges 
ture in which external 
ed.  Upon arrival and 
ved robotically from the 
 process, and at various 
botic transfer to its final 
ccommodate a complete 
ours. The OPALS FS 
around creating and 
ronment” for nominal 
system, along with other 
ser diode and power 
ned within a sealed 
s a 1-atmosphere (STP) 
l life of the payload.  As 
C fans, not unlike those 
ers, drive circulation of 
nts and through a ducted 
irculating the air in this 
 convectively from the 
rough the air mass flow, 
t is then conducted to an 
of circulation that results 
the payload provides an 
flight system from heat 
onduction becomes the 
 of heat transfer, as the 
es no mechanism for 
paths from traditional 
ard finite element and 
odes ineffective, and 
sis process between 
 dynamics (CFD) codes 
id flow.  Early concepts 
Figure 15), for example, 
 a long duct to transfer 
to the heat exchanger 
alysis, however, showed 
e flow due to repeated 
s-sectional areas within 
 design has evolved to 
ng in a single “turn” 
ger, and optimization of 
y obstructions from the 
erative process naturally 
utationally simpler and 
practical to fabricate and 
map of fluid flow in the 
nvironment within the 
challenge for the COTS 
not even ship with a 
 
 15
 manufacturer specification for vibration tolerance.  To deal 
with this issue, the rigid tray assembly that houses the 
avionics and fans is mounted on a system of wire-rope 
isolators designed to dampen random vibrations within the 
specific frequency spectra produced by the launch vehicle.  
These isolators protect delicate solder joints and other non-
 rugged components from being torn apart by launch loads. 
Further, in much the same way as the loss of circulation 
during power outages provides a natural means of insulation 
against heat loss, the wire rope isolator system’s poor 
thermal conductivity also impedes conduction to the outer 
structure of the sealed container. 
External, Process-Derived Drivers and Constraints 
While many decisions were internally motivated by the JPL 
processes and the OPALS paradigm, a significant number 
also came via the ISS and launch vehicle interfaces, both 
programmatically and technically.  
As one might anticipate, the ISS interface in particular 
impacted the OPALS day-to-day operations as well as the 
design features it implemented. The most clear example of 
this aspect came via the over 400 requirements imposed by 
the ISS program on the OPALS payload, followed by the 
V&V process mandated to demonstrate compliance. 
Requirements—As one of the first payloads to negotiate 
both the ISS and Dragon interfaces, OPALS has been 
routinely involved in technical changes beginning and 
ending with its interface requirements.  A considerable 
ongoing effort within OPALS and its partners has been to 
solidify the understanding of the requirements levied. 
When OPALS began in 2009, the Dragon had neither flown 
nor been fully designed.  This was best represented in the 
miniscule 16 provided requirements that were largely 
placeholders for what would become the Dragon’s interface 
specification.  At that point, expectations were that OPALS 
would be completed well before its Dragon flight. This 
schedule disconnect led to a considerable technical 
disconnect. 
In order to proceed with OPALS development despite the 
lack of a full set of design requirements assumptions had to 
be made in three key areas: power, connectivity, and the 
launch environment.  The first question of power came 
about for an obvious reason: OPALS has thermally sensitive 
optics and commercial equipment, and these components 
need heater power to be kept warm in space.  Without 
requirements on Dragon power provisions, the project’s first 
assumption was that the thermal control hardware designed 
for the on-orbit ISS environment would also prove valid 
during a Dragon ascent.  After exhaustive integrated thermal 
analysis, this assumption, and the resulting engineering 
implementation, has proven to be valid, and an additional 12 
pages of requirements and supporting data now reflect this 
interface design. 
After requirements were negotiated and an agreement was 
reached to provide sufficient thermal power during ascent, 
the question remained of how this power would be routed 
into the OPALS payload.  To direct the efforts towards a 
solution of connectivity, OPALS turned to the JAXA H-II 
Transfer Vehicle (HTV) and Space Shuttle designs that 
powered FRAM-based payloads similar to OPALS.  These 
additional carrier requirements allowed several connectivity 
options and it was thus taken to be a valid assumption that 
the Dragon team could design around OPALS’ desired 
cabling pin assignments.  The OPALS design was thus 
submitted to SpaceX and, as this was the first request for a 
specific option, the OPALS connectivity solution has 
become the primary power distribution option amongst 
external Dragon cargo requirements. 
The project’s greatest challenge, however, was the need to 
design the FS prior to receiving any validated launch 
 
Figure 15: Early design of the sealed container did not 
optimize component placement or airflow 
 
Figure 16: CFD analysis led to a new component layout 
that allowed for more efficient heat removal 
 
 16
 loading requirements.  To address this, OPALS began with 
JPL and NASA’s extensive historical data on expected 
launch loads, amended with ample margin and overlaid with 
standard levels on workmanship. The resulting crude 
spectrum was then supplied to the ISS and SpaceX 
dynamics teams who over the course of several months 
helped refine test plans to a conservative but agreeable 
level, which again proved to be valid (and indeed 
conservative) via integrated analysis and testing. At the time 
of this writing OPALS had successfully completed vibration 
testing. 
Lastly, the project has dealt with the uncertainty that comes 
via requirements variability from the ISS interface. Since 
OPALS began, 37% of the 694 ISS interface requirements 
have changed. Even though only 376 of them are applicable 
to OPALS, the project has had to maintain cognizance in 
this regard over the full set.  Despite the fact that the ISS is 
an operational facility and many components have been 
flying in orbit for several years, both OPALS and the ISSP 
are still learning about the function and performance of 
these components.  As such, there have been ample updates 
to the electrical and robotic interface requirement segments.  
These requirement changes are executed methodically in a 
thoroughly reviewed manner.  After internal ISS 
coordination, pending requirement updates are quickly 
disseminated amongst payload developers.  After external 
review by existing and prospective payloads, signatures are 
requested and requirements are enacted. 
V&V—Verification and Validation includes the final work 
done to certify both that the payload meets the word of the 
requirements, and that it performs the intended function. 
55% of OPALS’ requirements to be verified are provided by 
its external interfaces, including the ISS and Dragon.  
Though verified along with all other project requirements, 
these interface requirements demand a different balance of 
focus.  As these requirements are provided by external 
entities they are managed outside of JPL and subject to 
external verification.  OPALS, therefore, has no formal 
validation program for these requirements beyond ongoing 
interface systems engineering diligence.  While this 
externalized approach minimizes internal efforts, it 
simultaneously increases verification overhead.   
Verification of each external interface requirement falls 
under the cognizance of an external Discipline Engineer 
(DE) and the OPALS verification program is built around 
this external approval process, which is diagramed in Figure 
17.  These external engineers represent the external 
hardware expertise necessary to ultimately understand, 
validate and approve all interactions with their hardware.  It 
is important to note that these engineers support a multitude 
of projects across geographic boundaries, and their ability to 
provide dedicated attention to OPALS is attenuated by the 
breath of the projects they support. 
Internal to OPALS, an abundance of verification data is 
generated for these DEs in the verification of the 452 
external requirements.  The planning, technical 
coordination, and direction of this work is coordinated 
between the OPALS External Interface Engineer and the 
cognizant engineers within OPALS. As data and plans have 
been generated over years of interaction among these 
organizations, it is incumbent upon the EIE to ensure 
internal consistency and remedy problems across evolving 
interfaces. 
External, Technically-Derived Drivers and Constraints 
The ISS-imposed requirements provide the specification for 
the physical interface to the station, and, via the PSRP 
process, also provide direction on meeting the safety 
considerations that come with the Class A status of the ISS. 
This section will highlight how technical specifications 
from the ISS impacted aspects of the OPALS design.  
Mass & Power Budgets—Most payloads will find the ISS 
allocation for mass and 28V operational power to be quite 
generous at 490 lbs. (excluding the top half of the FRAM—
 the ExPA plate) and 504 watts, respectively. The ISS also 
provides 750 watts on a 120V operational line and an 
additional 300 watts of power on a 120V heater line.  
Expected to come in under 400 lbs., OPALS fits well within 
its mass allocation. In fact, at no point in its development 
did the OPALS mass margin—calculated as (Allocation-
 CBE)/Allocation—fall below 15%, and since CDR it has 
been hovering around 30%. The 28V ops power margin has 
been even more generous, hovering at or above 60% for 
much of the projects lifecycle, while the 120V ops and 
120V heater lines have seen equally generous margins of 
over 60% and 70 %, respectively.  
In space, mass and power are drivers more often than not. 
For OPALS the opposite has been the case, to the point 
where the excess allocations has been used to solve 
problems in other areas. One such example has been the 
 
Figure 17:  The OPALS ISS requirement verification 
process is built around the ISS approval process  
 
 
design of our gimbal. At nearly 70 lbs., the
 to be severely overdesigned for the 3 lb
 supports. However, the need for such a b
 forced by the early selection of the actuato
 long-lead items and had to be large enoug
 the optical head in the absence of launch lo
 time, by the yet unknown design of the opt
 under certain configurations, could have be
 lbs. Knowing that mass would likely not 
project was thus able to save cost by avo
 the mass of the gimbal while at t
 accommodating an unknown optical head
 lack of launch locks.  
The power draw of the electronics was 
concern since one of the benefits of having
 is that their power draw is well known an
 fluctuate greatly over time. If there was on
 power draw required more active managem
 120V heater line which is shared by the ISS
 launch vehicle, of which the latter had si
 stringent and fluctuating requirements.  
Designing to a Class A Interface—Of all th
 interface, the safety-related ones likely 
impact on the OPALS design. There are 
features that owe their existence to the need
 the two-fault tolerant design against cata
 mandated by the PSRP. The payload ha
 combination of three hardware and softwar
 each of the two catastrophic hazards that we
 the inadvertent usage of the 2.5 watt class
 shining the laser outside of its approved ar
 The hardstops limiting the travel of each ax
 constitute two of the inhibits required to pre
 Via a negotiation process with the PSRP, th
 upon the area around the ISS where it wou
 Figure 18: OPALS Field of Regard (red)
 Motion (yellow) projected over the OC
 station 
17
  gimbal appears 
. optical head it 
eefy design was 
rs—which  were 
h to immobilize 
cks—and, at that 
ical head, which, 
en well over 10 
be an issue, the 
iding optimizing 
he same time 
 design and the 
even less of a 
 COTS avionics 
d is unlikely to 
e area where the 
ent was on the 
 and the SpaceX 
gnificantly more 
e aspects of the 
had the largest 
a number of FS 
 to comply with 
strophic failures 
d to include a 
e inhibits against 
re identified: (1) 
 4 laser, and (2) 
ea of operations. 
is of the gimbal 
vent the latter. 
e project agreed 
ld be allowed to 
point the laser, referred to as the 
From this not-to-exceed area, the p
 allocation to allow for uncertai
 manufacturing. Using these derate
 gimbal to keep the laser within 
Motion (ROM) (Figure 18). Relat
 (~nadir), the ROM extends from ap
 in the gimbal azimuth axis (~
 approximately 1˚ to 38˚ in the 
(~crosstrack). Generally speaking, 
range limits the length of each pass
 while the size of the elevation 
frequently a pass occurs. This is 
mission success is at odds with m
 yield to it. Were it not for the nee
 operation of the laser due to safety
 would have enjoyed longer and mo
 improving its chances of meeting its
 In addition to the hardstops, meetin
 mandate requires that the desi
 microswitches, two relays, softw
 protection, and operational constr
 with the Huntsville Operations Supp
 and function of these inhibits were d
 MOS Interface—The main driver
 implementation was the availabilit
 operations tools, processes, and infr
 payloads. Although drivers are som
 negative impact on development,
 opposite was true. The OPALS 
leverage existing capabilities as mu
 development of new tools and proce
 Several remote operations tools are
 from MSFC and JSC for telemetr
 management, schedule viewing, tele
 over-IP. Table 3 details the av
 function. The OPALS MOS has i
 tools with only a minor amoun
 required. Given the wide array of t
 responsibilities of OPALS MOS 
simplified to development of the 
ephemeris processing, generatio
 generation of telemetry and comma
 decision-making and execution,
 analysis. 
In addition to tools, OPALS has als
 great deal in the area of operatio
 depicts the interface support pro
 Marshall Space Flight Center and 
Directorate (MOD) at the Johnson 
general, MOD handles the overall 
with tasks including crew operati
 orbital reboosts, docking activitie
 MOD defines its interface with OP
 Rules that govern power, attitud
 restrictions on payload activity. T
  
 and Range of 
TL ground 
Field of Regard (FOR). 
roject further derated the 
nties in modeling and 
d values it designed the 
the expected Range of 
ive to the ISS +Z axis 
proximately -34˚ to +73˚ 
alongtrack) and from 
gimbal elevation axis 
the size of the azimuth 
 over the ground station, 
range determines how 
a clear example of how 
ission safety and must 
d to restrict the area of 
 considerations, OPALS 
re frequent passes, thus 
 level one requirement.   
g the two-fault tolerance 
gn also include four 
are arm-fire command 
aints to be coordinated 
ort Center. The purpose 
iscussed in section 3. 
 for the OPALS MOS 
y of significant existing 
astructure for ISS-based 
etimes seen as having a 
 in this case quite the 
MOS has attempted to 
ch as possible to avoid 
sses and thus save cost.  
 available free of charge 
y processing, command 
metry query, and voice-
 ailable tools and their 
ncorporated all of these 
t of tool configuration 
ools available, the prime 
development has been 
operations concept, ISS 
n of file products, 
nd databases, operations 
 and troubleshooting 
o been able to leverage a 
ns processes. Figure 19 
vided by the POIC at 
the Mission Operations 
Space Flight Center. In 
ISS platform operations, 
ons, robotic operations, 
s, and attitude control. 
ALS via a set of Flight 
e, trajectory, and crew 
he POIC, on the other 
 
 
hand, provides the infrastructure to 
commands and file products to the payloa
 infrastructure to receive and relay real-time
 the payload. The agreements between the 
POIC to ensure proper operation, m
 monitoring of the payload are documen
 Regulations. In addition, the POIC maintain
 process for planning payload activities an
 those activities into the larger ISS schedule.
 Activity planning and scheduling begins 8
 launch and continues up to 7 days before th
 it is included in the ISS Short Term Pl
 OPALS operations are time critical
 commanding by members of the POIC, O
 will be designated with priority over 
activities in the STP. During real-time 
Payload Operations Director at the POI
 interface for the OPALS payload and provid
 inputs for activity coordination with th
 Director. The expectations of the payload d
 it will provide a clear set of science objecti
 set of data and planning requirements neede
 those objectives. For OPALS, these 
documented in the OPALS Ops Concep
 delivered to the POIC and MOD 18 mon
 anticipated launch date. It is also expected 
operations team will submit a formal tr
 participate in training exercises with the P
 other ISS payloads. The POIC offers two fl
 activities: scenario training and simulation t
 Scenario training exercises MOS execut
 specific processes while simulation training
 familiarity with ISS interfaces, coordination
 MOD entities, and decision-making in th
 anomalies. The scenario activity resembles 
operational readiness test (ORT) in 
Table 3: Existing operations to
 Tool Operations F
 Telescience Resource 
Kit (TReK) 
Telemetry Proce
 Telemetry Displ
 Telemetry Datab
 Command Mana
 Command Datab
 Enhanced HOSC 
System (EHS) 
Telemetry Quer
 Database Synch
 HOSC Network
 Internet Voice-over-IP 
(IVoDS) Voice Loops 
Payload Information 
Management System 
(PIMS) 
File Transfer 
Operations Chan
 On-board Short Term 
Plan Viewer (OSTPV) ISS Schedule V
 18
 relay real-time 
d as well as the 
 telemetry from 
payload and the 
aintenance, and 
ted as Payload 
s a well-defined 
d incorporating 
  
 months before 
e activity, when 
an (STP). Since 
 and require 
PALS activities 
conflicting ISS 
operations, the 
C is the prime 
es the necessary 
e MOD Flight 
eveloper are that 
ves along with a 
d to accomplish 
products were 
t document and 
ths prior to the 
that the payload 
aining plan and 
OIC, MOD, and 
avors of training 
raining.  
ion of payload-
  exercises MOS 
 with POIC and 
e event of ISS 
what is called an 
the JPL flight 
development process, while the sim
 to the ISS program due to the
 diversity of the ISSP interfaces. F
 members are available on consol
 OPALS MOS in a flight-like opera
 role of the Flight MOS and Groun
 react appropriately to nominal and 
relayed by the POIC over the voice
 expected to obey all Flight Rules a
 in the execution of their activ
 proficiency with all operations pro
 OPALS and external (e.g. ISS). 
6. CONCLUSI
 The development of the flight paylo
 two factors: (1) interfacing with the
 sense and a programmatic one, and
 as a Class D risk classification paylo
 The ISS physical interface provided
 but one that was greatly facilita
 standardized FRAM and by the ge
 allocations. The latter have afforde
 flexibility in making design decisi
 the expense of the still generous ma
 Operating on the ISS also meant
 facility and of the astronauts it hos
 all other considerations. As such, O
 in a series of inhibits to provide tw
 catastrophic hazards identified. 
despite being a Class D payload
 typically affords significantly mor
 project’s risk posture for mission su
 on safety. The ISS-driven proc
 scrutinizes this aspect can be da
 navigate it, projects need to plan
 significant impacts in both techn
 areas, while keeping in close c
 PSRP. 
The internal decision to implement
 payload also had significant implic
 led to the widespread use of COT
 ols 
unctions 
ssing 
ay 
ase Build 
gement 
ase Build 
y 
ronization 
 Access 
ge Requests 
iewer 
Figure 19: OPALS cross-agency
 ulation activity is unique 
 sheer complexity and 
or both exercises, POIC 
e to interface with the 
tional environment.  The 
d MOS teams will be to 
off-nominal notifications 
 loop. The teams will be 
nd Payload Regulations 
ities and demonstrate 
cesses, both internal to 
ONS 
ad was largely driven by 
 ISS, both in a physical 
 (2) being implemented 
ad.  
 a significant constraint, 
ted by the use of the 
nerous mass and power 
d the project significant 
ons that reduced cost at 
ss and power margins. 
 that the safety of the 
ts took precedence over 
PALS has had to design 
o fault tolerance for all 
This limitation comes 
, a classification which 
e latitude in defining a 
ccess but has no bearing 
ess that oversees and 
unting. To successfully 
 and accommodate for 
ical and programmatic 
ommunication with the 
 the project as a Class D 
ations for the design. It 
S components, which in 
 
 operations interfaces 
 
 19
 turn lead to a design that required forced convective cooling 
and vibration dampening, both uncommon for modern-day 
space payloads. Furthermore, it allowed the project 
flexibility in tailoring its verification and validation program 
for non-ISS requirements to save cost and schedule. 
The focus of space-borne instruments is usually on the flight 
articles, which in the case of OPALS is the FRAM-based 
payload to be externally installed on the ISS. However, 
most, if not all, projects must also develop a ground 
infrastructure to support the operations of the flight asset. 
For OPALS, despite being more akin to an instrument than 
a spacecraft, that was certainly the case as significant 
development was required for both the optical ground 
station to enable the transmission of a beacon and receipt of 
the optical downlink for the former, and for the MOS to 
support commanding and telemetry. 
The use of the OCTL facility in California greatly reduced 
the amount of development required to receive and process 
the optical downlink, and to transmit the beacon needed by 
the FS to locate the ground station. The development was 
thus restricted to the optics needed to condition the light 
beam for processing by the hardware receiver and the 
software decoder. 
The design of the MOS was, by and large, dictated by the 
interface to the ISS’s expansive payloads operations 
infrastructure located at Marshall Space Flight Center. 
Because the interface was already mature and well 
understood, the project’s efforts were primarily focused on 
ensuring compatibility rather than developing its own 
capability. The savings afforded by leveraging the existence 
of the already operating infrastructure cannot be 
understated. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors express their gratitude to the entire OPALS 
team for their dedication and hard work, and to the mentors 
that have guided the team on a path to success. The authors 
acknowledge all of the OPALS team members, whose 
technical contributions made the writing of the paper 
possible.   The work described in this paper was carried out 
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. 
REFERENCES  
[1] R. J. Cesarone, D. S. Abrahams, S. Shambayati, and J. 
Rush, “Deep space communications, visions trends and 
prospects,”  In Proc. Int. Conf. Space Opt. Syst. Appl., 
Santa Monica, CA, May 11–13, 2011, pp. 412–425. 
[2] H. Hemmati. “Special section guest editorial: free space 
optical communications.” Opt. Eng. 0001; 
51(3):031201-1-031201-1.  
doi:10.1117/1.OE.51.3.031201. 
 [3] H. Henniger, and O. Wilfert. "An introduction to free-
 space optical communications." Radioengineering 19.2, 
pp. 203-212, 2010. 
[4] Risk Classification for NASA Payloads, NASA 
Procedural Requirements NPR 8705.4, 2008. 
[5] Phaeton Early Career Hire Development Program. R. M. 
Jones, J. Lim. 2012. Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology. 19 Oct. 2012. 
<http://phaeton.jpl.nasa.gov/internal/index.cfm> 
[6] R. Richard, B. Solish, M. Seibert, K. Kilbride, S. Dong, 
and T. Coffee. “Bridging the Generation Gap : A Rapid 
Early Career Hire Training Program,” in AIAA Space 
2008 Conference, pp. 1-13. 
[7] A. Biswas, H. Hemmati, S. Piazzolla, B. Moision, K. 
Birnbaum, and K. Quirk, “Deep-space Optical Terminals 
(DOT) Systems Engineering.” IPN Progress Rep. 42-
 183. Nov. 15, 2010. 
[8] H. Hemmati, A. Biswas, I.B. Djordjevic, "Deep-Space 
Optical Communications: Future Perspectives and 
Applications," in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.99, 
no.11, 2011, pp.2020-2039. 
[9] Lucke, Robert L., et al. "Hyperspectral Imager for the 
Coastal Ocean: instrument description and first 
images." Applied Optics 50.11 (2011): 1501-1516. 
[10] M. Corson, D. Korwan, R. Lucke, W. Snyder, C. 
Davis, "The Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean 
(HICO) on the International Space Station," in IGARSS 
2008, pp.IV-101-IV-104. 
[11] Telescience Resource Kit. J. Onken. 2012. Marshall 
Space Flight Center. <http://trek.msfc.nasa.gov> 
[12] Payload Safety Review and Data Submittal 
Requirements, National Space Transportation System 
NSTS 13830, 1998. 
 [13] Computer-Based Control System Safety Requirements, 
Space Station Program SSP 50038, 1995. 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Bogdan Oaida is the Project Systems 
Engineer for OPALS. He received a 
B.S.E. in Aerospace Engineering in 
2007 and a M.Eng in Space 
Engineering in 2008, both from The 
University of Michigan. Since joining 
JPL in 2008, Bogdan has also worked 
on a number of Earth-sensing mission 
proposals and has participated in several TeamX studies, 
JPL’s concurrent engineering environment. 
 
 
Matt Abrahamson is
 Operations Lead for 
received a B.S. 
Engineering With 
Technology in 2006 a
 Aeronautics and Astron
 both from MIT. He 
Laboratory Fellow from
 since joining JPL has worked on flight op
 EPOXI, Stardust-NExT, Juno, and Dawn
 mission navigator. 
Robert Witoff is the IS
 Systems Engineer for 
received a B.S. 
Engineering from the 
Colorado at Boulder i
 pursuing a Masters in So
 Engineering at Stanford.
 Apigy Inc, Robert joined
 has additionally worked on the Dawn
 Interplanetary missions. 
Jessica Bowles Martine
 and Mission Assurance
 OPALS. She received 
Electrical Engineering 
Science and B.S. in Com
 Studies in 2003 at the
 Institute of Technology
 earned a M.Eng in Elec
 Engineering from Johns Hopkins Universit
 JPL in 2008, she has held various rol
 radiation testing for Juno, research in NA
 Parts Packaging program, and an ISS ba
 assembled telescope project. 
Daniel Zayas is the Th
 both OPALS and th
 Laboratory, a planned
 Condensate experimen
 International Space 
received B.S. degrees 
Engineering and Physics
 Aerospace Engineering
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  He
 contributed to a number of planetary m
 including JUNO and the Mars Science La
 Curiosity. 
 
20
  the Mission 
OPALS. He 
in Aerospace 
Information 
nd a M.S. in 
autics in 2008, 
was a Draper 
 2006-2008 and 
erations for the 
 projects as a 
S and Dragon 
OPALS.  He 
in Aerospace 
University of 
n 2009 and is 
ftware Systems 
  After founding 
 JPL where he 
 and Rosetta 
z is the Safety 
 Manager for 
a B.S.E. in 
and Computer 
parative Media 
 Massachusetts 
. In 2006 she 
trical Computer 
y. After joining 
es working on 
SAs Electronic 
sed robotically 
ermal Lead for 
e Cold Atom 
 Bose-Einstein 
t aboard the 
Station.  He 
in Aerospace 
, and a M.S. in 
, all from the 
 has previously 
issions at JPL 
boratory rover 
