   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1 
Direct-to-Earth Communications with Mars Science 
Laboratory during Entry, Descent, and Landing 
 Melissa Soriano, Susan Finley, David Fort, Brian Schratz, Peter Ilott, 
Ryan Mukai, Polly Estabrook, Kamal Oudrhiri, Daniel Kahan, Edgar Satorius 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
818-393-7632 
Melissa.A.Soriano@jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract—	   Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) undergoes 
extreme heating and acceleration during Entry, Descent, and 
Landing (EDL) on Mars.  Unknown dynamics lead to large 
Doppler shifts, making communication challenging.  During 
EDL, a special form of Multiple Frequency Shift Keying 
(MFSK) communication is used for Direct-To-Earth (DTE) 
communication.  The X-band signal is received by the Deep 
Space Network (DSN) at the Canberra Deep Space 
Communication complex, then down-converted, digitized, and 
recorded by open-loop Radio Science Receivers (RSR), and 
decoded in real-time by the EDL Data Analysis (EDA) 
System.  The EDA uses lock states with configurable Fast 
Fourier Transforms to acquire and track the signal.  RSR 
configuration and channel allocation is shown.  Testing prior 
to EDL is discussed including software simulations, test bed 
runs with MSL flight hardware, and the in-flight end-to-end 
test.  EDA configuration parameters and signal dynamics 
during pre-entry, entry, and parachute deployment are 
analyzed.  RSR and EDA performance during MSL EDL is 
evaluated, including performance using a single 70-meter DSN 
antenna and an array of two 34-meter DSN antennas as a back 
up to the 70-meter antenna. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1	  
 2. APPROACH ........................................................ 2	  
 3. DETAILED ANALYSIS ........................................ 3	  
 4. RESULTS ............................................................ 9	  
 5. CONCLUSION ................................................... 11	  
 6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................... 11	  
 REFERENCES ....................................................... 12	  
  
1. INTRODUCTION 
During Mars Science Laboratory (MSL)’s Entry, Descent, 
and Landing (EDL), there were two forms of real-time 
communication: Direct-to-Earth (DTE) and relay through 
Mars Odyssey orbiter. DTE communication was transmitted 
by MSL’s Small Deep Space Transponder (SDST) at X-
 band frequencies and received at the Canberra Deep Space 
Communications Complex (CDSCC) in Australia. 
 
 
Figure 1- MSL EDL Direct-To-Earth Communications 
system diagram 
 
A DTE Communications system diagram is shown in Figure 
1.  Three antennas at CDSCC received the DTE signal: 
DSS-43 (70-m), DSS-34 (34-m), and DSS-45 (34-m), with 
DSS-43 being prime.  Both Right Circular Polarization 
(RCP) and Left Circular Polarization (LCP) signals were 
received and down-converted to Intermediate Frequency 
(IF) and recorded from DSS-43, as well as RCP signals 
from DSS-34 and DSS-45.  MSL’s transmitted signal was 
RCP.  The signals from DSS-34 and DSS-45 were also 
correlated and combined by the Full Spectrum Processor 
Array (FSPA) and recorded as a back up to DSS-43. 
 
Analog data from the antennas were distributed to closed-
 loop Downlink Telemetry, and Tracking (DTT) receivers, 
the FSPA, and open-loop Radio Science Receivers (RSR).  
During EDL, traditional phase modulated low rate telemetry 
is not possible due to high dynamics and low signal-to-noise 
ratio.  The closed-loop DTT receivers received the signal on 
a best-efforts basis but as expected, did not stay locked 
through banking and parachute deployment.  The open-loop 
RSRs were prime for EDL.  The RSRs digitized, filtered, 
and down-converted the signal, using a 100 kHz 8-bit 
complex channel.  This data was relayed to the Wideband 
VLBI Science Receiver (WVSR) and transferred across the 
flight operations network from CDSCC in Australia to the 
EDL Data Analysis (EDA) assemblies at JPL’s Deep Space 
Operations Complex (DSOC). 
 
 
 2 
The EDAs processed the 70-m data using Fast Fourier 
Transform (FFT) based algorithms in real-time using 
acquisition and tracking lock states [4].  Each lock state may 
have different FFT parameters such as length of integration.  
Up to three threads and twelve processors work in parallel.  
The signal has a carrier and a subcarrier (or tone).  The 
received EDL signal, s(t), is shown in the equation below, 
where fc is the transmitted carrier frequency, fd is the data 
tone frequency, ∆ is the modulation index, and Pt is the total 
received power. 
 
! ! =    2!! cos 2! !" ? !! ! + ∆ ? !"# 2! !" ?
 !
 !!
 !
 !!
                                                                                                 !!(!) +   !(!)                                                                      (1)  
        
where !"# !  is the hard-limited sine function: 
 
                                                    !"# ! =   
 1,        0 < ! ≤ !
 ?1,        ! < ! ≤ 2!                              (2) 
 
The subcarrier’s offset from the carrier varies and this 
difference conveys a meaning.  An example FFT spectrum 
for s(t) with ∆ = 43° is shown in Figure 2.  The EDA 
searches for the carrier and data tone using peak power 
detection and then measures the difference between the 
carrier and subcarrier, which is converted to a tone 
mnemonic.  During MSL EDL, tone mnemonics as well as 
plots of residual frequency and signal-to-power ratio were 
provided in real-time to the Mission Support Area.  
 
 
Figure 2- FFT of MSL EDL signal 
For MER and Juno, ∆ = 48°.  The received carrier and data 
powers are functions of Pt and ∆.  As shown by the below 
equations, the choice of modulation index is a tradeoff 
between power in the carrier, Pc, for acquisition/tracking 
and power in the data, Pd, for tone detection.  Note that Pd 
includes the power in the first tone harmonic, denoted by 
Ptone, and also the power in the other harmonics.  The ratio 
of Pd to Ptone is 1.2337 [1].  MSL’s selection of ∆ = 48° vs ∆ 
= 43° for MER and Juno puts less of the total transmitted 
power in the carrier. 
 
                                                                                    !! =   !! ? !"#
 !∆                            (3) 
                                                                                    !! =   !! ? !"#
 !∆                            (4) 
                                                                                    !!"#$ =   
 !!?!"#
 !∆
 !.!""#
                             (5) 
 
 
2. APPROACH 
The DTE Communications system was tested in an in-flight 
test, with a Portable Radio Science Receiver (PRSR) and the 
MSL test bed, and using software simulations of expected 
Doppler dynamics. 
 
In-Flight Test 
An in-flight test of the DTE communications system 
planned for MSL EDL took place on DOY 179, 2012.  This 
test included two main parts: a. All 256 tones were tested 
with 10-second durations, ramping up from tone 1 to tone 
256 and then ramping back down to tone 1.  Tone number 
vs time (in seconds) for this part of the test is shown in 
Figure 3.  b. An abbreviated version of the nominal EDL 
sequence was also tested.  Tone number vs time for this part 
of the test is shown in Figure 4.  Note the heartbeat tones 
(which are played if there is no other event taking place) at 
tone numbers 233 and 239.  The in-flight test was successful 
and all radiated tones were correctly detected. 
 
Figure 3- Tone number vs Time (seconds) for in-flight test, 
tones ramp 
 
Figure 4- Tone number vs Time (seconds) for in-flight test, 
nominal EDL 
 
 
 3 
Software simulations 
Simulated signals were generated in the standard Radio 
Science Receiver (RSR) file format and processed by the 
Entry, Decent, and Landing (EDL) Data Analysis (EDA) 
system.  These data files were generated using eda/gen, 
which is part of the EDA software package.  The eda/gen 
software accepts as input a file in standard downlink 
frequency predicts format.  Residual frequency is computed 
by differencing the measured signal frequency and the 
predicted frequency.   
                                         !!"#$%&’( =   !!"#$%&"’ ?   !!"#$%&’(                                             (6) 
For the spacecraft predicts, a downlink frequency predicts 
file was provided by Dan Burkhart of MSL Navigation. In 
this file, parachute deployment and powered descent do not 
occur; the spacecraft impacts at around E+300 s.   A 
discontinuity occurs at this point, as seen in Figure 5.  The 
lack of parachute deployment in the predicts file is 
deliberate and desirable because the exact time of parachute 
deployment is unknown.  If parachute deployment were 
included, residual frequency would spike twice, at the 
predicted time and actual time.  With parachute deployment 
removed from the predicts, the spike in residual frequency 
occurs only at the actual time and is more easily detected in 
real-time.  The spacecraft predicts file has an entry time at 
MSL of 06-AUG-2012 05:10:43.8725 UTC.  Distance from 
MSL to CDSCC at this entry time resulted in a one-way 
light time (OWLT) of 827.226 seconds.  Entry time at Earth 
is, therefore, 06-AUG-2012 05:24:31.9465 UTC. 
 
Figure 5- 6DOF late chute signal and Navigation no-chute 
predicts 
For the measured signal, data from the 6 Degrees of 
Freedom (6DOF) model provided by Jeremy Schidner of 
NASA Langley were used.  Data for the latest, earliest, and 
nominal times of parachute deployment were obtained and 
this data is shown in Figure 6.  We will call this data “late,” 
“early,” and “nominal” respectively.  The 6DOF late chute 
signal and navigation predicts are shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 6- Overview of 6DOF parachute cases 
Residual frequency was computed by differencing these 
early and late bounding cases for the spacecraft signal and 
the downlink frequency predicts provided by MSL 
navigation. Software simulations were generated using these 
frequency residuals and used to test the EDA parameters 
[6].  Similar work was done prior to MSL’s launch in which 
simulated signals were also generated in RSR file format 
and processed by the operational EDA software for Mars 
Science Laboratory.  This work demonstrated 97% correct 
tones detection at total received signal power (carrier plus 
data)-to-noise density ratio (Pt/No) of 20 dB-Hz, 79-81% 
detection at 18 dB-Hz, and 16% detection at 16 dB-Hz [2]. 
 
MSL Test Bed 
In addition to simulations, the EDA was tested in over 25 
runs with MSL test bed.  In preparation for EDL, the 
engineering model of the flight hardware and software was 
tested numerous times, including the Telecom system.  The 
Intermediate Frequency (IF) signal was converted from 
analog to fiber optic, travelled across the lab via a fiber-
 optic link, was then converted back to analog, and fed as 
input to a PRSR.  The PRSR digitized, down-converted, 
filtered, and recorded the signal.  The data was then 
streamed in real-time to the EDA.  However, the standard 
test bed runs did not include Doppler dynamics.  Robustness 
tests combined the signal from MSL test bed with new 
navigation predicts that included Doppler dynamics from 
the 6DOF data.   
3. DETAILED ANALYSIS  
Theoretical Probability of Detection 
Searching for the signal amid frequency and frequency rate 
bins entails finding the bin with the largest squared value.  
Assuming the noise to be zero-mean Gaussian, each bin will 
have a chi-squared distribution.  The bin containing the 
signal will have a non-central chi-squared distribution [1]. 
Let the probability density function (PDF) of the signal be 
denoted by !! ! , and let the cumulative distribution 
function (CDF) of the noise bins be denoted by !! ! .  Let 
 
 4 
Nf be the total number of bins to be searched.  The 
probability of correct detection is given by: 
                            !! ! !! !
 !!!!!"
 !!!!
 !!!
                     (7) 
       
The expression above is the probability that each noise bin 
has a value lower than that of the signal bin.  We provide 
both the PDF of the signal bin and the CDF of the noise bins 
next.  These are defined in terms of several other terms 
listed below: 
 
1. !!!": Number of points per FFT.  This is the 
number of frequency bins over which we must 
search for the residual carrier. 
2. ∆!: Frequency resolution.  This is the sampling 
rate (100 kHz in this case) divided by !!!".  The 
result is the frequency resolution of the FFT. 
3. !: The  time  of  incoherent  integration. 
4. !"#   !"   !!
 !!
 : This is the carrier power to noise 
spectral density ratio for the residual carrier. 
5. !!"#$
 !!
 : This is the tone power (first harmonic only) 
to noise spectral density ratio. 
6. !!
 !!
 : This is the total signal power to noise spectral 
density ratio. 
For carrier detection, define: 
! = !∆! 
!! ! = !!!! 4 ? ! ? ! ? !"# !
 ! !!!?!"# !
 !?!"#
         
 !!!
 !         (8)                     
                                                                            !! ! = 1 ?
 ! !,!
 ! !
                             (9) 
Here, ? ! is the Euler gamma function and ? !, !  is the 
incomplete gamma function [1].  Hence, the probability of 
correct detection for the residual carrier, which is one minus 
the probability of error is: 
! =
 !!!! 4 ? ! ? ! ? !"# !! !!!?!"#
 !
 !?!"#
 !!!
 !
 1 ?
 ! !,!
 ! !
 !!!!
 !"
 !!!!
 !!!               (10) 
 
The key input parameters are T, ∆!, !!, and CNR. 
For the probability of correct detection in resolving tones, 
assuming we have already correctly detected the carrier: 
1. !!: This is now the number of tones and not the 
number of frequency and frequency rate bins as it 
had been in the residual carrier case. 
2. Replace CNR by !!"#$
 !!
  
3. Define ! = 2!∆!. 
The resulting expression for the probability of correct tone 
detection is: 
! =
 !!!! 4 ? ! ? ! ?
 !!"#$
 !!
 !
 ! !!!?
 !!"#$
 !!
 !
 !?
 !!"#$
 !!
 !!!
 !
 1 ?
 ! !,!
 ! !
 !!!!
 !"
 !!!!
 !!! (11) 
 
MSL EDL 
Significant events for the nominal parachute deploy case are 
shown in Table 1.  The 6DOF data was converted from 
Doppler frequency to sky frequency by adding MSL’s 
downlink transmitted frequency (TFREQ) of 
8,401,420,188.00 Hz and then a frequency offset of 9 KHz.  
The 6DOF data was originally in Spacecraft time (SCET), 
so one-way light time (OWLT) was added to obtain Earth 
Received Time (ERT). 
Table 1- MSL EDL Critical Events 6DOF nominal 
parachute chute deploy case 
 
Residual frequency, frequency rate, and frequency 
acceleration were computed and the late chute case is shown 
in Figure 7, Figure 8, and Figure 9 respectively.  Residual 
frequency changes slowly until Entry.  As the spacecraft 
accelerates towards Mars, it banks three times.  During 
banking, residual frequency rates reach +/- 300 Hz/s and 
residual frequency accelerations exceed +/- 100 Hz/s2.  
After banking is complete, residual frequency changes 
 
 5 
slowly until parachute deployment at E+255 seconds.  As 
the time of parachute deployment is unknown, the 
navigation predicts do not contain this event, causing a large 
jump in residual frequency, rate, and acceleration.   
 
 
Figure 7- Residual Frequency for late chute case 
 
Figure 8- Residual Frequency Rate for late chute case 
 
Figure 9- Residual Frequency Acceleration for late chute 
case 
Total received signal power (carrier plus data)-to-noise 
spectral density ratio (Pt/No) was predicted to be greater 
than 20 dB-Hz from when the spacecraft started transmitting 
tones at E-677 seconds until loss of direct to Earth 
communications at E+313 seconds (due to the loss of a line 
of sight from Mars to Earth).  This loss was a consequence 
of the geometry of the landing site and spacecraft trajectory.  
Predicted total received signal power to noise spectral ratio 
is shown in blue in Figure 10.  In this the late chute case, 
minimum Pt/No until loss of DTE communications at E+313 
seconds is 28 dB-Hz.  The off bore-sight/cone (theta) and 
clock (phi) angles of MSL’s low gain antennas are plotted in 
green and red respectively. 
 
 
Figure 10- Predicted Pt/No for 6DOF late chute case 
These signal characteristics were used to partition MSL 
EDL into three segments for processing by the EDA: Pre-
 Entry, Entry, and Parachute.  Each segment used different 
configuration parameters. 
 
Simulation Parameters 
EDA software simulations utilized various parameters 
shown in Table 2.  These parameters describe properties of 
the MSL EDL tones design and were fixed for all 
simulations.  A modulation index of 43° was chosen based 
on the need to maximize the probability of tracking the 
carrier and subcarrier [1].  Tones ranged in subcarrier 
frequency from 2 kHz to 20 kHz from the carrier.  This 
design choice balanced the conflicting desires for smaller 
spacing between tones (and a smaller channel with less 
bandwidth streamed in real-time) and larger spacing 
between tones (increasing the probability of adjacent tones 
being correctly detected).  Tone duration was 10 seconds.  
Simulations of detection probabilities performed for Mars 
Exploration Rover (MER) demonstrated that 10-second 
tones with Pt/No > 20 dB-Hz could be correctly detected 
>99% of the time [3].  Mars Science Laboratory 
requirements were for 90% correct detection. 
A 100 kHz channel was used for recording.  This channel’s 
bandwidth of +/- 50 kHz is large enough to contain the 
complete range of tones (+/- 20 kHz), as well as expected 
changes in residual Doppler frequency due to uncertainties 
in predicts (+/- 8 kHz) and auxiliary oscillator drift with 
temperature (+/- 20 kHz).  Maximum Doppler residual 
frequency change due to predicts was determined by 
differencing the bounding chute cases with the predicts.  
The auxiliary oscillator was expected to increase from -3°C 
to 11°C in the worst case.  This temperature change causes 
frequency drift.  To estimate this drift, models based on 
SDST laboratory test results were used. 
 
 6 
Table 2- Key EDA simulation parameters 
Parameter 
Definition 
Parameter Name Value 
Length of 
simulation 
LENGTH 15 minutes, 5 
seconds 
Sampling rate SAMPLE_RATE 100 kHz 
Modulation index 
(∆) 
MOD_INDEX 43° 
Number of tones TON_NUMBER 256 
Frequency offset 
where tones begin 
TON_OFFSET 2000 Hz 
Frequency delta 
between tones 
TON_DELTA 70.5883 Hz 
Tone duration TONE_DWELL 10 seconds 
 
For the EDA software simulations, Radio Science Receiver 
data files were generated including a signal with the 
parameters specified in Table 2.  The simulation time 
ranged from E-540 seconds (when the 6DOF data started) to 
E+365 seconds (52 seconds after expected occultation).  
The frequency residual data from the 6DOF late chute data 
shown in Figure 7 was used.  10-second duration tones were 
also added.  The EDA software calculates the subcarrier 
frequency of tone number n as shown below in Equation 1.  
For MSL, the EDA software calculates the subcarrier 
frequency of tone number n using a spacing of 70.5883 Hz 
between tones as shown in Equation 2.  However, the MSL 
SDST uses Data Numbers (DNs) that must be integer 
numbers to specify sub-carrier frequency values. The actual 
tone spacing implemented by MSL varied between 66 DN = 
70.81 Hz and 65 DN = 69.74 Hz.  Actual tone spacing 
varied less than 1 Hz from the tone spacing used by the 
EDA software.  The EDA was configured to allow for this 
difference. 
 
            ftone =  TON_OFFSET + n*TON_DELTA       (12) 
 
                       ftone = 2000 + n*70.5883 Hz                  (13) 
 
Total power to noise ratio (Pt/No) is a configurable 
parameter and was varied from 30 dB-Hz down to 20 dB-Hz 
for different test runs. 
 
EDA Configuration 
The EDA utilizes a configuration file that specifies 
parameters to use for processing.  An activity such as MSL 
EDL can be broken up into different configuration segments 
with start/stop times.  Each configuration segment may 
utilize different signal processing parameters.  The 
configuration segments used in MSL EDL are shown in 
Table 3.  In 6DOF simulations, the earliest time that 
parachute deployment occurred was at E+231 seconds; the 
parachute configuration segment started 10 seconds before 
this time for additional margin. 
Table 3- MSL EDA Configuration Segments 
Segment Start time End time 
Pre-Entry E-540 E-100 
Entry E-99 E+220 
Parachute E+221 E+365 
 
Let !!"#   be the maximum residual frequency rate and 
!!"#   be the maximum residual frequency acceleration. 
A rule of thumb for FFT resolution is that the maximum 
frequency change during the interval in which the FFT is 
computed < ?f/4 [3].  
                                                                                    ?! >    4  !!"#                            (14) 
Using !!"# of 400 Hz/s from Figure 8 yields ?f > 40 Hz.  
Based on this calculation, an FFT resolution of 40 Hz was 
chosen for the parachute configuration segment. 
A rule of thumb for time of incoherent integration is that it 
be sufficiently short that the maximum deviation of the 
received carrier frequency from a linear trajectory over the 
T-length segment is < ?f/4 [3]. 
                                                                                        ! <    2  
 !!
 !!"#
                              (15) 
Using ?f = 40 Hz and !!"#   !" 150 Hz/s/s from Figure 9 
yields T < 0.73 seconds.  The minimum time of incoherent 
integration for the EDA is 1 second, so the system was 
configured with a value of T = 1 second.  This decision 
implied that some tones would be missed during periods of 
very high dynamics, such parachute deployment. 
Key EDA configuration parameters for the pre-entry, entry, 
and parachute EDA configuration segments are shown in 
Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6 respectively. 
 
 7 
Table 4- Key EDA configuration parameters for Pre-Entry 
segment 
Parameter Acquisition 
State 
Tracking State 
FFT resolution 
(?f) 
2 Hz 2 Hz 
Number of 
samples/FFT 
(NFFT) 
50,000 50,000 
Time of coherent 
integration (?) 
0.5 seconds 0.5 seconds 
Time of 
incoherent 
integration (T) 
1 second 1 second 
Number of 
averaged FFTs 
(M) 
2 2 
Carrier 
frequencies to 
search 
Entire 100 kHz 
channel 
+/- 100 Hz 
Subcarrier 
frequencies to 
search 
+/- 2 Hz +/- 2 Hz 
Pre-FFT 
frequency rate 
search 
+/- 35 Hz/s +/-14 Hz/s 
Number of Pre-
 FFT frequency 
rate bins (Nr) 
15 15 
Post-FFT 
frequency rate 
search 
+/- 2 Hz/s +/- 1 Hz/s 
Threshold SNR 15.5 dB 14.5 dB 
Search space (Nf) 750,000 750,000 
 
Table 5- Key EDA configuration parameters for Entry 
segment 
Parameter Acquisition 
State 
Tracking 
State 1 
Tracking 
State 2 
FFT 
resolution 
(?f) 
10 Hz 5 Hz 5 Hz 
Number of 
samples/FFT 
(NFFT) 
10,000 20,000 20,000 
Time of 
coherent 
integration 
(?) 
0.1 seconds 0.2 seconds 0.2 seconds 
Time of 
incoherent 
integration 
(T) 
1 second 1 second 1 second 
Number of 
averaged 
FFTs (M) 
10 5 5 
Carrier 
frequencies 
to search 
Entire 100 
kHz 
channel 
+/- 200 Hz +/- 200 Hz 
Subcarrier 
frequencies 
to search 
+/- 10 Hz +/- 5 Hz +/- 5 Hz 
Pre-FFT 
frequency 
rate search 
+/- 1400 
Hz/s 
+/-35 Hz/s +/- 21 Hz/s 
Number of 
Pre-FFT 
frequency 
rate bins (Nr) 
15 15 15 
Post-FFT 
frequency 
rate search 
+/- 100 
Hz/s 
+/- 4 Hz/s +/- 2 Hz/s 
Threshold 
SNR 
14.0 dB 13.5 dB 12.5 dB 
Measure and 
feedback 
accelerations 
to tracking 
loop 
off off on 
Search space 
(Nf) 
150,000 300,000 300,000 
 
 8 
Table 6- Key EDA configuration parameters for Parachute 
segment 
Parameter Acquisition State Tracking State 
FFT resolution 
(?f) 
40 Hz 40 Hz 
Number of 
samples/FFT 
(NFFT) 
2,500 2,500 
Time of coherent 
integration (?) 
0.025 seconds 0.025 seconds 
Time of 
incoherent 
integration (T) 
1 second 1 second 
Number of 
averaged FFTs 
(M) 
40 40 
Carrier 
frequencies to 
search 
Entire 100 kHz 
channel 
+/- 600 Hz 
Subcarrier 
frequencies to 
search 
+/- 10 Hz +/- 5 Hz 
Pre-FFT 
frequency rate 
search 
+/- 500 Hz/s +/-350 Hz/s 
Number of Pre-
 FFT frequency 
rate bins (Nr) 
21 15 
Post-FFT 
frequency rate 
search 
+/- 140 Hz/s +/- 125 Hz/s 
Threshold SNR 10.0 dB 7.0 dB 
Search space (Nf) 52,500 37,500 
 
Theoretical probabilities of carrier and tone detection, P, 
were computed based on similar work for MER [7] and 
using the equations described in [1].  The parameters shown 
in Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6 were used. The probability 
of missed carrier acquisition (1-Paq) vs Pt/No is shown for 
the parachute segment tracking state in Figure 11.  For a 
desired probability of carrier acquisition of 99.9%, the 
threshold Pt/No is about 23 dB-Hz.  The probability of 
missed tone acquisition (1-Paq) vs Pt/No is shown for the 
parachute segment tracking state in Figure 11.  For a desired 
probability of carrier acquisition of 99.9%, the threshold 
Pt/No is about 21 dB-Hz. 
 
Figure 11- Probability of missed carrier acquisition for 
parachute segment acquisition state 
 
Figure 12- Probability of missed tone detection for 
parachute segment state 
Using the configuration parameters specified in Table 6 for 
the parachute segment state, tone detection is harder than 
carrier detection.  Predicted minimum Pt/No was 28 dB-Hz 
(as shown in Figure 10), so there were several dB of margin 
for both carrier acquisition/tracking and tone detection.  The 
parachute segment was the most challenging, due to two 
factors: a) higher dynamics, including a discontinuity in 
residual frequency during parachute deployment and b) 
lower predicted Pt/No due to swinging on the bridle and 
associated TLGA angles. 
 
 
 9 
4. RESULTS  
DSS-43 70-m Data 
MSL Entry, Descent, and landing took place on August 5, 
2012 UTC.  Key tones are shown in Table 7, along with the 
expected and actual times of receipt on Earth.  Expected 
times are from the nominal chute case.  The bank 1 tone 
occurred about 2 seconds later than the nominal 6DOF run 
and the bank angle was between 45° and 90° as expected.  
The bank 2 tone occurred about 6 seconds later than the 
nominal time and the bank angle was between -90° and -45° 
as expected.  The bank 3 tone occurred about 2 seconds 
earlier than the nominal time and the bank angle was 
between 45° and 90° as expected.  The maximum 
deceleration tone was received about 9 seconds later than 
the nominal time and maximum deceleration was between 
11 and 12 Gs. 
Table 7- Key MSL EDL Tones 
Event Expected Time 
from Entry 
(seconds) 
Actual 
Received 
Time from 
Entry 
(seconds) 
Tone start E-677 E-658 
Cruise stage 
separation 
E-600 E-600 
Switch from PLGA 
to TLGA 
E-20 E-20 
Entry 0 0 
Start of bank 1 E+72.26 E+74 
End of bank 1 E+83.88 E+85 
Maximum 
deceleration 
E+79.30 E+88 
Start of bank 2 E+93.26 E+99 
End of bank 2 E+103.51 E+110 
Start of bank 3 E+123.13 E+121 
End of bank 3 E+133.01 E+132 
Stand-Up-Fly-Right E+239 E+240 
Parachute Deploy E+255.77 E+260 
Heat shield Deploy E+274.89 E+283 
Loss of DTE 
communication 
E+313 E+299 
  
 
Figure 13- MSL EDL Pc/No, Ptone/No, and Residual 
Frequency with DSS-43 
Direct-to-Earth data received at DSS-43 during MSL EDL 
is shown in Figure 13.  Carrier-to-noise power (Pc/No) 
(plotted in light blue) measured by the EDA matched 
closely with Pc/No measured by the closed-loop receiver 
(dark blue).  Average Pc/No measured by the EDA using 
DSS-43 during EDL was 27.8 dB-Hz, consistent with 
predictions made by the MSL Telecommunications team 
[5].  Average tone power to noise spectral density ratio 
(Ptone/No) (plotted in purple) was 26.4 dB-Hz. Cruise stage 
separation (CSS) caused a 7 second signal outage as the 
Parachute Low Gain Antenna (PLGA) was briefly 
obstructed.  The antenna swap from PLGA to Tilted Low 
Gain Antenna (TLGA) resulted in a 4 second signal outage.   
Residual frequency as measured by the EDA (plotted in 
light red) and the closed loop receiver (dark red) matched 
closely as shown in Figure 13.  The closed-loop receiver lost 
lock at the following times: Cruise Stage Separation, 
PLGA-to-TLGA swap, banking, and parachute deployment.  
The changes in frequency observed during EDL can be 
attributed to two factors: 1. Doppler induced by events 
during EDL such as atmospheric entry, cruise stage 
separation, and parachute deployment; and 2. Changes in 
the output frequency of the auxiliary oscillator (AUX OSC) 
in the Small Deep Space Transponder (SDST), which are 
chiefly due to changes in temperature. 
Entry was predicted for 5:24:33 UTC in the navigation 
predicts file and actually occurred 1 second later, at 5:24:34 
UTC.  This difference between predicted and actual entry 
time and banking times resulted in the Doppler shift of 
about 4 kHz between E+50 seconds and E+150 seconds.  
The navigation predicts file also did not include parachute 
deployment, resulting in a large jump in residual frequency 
at around E+260 seconds. 
Figure 14 illustrates frequency as a function of AUX OSC 
and Baseplate temperature.  Cubic polynomials provide a 
good approximation to the frequency versus temperature 
behavior of the SDST AUX OSC crystal, particularly in this 
temperature region.  The R2 value for the AUX OSC 
 
 10 
temperature sensor polynomial is 0.9977, while the R2 value 
for the baseplate temperature sensor polynomial is 0.9984.  
Table 8 presents the polynomial coefficients. 
 
 
Figure 14- Frequency (Hz) vs Temperature (degrees 
Celsius) for Auxiliary Oscillator and Baseplate  
Table 8- Coefficients for Frequency vs Temperature 
Polynomials 
 
 
Although the high R2 values seem to provide reason for 
confidence in these temperature predictions, the EDL 
thermal environment differs notably from that in cruise.  
Steady temperatures and thermal equilibrium characterize 
the cruise thermal environment.  The EDL thermal 
environment is characterized by rapid heating.  As a result, 
the SDST and its internal components were not in thermal 
equilibrium during EDL.  In thermal equilibrium, as shown 
in Figure 15 below, the AUX OSC is normally somewhat 
warmer than the baseplate.  However, as Figure 15 also 
shows, during EDL, the baseplate temperature rose 
relatively quickly and rapidly overshot the AUX OSC 
temperature.  Although AUX OSC temperature rose slowly 
to “catch up” with baseplate temperature, the SDST was not 
in thermal equilibrium during EDL.  This impacts the 
accuracy of any frequency predictions based on baseplate 
temperature. 
 
Figure 15- MSL EDL SDST Temperatures 
DSS-34/DSS-45 34-m Array Data 
As a backup to the prime 70-m antenna (DSS-43), the 
signals from a beam waveguide 34-m antennas (DSS-34) 
and a high efficiency 34-m antenna (DSS-45) were 
combined and recorded.  This back-up data was not needed 
in real-time and was analyzed in post-processing. 
Direct-to-Earth data received by the DSS-34/DSS-45 array 
during MSL EDL is shown in Figure 16.  Average carrier-
 to-noise power (Pc/No) (plotted in light blue) measured by 
the EDA using the DSS-34/DSS-45 array during EDL was 
23.5 dB-Hz.  
 
Figure 16- MSL EDL Pc/No, Ptone/No, and Residual 
Frequency with DSS-34/DSS-45 Array 
Antenna sensitivity is measured by G/T, where G is the 
antenna gain, and T is the system noise temperature.  G is a 
function of wavelength, ?, physical aperture area, Ap, and 
aperture efficiency, ?, as shown below.  
 
                                       ! =   
 !!
 !!
 !!!                               (16) 
 
Based solely on physical aperture area, Ap, the G/T of a 34-
 m antenna is about (17.0*17.0)/(35.0*35.0) = 23.6% the 
G/T of a 70-m antenna.  However, the DSN 70-m antenna 
also has better aperture efficiency, ?, and a lower system 
noise temperature, T, than the DSN 34-m antennas.  With 
these factors considered, the G/T of a DSN 34-m antenna is 
about 18% the G/T of a DSN 70-m antenna [8].  The 
predicted difference in array gain between the 70-m antenna 
and two arrayed 34-m antennas is 10*log10 (1.0/(.18+.18)) = 
4.44 dB, assuming no combining loss. Pc/No is proportional 
to G/T.  The measured difference in Pc/No during EDL 
between DSS-43 and DSS-34/DSS-45 is shown Figure 17.  
The mean measured difference from E-645 seconds to 
E+299 seconds was 4.26 dB.  Therefore mean combining 
loss during this time was about 0.18 dB. 
 
Coeff x3 x2 x1 1
 AUX	  OSC	  Sensor 0.782246404 -??72.49066315 1489.915415 8401410276
 Baseplate	  Sensor 0.824981981 -??66.82276803 1134.968993 8401413648
 
 11 
 
Figure 17- Difference in DSS-43 and DSS-34/DSS-45 Pc/No 
 
After EDL, Event Records (EVRs) that logged each tone 
issued during EDL were obtained from MSL.  These logs 
were compared with the real-time results provided by the 
EDA to determine performance.  The DTE communications 
system received and correctly identified 100% of radiated 
tones in real-time during MSL EDL.  These results are 
consistent with the theoretical probabilities of carrier 
acquisition/tracking and data tone detection computed in 
Section 3. 
5. CONCLUSION  
The Direct-to-Earth X-band communications system utilized 
during MSL EDL successfully detected all radiated tones, 
despite challenging signal dynamics with large unknown 
changes in Doppler frequency, rate, and acceleration.  
Future missions with periods of rapid and unknown signal 
dynamics such as Mars or icy moon landers can leverage 
from the MSL design for DTE communications.  
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of 
Jan Tarsala in the testing of the EDA prior to MSL EDL 
using a PRSR and MSL testbed.   The authors would like to 
thank Jeremy Shidner for providing 6DOF simulation data 
that was valuable in configuring the EDA.  The authors 
would also like to thank the CDSCC station personnel for 
their excellent support and operations of the DSN 
equipment and the Full Spectrum Processor Array in 
particular. 
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology.  Copyright 
2012 California Institute of Technology.  Government 
sponsorship acknowledged. 
  
 
 12 
REFERENCES  
[1] E. Satorius, P. Estabrook, J. Wilson, D. Fort. "Direct-to- 
Earth communications and signal processing for Mars 
exploration rover entry, descent and landing," The 
Interplanetary Network Progress Report, IPN Progress 
Report 42-153, May 2003. 
[2] Andre Jongeling and Susan Finley.  “Mars Science 
Laboratory Telecom System Engineering Pre-CDR Peer 
Review: EDL Data Analysis Simulations Results.”  April 
24, 2007.  
[3] W. J. Hurd, P. Estabrook, C. S. Racho, and E. Satorius. 
"Critical spacecraft-to-earth communications for Mars 
exploration rover (MER) entry, descent and landing," 
Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference, vol.3, pp. 1283-1292, 
MT, March 2002.  
[4] M. Soriano, S. Finley, A. Jongeling, D. Fort, C. Goodhart, 
D. Rogstad, R. Navarro, “Spacecraft-to-Earth 
Communications for Juno and Mars Science Laboratory 
Critical Events,” Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference, MT, 
March 2012. 
[5] A. Makovsky, P. Illott, J. Taylor.  “Mars Science 
Laboratory Telecommunications System Design,” Deep 
Space Communications and Navigation Systems Center 
of Excellence Design and Performance Summary Series, 
November 2009. 
[6] M. Soriano and P. Estabrook, “MSL EDL Simulations” 
(internal document), Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, 
CA, May 7, 2012. 
[7] E. Satorius, “Revised Thresholds for EDL” (internal 
document), Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, 
January 14, 2003. 
[8] A. Kwok.  “Module 206, Telemetry General 
Information.” in DSN Telecommunications Link Design 
Handbook.  Rev. B.  DSN No. 810-005.  Pasadena 
California: JPL, October 31, 2009.  
http://eis.jpl.nasa.gov/deepspace/dsndocs/810-005/ 
 
  
 
 13 
Melissa Soriano is a staff 
software engineer in the Tracking 
Systems and Applications Section 
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  
She has developed real-time 
software for Direct-To-Earth 
communications with Mars 
Science Laboratory during Entry, 
Descent, and Landing, the Long Wavelength Array, NASA’s 
Breadboard Array, and the Wideband VLBI Science 
Receiver used in the Deep Space Network.  Melissa is also 
currently the software cognizant engineer for the DSCC 
Downlink Array.  She has a B.S. from Caltech, double major 
in Electrical and Computer Engineering and Business 
Economics and Management.  She also has an M.S. in 
Computer Science from George Mason University. 
Susan Finley is a key staff 
member in the Processor Systems 
Development Group at JPL.  She 
is the subsystem engineer for the 
Full Spectrum Processor 
subsystem deployed in NASA's 
Deep Space Network.  Her 
experience includes the operation 
of the EDA for both of the MER landings on Mars as well as 
the operation of the Radio Science Receiver for the landing of 
the Huygens Probe on Titan and for the Phoenix landing on 
Mars. 
 
David Fort received a B.A.Sc.in 
Engineering Physics and M.Sc.in 
Astronomy from the University of 
Toronto and an M.Sc. and Ph.D. in 
Radio Astronomy from the University 
of Manchester.  He joined NRC 
(Canada) in 1972 and worked on all 
aspects of VLBI until 1987.  He 
subsequently joined JPL in section 335 and worked on a 
number of hardware and software projects for the DSN and 
became supervisor of the Processor Systems development 
Group for the two years prior to returning to NRC in 2002. 
Until his retirement in 2010 he worked on the EVLA 
Correlator Project.  Now a "Guest Worker", he helps out 
with the EVLA as it becomes fully operational and with 
occasional questions from JPL. 
 
Brian Schratz is the lead engineer for 
the EDL telecommunications on the 
Mars Science Laboratory mission and 
a member of JPL's Communications 
Systems and Operations group.    He 
joined JPL three years ago with a 
B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E. from The 
Pennsylvania State University. 
 
Peter Ilott is the telecommunications 
system lead for the MSL mission. He 
has worked on spacecraft 
telecommunications system design 
for 25 years, 11 years on commercial 
spacecraft, and since 2000 at JPL. 
He worked on MER, Phoenix, as a 
telecommunications system engineer. 
Peter worked on all the Mars EDL (entry descent and 
landing) efforts since MER, and in between Mars missions 
helped out on the Deep Impact and Cloudat missions at JPL. 
He currently supports the MSL surface mission phase, and is 
the telecommunications lead for the Europa mission 
currently under study. Ilott holds BSc, MSc, and PhD 
degrees in physics and electrical engineering from McGill 
and the Univeristy of Montreal. 
 
Ryan Mukai received the B.S.E.E. 
and the M.S.E.E. in 1997 and the 
Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering in 
2003, all from UCLA.  He has been 
employed at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory as a Telecommunications 
engineer since 1999 and has served 
on the Mars Exploration Rover, 
DAWN, Cassini, Juno, and Mars 
Science Laboratory projects. 
 
 
Polly Estabrook is the deputy 
manager of the Communication 
Architectures and Research Section 
at JPL.   She is a member of NASA’s 
Space Communication and 
Navigation Program supporting the 
definition of the NASA’s future 
Integrated Communication and 
Navigation Network and is a member of the Integrated 
System Engineering team for the Mars Science Laboratory 
rover.  From 2005 to 2010, she led several communication 
system design teams with the goal of defining the 
modifications to NASA’s Space Communication and 
Navigation infrastructure needed to support the planned 
human missions to the Moon and Mars. From 2000 to 2004 
she was the lead telecom system engineer for the Mars 
Exploration Project, responsible for the performance of the 
entry descent and landing telecommunications system and 
for the overall design and performance of the Direct to 
Earth and relay communications systems. In 2004, Dr. 
Estabrook received the NASA Exceptional Achievement 
Medal for her work on the Mars Exploration Rover Telecom 
System. She has written over 35 technical papers and 
chaired numerous IEEE and AIAA conference Sessions.  
Polly Estabrook received her B.A. in engineering physics 
from the University of California, Berkeley, and M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA. 
 
  
 
 14 
Kamal Oudrhiri is a senior 
member in the Radio Science 
Systems Group at NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. As a 
contract technical manager, 
Oudrhiri led multi-disciplinary 
teams through the design, 
implementation and delivery 
of flight hardware to the radio 
science community. Over the last decade, Oudrhiri served in 
key roles on multiple NASA missions: The Mars Exploration 
Rovers (MER), the International Cassini mission to 
Saturn,The GRAIL lunar mission and The Mars Science 
Laboratory (MSL). 
 
Daniel Kahan is a senior member of 
the Radio Science Systems Group 
at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Over the last eight years, he has 
provided engineering support for the 
radio science community on multiple 
NASA missions, including Mars Global 
Surveyor, Mars Reconnaissance 
Orbiter, the GRAIL lunar mission, the 
International Cassini mission to Saturn, and Mars Science 
Laboratory. 
Edgar H. Satorius is a principal 
member of the technical staff in 
the Flight Communications 
Systems Section of the Jet 
Propulsion Lab. He performs 
systems analysis in the 
development of digital signal 
processing and communications 
systems with specific applications to blind demodulation, 
digital direction finding and digital receivers. He has 
published over 90 articles and holds two patents in the field 
of digital signal processing and its applications. In addition, 
he is an Adjunct Associate Professor at the University of 
Southern California where he teaches digital signal 
processing courses. He received his B.Sc. in engineering 
from the University of California, Los Angeles and the M.S. 
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the 
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California. 
