   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric Sounder (HyMAS) 
Architecture and Design Accommodations 
Lawrence Hilliard, Paul Racette 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
8800 Greenbelt Road 
Greenbelt MD 20771 
301-286-9294 
Lawrence.M.Hilliard@NASA.gov 
Paul.E.Racette@NASA.gov 
 
William Blackwell, Christopher 
Galbraith, Erik Thompson 
 MIT - Lincoln Laboratory 
244 Wood Street 
Lexington, MA 02420-9108 
781-981-7973 
wjb@ll.mit.edu 
chris.galbraith@ll.mit.edu 
Erik.Thompson@ll.mit.edu  
 
 
Abstract—The Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric 
Sounder (HyMAS) is being developed at Lincoln Laboratories 
and accommodated by the Goddard Space Flight Center for a 
flight opportunity on a NASA research aircraft. The term 
“hyperspectral microwave” is used to indicate an all-weather 
sounding that performs equivalent to hyperspectral infrared 
sounders in clear air with vertical resolution of approximately 
1 km. Deploying the HyMAS equipped scanhead with the 
existing Conical Scanning Microwave Imaging Radiometer 
(CoSMIR) shortens the path to a flight demonstration. 
Hyperspectral microwave is achieved through the use of 
independent RF antennas that sample the volume of the 
Earth’s atmosphere through various levels of frequencies, 
thereby producing a set of dense, spaced vertical weighting 
functions. The simulations proposed for HyMAS 118/183-GHz 
system should yield surface precipitation rate and water path 
retrievals for small hail, soft hail, or snow pellets, snow, 
rainwater, etc. with accuracies comparable to those of the 
Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder. Further 
improvements in retrieval methodology (for example, 
polarization exploitation) are expected. 
The CoSMIR instrument is a packaging concept re-used on 
HyMAS to ease the integration features of the scanhead. The 
HyMAS scanhead will include an ultra-compact Intermediate 
Frequency Processor (IFP) module that is mounted inside the 
door to improve thermal management. The IFP is fabricated 
with materials made of Low-Temperature Co-fired Ceramic 
(LTCC) technology integrated with detectors, amplifiers, A/D 
conversion and data aggregation. The IFP will put out 52 
channels of 16 bit data comprised of 4 – 9 channel data streams 
for temperature profiles and 2-8 channel streams for water 
vapor.  
With the limited volume of the existing CoSMIR scanhead and 
new HyMAS front end components, the HyMAS team at 
Goddard began preliminary layout work inside the new drum. 
Importing and re-using models of the shell, the scan head 
computer, and the slip rings developed for CoSMIR was the 
starting point. The next step was to modify the antenna 
faceplate to accommodate the dimensions of the three dual 
polarization Gaussian Optics Antenna (GOA) assemblies. Two 
mechanical concepts for the core technology, the hyperspectral 
IFP, were captured in a design tradeoff. Connector models 
considered minimum bend radii for the IFP analog connectors. 
Hyperspectral imaging is accomplished by strategically using a 
short wavelength intermediate frequency of 18-29 GHz, and 
thus reducing the size of components in the connection of the 
front end to the IFP. The SMK (2.92mm) Series connector will 
lay near the hinge line to minimize its’ flexing. 
The digital output of the IFP will use a Serial Peripheral 
Interface (SPI) that must be accommodated by the scan head 
computer. To make that computer more reliable, maintainable, 
and forward compatible with the 52 HyMAS channels, a 
testbed of the scan head, calibration, and archive computers 
and the PIC24 microprocessor that resides on the IFP is in 
development. The computers will be programmed using a new 
framework application called Interoperable Remote 
Component (IRC). This software allows flexibility to program 
computers that communicate with each other and can adapt 
easily to the emerging HyMAS requirements for data format, 
algorithms, and graphical user interface (GUI). It is expected 
that the CoSMIR instrument will cut over to the IRC after it is 
adapted on an updated CoSMIR testbed. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
2. HYMAS DESCRIPTION ..................................... 2 
3. COSMIR/COSSIR & HYMAS COMPARISON .. 5 
4. LTCC-BASED IF ELECTRONICS RESULTS ....... 6 
5. SUMMARY ......................................................... 7 
6.ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ....................................... 7 
REFERENCES ......................................................... 8 
BIOGRAPHY .......................................................... 8 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric Sounder 
(HyMAS) instrumentation capability takes a new step in 
prototyping for NASA and NOAA research. Hyperspectral 
measurements at all-weather microwave frequencies have 
previously been deferred until a breakthrough in 
miniaturization of filter banks was realized. That 
breakthrough, in a 10 cm x 10 cm x 1cm envelope allocated 
to the IF electronics in HyMAS, will lead the way to high 
resolution vertical profiling.  This paper is organized as 
follows. The hyperspectral microwave concept is first 
introduced, and it is demonstrated that 52 channels can be 
realized in 2 bands that provide temperature and water vapor 
profiles. A comparison of the design characteristics of 
 
 2
 CoSMIR/ CoSSIR and HyMAS is presented. We then 
describe the strategy used in the configuration to 
accommodate the Low Temperature Co-fired Ceramic 
(LTCC) technology. The Interoperable Remote Component 
(IRC) architecture is also being introduced in the HyMAS 
build. All configurations presented in this paper are carried 
out by adapting to the CoSMIR scanhead. Finally, we 
summarize and provide suggestions for further research and 
development.  
2. HYMAS DESCRIPTION  
Front End  
 
The block diagram in Figure 1 illustrates the overall strategy 
that must be used to fit 52 channels in the HyMAS 
scanhead. Down conversion to a relatively high IF band of 
18-29 GHz allows the connecting hardware to remain small. 
A 1st stage IF amplifier inside the mixer housing sets the 
sensitivity and dynamic range for the amplifier and filtering 
functions in the IF electronics.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Block diagram showing both the HyMAS RF electronics and core technology in the IF filter bank 
 
Gaussian Optics 
Lens Antennas 
(GOAs) 
* Waveguide 
spacer to 
accommodate 
RF Preamp 
option  
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Feed #1 
172-183 
GHz  
Feed #2 
and #3 
108-119 
GHz  
 
 3
 Gaussian Lens Antennas— saving on the room required for 
an orthomode transducer(OMT), the HyMAS design uses a 
2 pol Gaussian optics lens antenna(GOA) for all 3 feeds. 
Matched 3.1-3.3? beams are achieved with a slight defocus 
of the 183 GHz beam. Both polarizations on each GOA are 
also matched and early results indicate that they are meeting 
specifications. Sidelobes appear to be >23 dB below the 
main beam.  
 
RF Preamp option— To achieve the best sensitivity and 
dynamic range for single sideband, we ultimately want to 
amplify at RF before the mixer conversion loss dominates 
the measurement. For now, we are accommodating this 
future option with a waveguide spacer. The specifications 
for this chip at 185 GHz are: 5 dB noise figure, 20 dB gain, 
~13 dB input and output match. When signal into the mixer 
is amplified then LO mixing power can be reduced with less 
impact to the system sensitivity.  
 
Mixer/IF amp Assembly— Conversion loss is specified at ~ 
6 dB (DSB), and the 1st IF amplifier will be incorporated 
into the mixer block to provide approximately 25 dB gain 
over a 18-29 GHz bandwidth. Gain Flatness is specified as 
±2 dB and Noise Figure < 3 dB over the IF bandwidth.  
 
Figure 2: The integrated mixer amplifier saves volume 
and comes matched to a 50 ohm load- photo courtesy of 
Virginia Diodes, Inc.  
 
Local Oscillator Chain—An example of these components 
was configured with commercial off the shelf (COTS) 
components to estimate volume and power. The phase 
locked dielectric resonator oscillator chains must provide 
required power to both of 2 mixers (estimate = 2-4 mW) at 
subharmonic mixing frequency to produce 18-29 GHz 
intermediate frequency. Frequency temperature stability is 
250 KHz/degree Celsius centered at 77.15 GHz over -10 C 
to +40 C. For the 118 GHz channels, the same oscillator 
must drive four mixers at 2-4 mW. Local oscillator DC-RF 
power efficiency is always a driver of system power, and 
ultimately, volume and mass when LO power must be split 
requiring more thermal control components. 
Compact IF Processor (IFP) using LTCC-based IF filters 
—This is the key technology on the HyMAS project, 
allowing the IF back-end to be accommodated with minimal 
real estate in the drum. The IFP sits on the inside wall of the 
doors that allow access to the scan head drum. Six SMK 
coax connectors for input and 1 “9-pin D” for control, DC 
power, and digital output are placed in the hinge of the door 
to minimize flex. The position on the door will be ideal for 
heat spreading in the drum. Figure 3a and 3b describe the 
functional and physical layout of the IFP. The IF amplifier 
consumes 220 mWatts and is located near one corner of the 
filter bank real estate. This relative orientation of the 
amplifier to the filters spreads out the heat when the vertical 
stacked filters and more compact form factors are employed. 
Vertical stacked filters will improve channel isolation due to 
less trace-trace coupling but horizontal filters shown in 
figure 3b provided better access for early prototyping and 
test probing. With the vertical stacking, there will be better 
spurious response due to reduced feed and adjacent 
resonator coupling and there is also less filter loss because 
of fewer resonators. Integrating the diode detector circuits 
(Figure 3b) further reduces the footprint and simplifies 
channel filter output signal routing (since it is then a near-
 DC signal instead.of 18-29 GHz RF). 
 
Figure 3a and 3b: The various functions of the HyMAS 
IF electronics filter bank components in functional block 
diagram and in physical design of a 9-channel prototype 
 
 4
   
The ultimate physical design target is a 10 cm x 10 cm x 1 
cm multilayer package that has some flexibility to grow in  
the scan head accommodation. Figure 4 depicts such an 
accommodation, if needed. The scan head computer is 
depicted in red. The antennas are depicted in gray. Because 
of its location on the door, significant attention must be paid 
to the location of the SMK (2.92mm) Series connector. It 
will lay near the hinge line to minimize its flexing. 
Likewise, the D connector for the serial peripheral interface 
(SPI) needs to be carefully placed to be able to reach the 
scan head computer, but not jam it when the door closes,  
and not introduce electrical noise in the RF or IF chains.  
 
 
Figure 4: The 10 cm x 20 cm x 1 cm accommodation for 
the IFP depicted (in green) on the inner wall of the scan 
head door.  
Backend 
 
 
 
Figure 5a: The key functional components of the IFP 
(analog/digital side) and the dc power consumption of 
each (in red) 
 
IFP post-detection signal processing—On the top side of 
the HyMAS IFP, there will be compact analog and digital 
electronics to process the output of the IF filter bank. A 
chain of op-amp based amplifiers and active filters picks up 
the detected outputs of each of the 52 channels (routed 
through vias from the RF detectors), balancing the IF 
dynamic range and providing a mid-full scale input to 
multichannel ADCs. The digitized output of all 52 digital 
channels is then aggregated by a PIC24 Microcontroller. 
The key components of this circuitry are pointed out in 
figure 5a. The IF amp, ADC, and PIC24 hot spots on the 
board are thermally modeled at the board level and these 
models will be coupled to the scan head thermal models to 
get rid of heat conductively into the scan head door.   
 
 
Figure 5b: The Scan head computer will pull the data 
from the IFP over a serial peripheral interface (SPI)[6]  
 
 
 
Figure 5c: Hand-shaking between back end components  
Microcontroller/scanhead computer interface—. HyMAS is 
the beneficiary of a general upgrade to NASA aircraft 
instruments that is a development between the Goddard 
Science Data Processing Branch and several instrument 
 
ADC Signals 
completion of 
conversion 
ADC PIC24 
Data  
Requestor 
Requests Sample 
PIC Processes Request 
PIC Configures ADC 
PIC Requests a Conversion 
PIC Requests data  
ADC finds data  
PIC Processes Data 
PIC Sends Data 
PIC Signals 
Data as Ready 
Requestor 
requests 
data 
 
 5
 projects. Figure 5b and 5c describe the 52 channel readout 
from the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI ) managed by the 
microcontroller on the IFP. The scan head computer adds 
time tags that register temperatures, voltages, in the front 
end, and calibration target temperatures. Time-tagged 
pointing data comes across slip rings from the navigation 
system and conical scanning mechanism to the archive 
computer (figure 5b). The handshaking between the 
microcontroller and the ADC multiplexes the 52 channels 
into a serial data stream and then the scanhead computer 
interrogates the microcontroller adding housekeeping data 
and time tags in figure 5c. Watchdog timers ensure that the 
processor does not freeze, and resets were introduced from 
an external watchdog as well. A preliminary IFP timing 
budget analysis was done for a specific acquisition pattern 
(1 channel @ 20KHz, 8 @ 5 KHz for a single channel bank 
see Table 1). This analysis seems to indicate that moving to 
more channels at slower rates seems feasible. The model 
output shown was for a total of 216 total samples over about 
3600 microseconds. Scaling to a single sample for 52 
channels gives a sampling period of about 867 
microseconds, which is well under the proposed 10 msec 
sampling period. 
Table 1 and Figure 6: HyMAS Frequency shift and 
polarization provide 36 unique temperature profiles [3] 
and two curves show the prediction for filtering a 
normalized unit  gain at channels 1and 4 
 
 
Other than the SPI interface and the increased number of 
channels, this scanhead data formatting is identical to that 
which was used by the Conical Scanning Microwave 
Radiometer CoSMIR and Conical Scanning Submillimeter-
 wave Imaging Radiometer (CoSSIR). However, with better 
technology made available since the development of 
CoSMIR/CoSSIR, HyMAS will be piggy-backing on a 
concurrent upgrade of the instrument data system.  
The Interoperable Remote Component (IRC) is a new 
application framework that was created for controlling and 
monitoring remote devices and sensors. This framework 
application is utilized to program functions of each 
component in the HyMAS instrument. Figure 7 shows the 
basic framework that will be used to develop graphical user 
interfaces (GUIs) for the new hyperspectral analysis 
capability prototyped for HyMAS.  CoSMIR and CoSSIR 
will be able to re-use the IRC code for their own 
hyperspectral analysis when their instruments become 
equipped with an IFP adapted to their front end frequencies. 
IRC enables significant savings in development costs by 
utilizing eXtensible Markup Language (XML) descriptions 
to configure the framework for a specific application. 
Instrument Markup Language (IML) is used to describe the 
commands used by an instrument, the data streams 
produced, the rules for formatting commands and parsing 
the data, and the method of communication. Often no 
custom code is needed to communicate with a new 
instrument or device [5]. 
 
Figure 7: The general IRC test bed being developed for 
multiple aircraft instruments-block diagram by Beth 
Timmons Goddard Science Data Processing Branch 
The specific GUI for HyMAS will enable algorithms for 
temperature and water vapor profiling to run plots that 
perform quick look analysis versus established models. (See 
Figure 8 from [3] and [4]) 
  
  
Figure 8: HyMAS temperature weighting functions are 
shown for the 1976 US Standard Atmosphere over a 
non-reflective surface at nadir incidence and spectral 
multiplexing for 1,2,4, and 8 channels [3] and [4]
 
 6
  
3. COSMIR/COSSIR & HYMAS COMPARISON 
Table 2: HyMAS must fit in the same package as 
CoSMIR and CoSSIR (GOA rendering courtesy of 
Millitech Corp.) 
CoSMIR/CoSSIR 
Frequencies and Channels, 
and polarizations  
HyMAS Frequencies 
and channels 
 
 
52 channels realized 
with 18-29 GHz 
Hyperspectral 
IFProcessor 
CoSMIR Frequencies: 9 
channels at 50.3, 52.6, 89 (H 
& V), 165.5 (H & V), 
183.3±1, 183.3±3, 183.3±7 
GHz  
CoSSIR : 12 channels 183-
 874 GHz 
Frequencies : 2 
36 Channels near the 
118.75-GHz oxygen 
line, 16 channels near 
183.3 GHz water vapor 
line 
CoSMIR/ CoSSIR Field of 
View (FOV):  ? 4° beam 
width (gives a nadir 
footprint at the surface of 
about 1.4 km at the ER-2 
aircraft cruising altitude of 
20 km) 
~3.1-3.3? Matched 
beams for 3 horns all w/ 
2 linear polarizations 
 
 
Table 2 points out the main differences and similarities 
between HyMAS and its predecessors CoSMIR and 
CoSSIR.  
The 52 channels realized with HyMAS use the same scan 
head volume in order to reduce development and flight re-
 qualification costs of a new mechanism. The scan head is a 
cylinder 21.5 cm in diameter and 28.0 cm long. That 
compatibility is our top priority accommodation in the 
design. HyMAS will also have scan modes that are 
programmable. Modes for conical angles between 0 - 53.6°, 
across-flight track scans, or combinations of both are 
available. 
All 3 instruments have in-flight calibration .  Two external 
targets at <328?K  and at ambient temperature (<250? at 
ER-2 aircraft cruising altitudes) which are seen when the 
antennas roll up and look away from the atmosphere. 
Another synergy of HyMAS technology is that 
CoSMIR/CoSSIR both have 183 GHz channels at the high 
end and low end of their respective ranges. Therefore,  
noise injection / calibration and noise coupler technology at 
183 GHz is important to all 3 instruments.  
 
A Low Noise Amplifier (LNA) at 183 GHz would reduce 
Local oscillator power requirements and is especially 
critical for arrays of receivers. 
Hyperspectral Microwave technology would enhance all 3 
instruments scientific return. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 compares the channel capacity of the HyMAS to its 
predecessors CoSMIR and CoSSIR. With the bulk of the 
volume taken up by the respective front end hardware, the 
hyperspectral microwave capability can be demonstrated on 
HyMAS by miniaturizing the IF processor. It can also be 
implemented on CoSMIR and CoSSIR to better resolve 
temperature and water vapor profiles.  
 
4. LTCC-BASED IF ELECTRONICS RESULTS 
 
Figure 9: The 10cmx10cmx1cm IFP package[1] and the 
scan head doors that it must fit on (CoSMIR pictured on 
left [2]) 
  
The current status of miniaturization effort is in transition.  
The 9-channel prototype in the horizontal resonator 
implementation can only be miniaturized so much to a form 
factor that is 5 cm high and probably too large for the scan 
head door. Smaller designs will need to be stacked vertically 
with less test point access than the initial prototype. 
However, the 9-channel prototype has given us our initial 
measurements and shown us that, in terms of material 
properties and process tolerances, Low Temperature Co-
 fired Ceramic (LTCC) technology gives acceptable 
performance up to about 29 GHz for these filter designs.  
We have chosen this relatively high IF frequency band of 
18-29 GHz to facilitate miniaturization of the IF processor 
module.  We have found that even the horizontal resonators 
have suitable bandwidth and Q factor, inter-channel 
isolation, and insertion loss.  Simulations predicted ~ 12 dB 
insertion loss per channel and return loss > 10 dB 
(passbands). The initial tests of the 9-channel prototype in  
Figures 10 and 11 show that the filtering predicted in figure 
6 is spaced by ~156 MHz per channel, but all 9 channels 
were shifted uniformly, probably due to tolerances in the 
dielectric constant of the RF substrate. This also could 
happen in our substrate integrated waveguide (SIW), but a 
uniform frequency shift can be accomodated by changing 
the LO mixing frequency to adapt to a uniform shift in what 
the IF electronics is looking for.  An 11 GHz IF that is 17-
 
 7
 28 GHz or 19-30 GHz can also work as long as the front end 
is mixing down to those IF frequencies and the channel 
spacing is uniform.  
20 25 3015
 -50
 -40
 -30
 -20
 -10
 -60
 0
 freq, GHz
 dB
 (S
 (2,
 1))
 (
 (,
 ))
  
Figure 10 Individual response of 9-channel HyMAS IF 
filters 
Insertion loss ranged from 2.2 dB in channel 1 at the IF low 
end frequency of 18.65 GHz (channel 1) to 5.4 dB at 28.9 
GHz (channel 9, the high end). Bandwidths ranged from 
550-650 MHz, with return loss in the respective pass bands 
always greater than 10 dB.  
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 2915 30
 -25
 -20
 -15
 -10
 -5
 0
 5
 -30
 10
 freq, GHz
 dB
 (S
 (1,
 1))
 (
 (,
 ))
  
Figure 11: HyMAS 9-channel Prototype Return Loss 
Channels 1-9 (>10 dB over each respective passband) 
Filter resonator unloaded Q (Qu) was estimated from the 
relationship between filter insertion loss (IL), resonator 
unloaded Q, fractional bandwidth (∆), and the low-pass 
filter parameters (gk’s): 
∑
 =
 ∆
 =
 n
 k
 k
 u
 g
 Q
 IL
 1
 343.4
   
Measured Qu ~ 250 was less than simulated (Qu ~ 600) but 
still significantly better than microstrip or stripline coupled 
line filters (typical Qu ~ 100-150).  Finally, inter-channel 
isolation was > 35 dB between channels 3 and 5, 5 and 7, 
and 7 and 9 as measured between adjacent filters. Isolation 
improvement is expected with the vertical filter design. The 
52-channel HyMAS IFP will be prototyped and tested in 
August 2013.  
 
6. SUMMARY 
Accommodation  for the  HyMAS IF frequency of  18-29 
GHz has been planned throughout the HyMAS system. 
Careful frequency planning selection of components and 
component placement has improved the chances that the 
LTCC implementation of hyperspectral filtering can 
function in a tight package. The CoSMIR and CoSSIR 
teams at Goddard have had great success with existing 
designs but the instruments are undergoing a data system 
upgrade, and see the potential of the miniaturized filter 
bank. The preliminary results of the 9-channel prototype 
filterbank developed by MIT Lincoln Labs is very 
promising and the implementation of more compact vertical 
filter structure will likely improve that performance on the 
flight build expected in August 2013. Further integration 
into the HyMAS scanhead , instrument, and NASA ER-2 is 
being planned for summer of 2014.  
 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The hyperspectral microwave receiver system will be 
integrated into a new scanhead compatible with the NASA 
GSFC Conical Scanning Microwave Imaging 
Radiometer/Compact Submillimeter-wave Imaging 
Radiometer (CoSMIR/CoSSIR) airborne instrument system 
to facilitate demonstration and performance characterization 
under funding from the NASA ESTO Advanced Component 
Technology program.  
We would also like to acknowledge the Global Precipitation 
Measurement (GPM) Mission which is investing in the 
adaptation of IRC to the aircraft instruments required for 
ground calibration and validation. The G-Band LNA work is 
underway at Goddard Space Flight Center thanks to internal 
Research and Development funding and previous 
investment in Small Business Innovative Research.  
The LTCC filter development work was originally 
sponsored by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
Administration under Air Force Contract FA8721-05-C-
 0002. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions, and 
recommendations are those of the authors and are not 
necessarily endorsed by the United States Government.  
 
 8
 REFERENCES 
[1] Sutton, M. , L. Hilliard, P. Racette, N. Shur, E. Sheybani,  
G. Javidi, A. Eslami,  J.Luttamaguzi, D. Djavadi 
“Computer Aided Designs of Hyperspectral Microwave 
Atmospheric Sounder (HyMAS) Scanhead”, Summer 
Internship Poster, July 2012, Goddard Space Flight 
Center, Greenbelt MD 
[2] Piepmeier, J.; Racette, P.; Wang, J.; Crites, A.; Doiron, T.; 
Engler, C.; Lecha, J.; Powers, M.; Simon, E.; Triesky, M.; 
Krebs, Carolyn , “An Airborne Conical Scanning 
Millimeter-wave Imaging Radiometer (CoSMIR) “ 
NASA Technical Reports Server NASA Center: Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Publication Year: 2001,Document 
ID: 20010091686 
 [3] Blackwell, W.J. , Galbraith, C. ,  Hancock, T. , Leslie, R. 
,  Osaretin, I. ,  Shields, M. ,  Racette, P. ,  Hilliard, L. 
“Design and Analysis of a Hyperspectral Microwave 
receiver subsystem”, IEEE-IGARSS, 22-27 July. 2012; 
Munich; Germany 
[4] Blackwell, Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric 
Sounding, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE 
AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 
2011 
[5] Hosler, Troy J. and C.F. Hostetter ,  Instrument Remote 
Control Application Framework, SpaceOps Conference; 
19-23 Jun. 2006; Rome; Italy 
[6] Williams, J. , L. Hilliard, J. Beck, J. Hosler, G. Crum, E. 
Sheybani,  G. Javidi, A. Eslami,  J.Luttamaguzi, D. 
Djavadi ,” Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric 
Sounder Emulator”, Summer Internship Poster, July 2012, 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt MD 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Lawrence M. Hilliard received a B.S. in 
Electrical Engineering from Michigan Technological 
University in 1983. He has been with NASA GSFC for 
more than 30 years. He is currently development lead for 
VLBI2010 in the Space Geodesy Project (SGP) at 
Goddard. Prior to SGP, he led an AESMIR aircraft 
instrument team winning a Robert Goddard Exceptional 
Achievement Award. He has also managed efforts for 
COBE-DMR, SWAS, and Swift-BAT instrument and 
payload development and has been involved in the 
formulation and development of numerous aircraft and 
Earth-orbiting spacecraft and payloads. His career 
started with parts engineering on the GOES program for 
NASA Goddard.  
 William J. Blackwell received the B.E.E. 
degree in electrical engineering from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, in 1994 and the 
S.M. and Sc.D. degrees in electrical engineering and 
computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, in 1995 and 2002. 
Since 2002, he has worked at MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 
where he is currently an Assistant Leader of the Sensor 
Technology and System Applications Group. His primary 
research interests are in the area of atmospheric remote 
sensing, including the development and calibration of 
airborne and spaceborne microwave and hyperspectral 
infrared sensors, the retrieval of geophysical products 
from remote radiance measurements, and the application 
of electromagnetic, signal processing and estimation 
theory. Dr. Blackwell held a National Science Foundation 
Graduate Research Fellowship from 1994 to 1997 and is 
a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, Phi Kappa Phi, 
Sigma Xi, the American Meteorological Society, the 
American Geophysical Union, and Commission F of the 
International Union of Radio Science.Â  He is currently 
an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing and the IEEE GRSS 
Newsletter. He is Chair of the IEEE GRSS Frequency 
Allocations for Remote Sensing (FARS) technical 
committee, the IEEE GRSS Remote Sensing Instruments 
and Technologies for Small Satellites working group, and 
the Boston Section of the IEEE GRSS and serves on the 
 
 9
 NASA AIRS and Suomi NPP science teams and the 
NPOESS Sounding Operational Algorithm Team. He is 
the Principal Investigator on the MicroMAS (Micro-sized 
Microwave Atmospheric Satellite) program, comprising a 
high-performance passive microwave spectrometer 
hosted on a 3U cubesat planned for launch in 2013.Â  He 
was previously the Integrated Program Office Sensor 
Scientist for the Advanced Technology Microwave 
Sounder on the Suomi National Polar Partnership that 
launched in 2011 and the Atmospheric Algorithm 
Development Team Leader for the NPOESS Microwave 
Imager/Sounder. Dr. Blackwell received the 2009 NOAA 
David Johnson Award for his work in neural network 
retrievals and microwave calibration and is co-author of 
Neural Networks in Atmospheric Remote Sensing, 
published by Artech House in July, 2009.Â  He received a 
poster award at the 12th Specialist Meeting on 
Microwave Radiometry and Remote Sensing of the 
Environment in March 2012 for ``Design and Analysis of 
a Hyperspectral Microwave Receiver Subsystem'' and 
was selected as a 2012 recipient of the IEEE Region 1 
Managerial Excellence in an Engineering Organization 
Award ``for outstanding leadership of the multi-
 disciplinary technical team developing innovative future 
microwave remote sensing systems.'' 
 Paul E. Racette has been the principal 
engineer responsible for the overall instrument concept, 
development and deployment of highly-innovative remote 
sensing instruments. Each of these instruments has 
produced unique, scientifically rich data. Paul has 
participated in more than fifteen major field experiments 
around the world pioneering techniques to observe the 
Earth. As a member of the senior technical staff at 
Goddard, he has initiated technology developments, 
research projects, and international collaborations that 
have advanced the state of the art in microwave remote 
sensing and instrument calibration. For these efforts and 
accomplishments Paul received the NASA Medal for 
Exceptional Service and was the first recipient of 
Goddard’s Engineering Achievement Award established 
to publicly recognize Goddard’s highest achieving 
engineers. In 2005 he completed the requirements for his 
Doctor of Science in electrical engineering from The 
George Washington University. Recognizing the critical 
needs in education and a desire to seek new adventures, 
Paul applied and was accepted into the NASA 
Administrator’s Fellowship Program. As a NAFP fellow 
he returned to his home state to serve as a guest faculty at 
the Haskell Indian Nations University during the 2005 – 
2006 academic year.  
Paul recently completed the second year of his fellowship 
working at NASA Headquarters as Special Assistant to 
the Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of 
Education. 
 
Paul is highly commited to serving the public through 
professional activities. Paul has served the IEEE in many 
capacities including secretary of the University of 
Kansas’ IEEE student chapter, the Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Society’s New Technology Directions 
Committee Representative, Chair of the Instrumentation 
and Future Technologies Committee, and Professional 
Activities Committee for Engineers Representative. He 
now serves as Editor-In-Chief for Earthzine. 
 Christopher J. Galbraith is a 
member of the Technical Staff at MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
in the RF and Quantum Systems group where he develops 
microwave circuits for communications, radar, and 
radiometric systems, small form-factor packaging and 
antennas, and superconducting electronics. He  received 
the B.S.E.E., M.S.E.E. and Ph.D degrees from the 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. During the summers 
of 2001 and 2002, he was an intern with TRW Space and 
Electronics, Redondo Beach, CA, where he worked on 
satellite communications systems and microwave circuit 
design. He is active in the IEEE Microwave Theory and 
Techniques society (MTT-S) where he currently serves as 
the chair of the Boston chapter. 
 
 Erik Thompson Assistant Staff at 
MIT Lincoln Laboratory. He received a B.E. in Electrical 
Engineering from Stevens Institute of Technology. As a 
Stevens student Thompson was selected as the 
Cooperative Education and Internship Student of the Year 
award by the New Jersey Cooperative Education and 
Internship Association (NJCEIA). 
 As an undergraduate at Stevens, Thompson took part in 
five Co-op internships. The first two assignments were 
with Datascope Patient Monitors, where he worked with 
the electrical engineering staff to test hospital products 
and implement fixes. Next, he worked as a computer 
engineer at the Armament, Research, Development and 
 
 10
 Engineering Center (ARDEC) at Picatinny Arsensal. 
Finally, Thompson spent two semesters at Safe Flight 
Instrument Corporation. There, he served as project lead 
for the development of cockpit sensors that prevent 
airplanes from stalling. He was primarily responsible for 
overseeing the design and testing of software and 
electronics systems.  
 
 
 
 
 11
  
