   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1 
Results from an Integrated AOTF-LDTOF Spectrometer 
Suite for Planetary Surfaces 
Nancy Chanover, David Voelz, David 
Glenar, Xifeng Xiao, Rula Tawalbeh, 
and Kyle Uckert 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, NM 88003 
575-646-4438 
nchanove@nmsu.edu 
davvoelz@nmsu.edu 
dglenar@nmsu.edu 
xixiao@nmsu.edu 
rula@nmsu.edu 
kuckert@nmsu.edu 
Penelope Boston 
New Mexico Institute of Mining and 
Technology 
Socorro, NM 87801 
575-835-5657 
pboston@nmt.edu 
Stephanie Getty, William 
Brinckerhoff, Paul Mahaffy, and 
Xiang Li 
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 
301-286-9760 
stephanie.a.getty@nasa.gov 
william.b.brinckerhoff@nasa.gov 
paul.r.mahaffy@nasa.gov 
xiang.li@nasa.gov 
 
Abstract— On future landed missions to Mars and small solar 
system bodies, efficient sample prescreening will be necessary 
to select interesting targets for further analysis by analytical 
instruments with very limited time and power resources. Near 
infrared spectroscopy is well suited for rapid and non-invasive 
identification of mineral classes, and for determining the 
possible presence of organic molecules. Here we describe a 
miniature acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) point 
spectrometer that is tunable from ~1.6 - 3.6 µm. It identifies 
minerals associated with aqueous environments at sample 
scales of ~ 1 mm, as well as organic molecules and volatiles.  
The AOTF point spectrometer was integrated with a laser 
desorption time-of-flight (LDTOF) mass spectrometer 
developed at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, and can 
be used to prescreen samples for evidence of organics before 
the laser desorption step and subsequent mass spectrometer 
measurement. The LDTOF mass spectrometer provides 
pulsed-laser desorption and analysis of refractory organic 
compounds up to 150,000 Da on a spatial scale of 50-100 µm, 
determined by the laser spot size at the target. 
The recent integration of the two instruments allowed for 
coincident spectral measurements of geologic samples; follow-
 up measurements from the LDTOF were taken from an 
identical region on the samples of interest, allowing for a direct 
comparison between the two complementary data sets.  We 
present measurements of a standard sample suite consisting of 
sulfates, carbonates, clay minerals, and iron oxides.  We also 
compare AOTF and LDTOF spectra of calcite, as well as 
gypsum doped with phthalic acid and valine, and discuss the 
relationship between reflectance spectra acquired by the 
AOTF and the LDTOF mass spectra.  Finally, we discuss 
measurements made of irradiated ices such as those found in 
areas of high astrobiological interest like Europa. 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION .................................................1	  
 2. METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS ........................2	  
 3. CONCLUSIONS...................................................9	  
 4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.....................................9	  
 REFERENCES.......................................................10	  
 BIOGRAPHY ........................................................11	  
  
1. INTRODUCTION 
On future lander missions to Mars, small bodies, and outer 
solar system satellites, robust sample screening and 
selection will be essential to achieve the maximum scientific 
benefit within limited payload resources. On both in situ and 
sample return missions, a common central goal will likely 
be to understand the production and processing of organic 
molecules in the solar system and their relationship to 
prebiotic chemistry and habitable environments. One 
approach for achieving this goal is the identification of key 
organic functional groups and their host mineralogy by a 
spectroscopic prescreening tool, followed by organic 
compound analysis with a more complex mass 
spectrometric method. 
The samples selected for sophisticated laboratory analysis – 
or for return to Earth – must be carefully vetted by 
analytical tools that provide the greatest assurance of 
science value given the limited resources available on lander 
platforms. For the Mars sample return mission that was 
recently highlighted as a top priority for planetary science in 
the 2013-2022 decade [1], one selection criterion might be 
the presence of reduced complex organic compounds in 
association with preservational mineral microenvironments 
from within sedimentary rock.  Alternatively, in what will 
likely be strictly in situ missions for the next several 
decades to rocky or icy targets such as asteroids, Europa, 
Enceladus, or comets, robust sample screening will provide 
the information necessary to select the most interesting 
targets for further analysis. Subsequent steps could range 
from conducting more intensive screening to processing and 
introduction of samples into a sophisticated analytical 
laboratory with limited sample capacity. 
We discuss the development and laboratory demonstration 
of a dual instrument consisting of a near-infrared point 
spectrometer based on acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) 
technology and a laser desorption time-of-flight (LDTOF) 
mass spectrometer.  This instrument pair can be used to 
screen for organic materials and corroborate analyses of 
 
 2 
samples containing organic biomarkers or mineralogical 
signatures suggestive of extant or extinct organic material 
collected in situ from planetary surfaces. 
Near infrared spectroscopy is well suited for rapid and non-
 invasive identification of mineral classes, and the possible 
presence of organic molecules. Our miniature AOTF point 
spectrometer is tunable from ~1.6 - 3.6 µm, which 
represents an optimum tradeoff between device tuning range 
and spectral information content. It identifies minerals 
associated with aqueous environments at sample scales of ~ 
1 mm, as well as organic molecules and volatiles (notably 
H2O and CO2 ice), where they are present.  AOTFs have 
previously been used on board Mars Express [2] and Venus 
Express [3] as integral components of their IR 
spectrometers. They are inherently rugged, radiation-hard, 
rapidly tunable, and can operate at cryogenic temperatures, 
so they are a suitable choice for miniature landed-
 spectrometers. Our group also has a demonstrated history of 
developing and using AOTF devices for planetary science 
imaging applications [4-9]. 
The LDTOF mass spectrometer provides pulsed-laser 
desorption and analysis of refractory organic compounds up 
to >150,000 Da on a spatial scale of 10-30 µm determined 
by the laser spot size at the target. At higher laser power, it 
also measures major, minor, and trace elements with parts-
 per-million sensitivity. The compact size and low power 
requirements of the LDTOF mass spectrometer could make 
it suitable for mounting on a robotic arm of the type 
developed for the Phoenix and Mars Science Laboratory 
(MSL) missions. The LDTOF employs a pulsed 266 nm 
Nd:YAG laser to desorb and ionize analyte from a solid 
surface.  Each laser pulse sets t = 0, relative to the time-
 separated ion peaks to follow. The LDTOF mass 
spectrometer collects laser-desorbed ions by drawing them 
from the sample surface into the ion extraction lens (IEL).  
The ions are focused into a reflectron time-of-flight analyzer 
and terminate at a microchannel plate detector and anode.  
The voltage pulses are then acquired as a function of time 
on an oscilloscope. This instrument also has significant 
heritage and has been used in a variety of applications; a 
recent version was described in detail previously [10, 28]. 
The AOTF point spectrometer, when paired with the 
LDTOF mass spectrometer, can examine samples for 
evidence of volatile or refractory organics (the latter 
including kerogen-like residues on mineral surfaces) before 
the laser desorption step and subsequent mass spectrometer 
measurement.  The measurement flexibility offered by 
AOTF technology allows significant near-IR spectroscopic 
diagnostic capability without exceeding the resources of a 
small surface laboratory.  AOTF devices can therefore be 
used as a prescreening tool and enable judicious down-
 selection of samples for further analysis with the LDTOF 
mass spectrometer. 
We previously discussed the development of the breadboard 
and brassboard AOTF point spectrometer systems, as well 
as modifications to the existing LDTOF mass spectrometer 
required to accommodate the AOTF inside of the LDTOF 
vacuum chamber [11-13].  Here we describe our integration 
activities representing the culmination of our development 
efforts, including measurements of samples acquired with 
the integrated instrument.  In Section 2 we provide a 
summary of the performance of both the AOTF point 
spectrometer and the LDTOF mass spectrometer.  This 
includes a description of the instrument performance and a 
summary of the data collected with the integrated 
instrument.  In Section 3 we offer an interpretation of our 
results and discuss our future work. 
 
2. METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS  
AOTF Point Spectrometer 
Analysis of a field sample is carried out in two steps. The 
sample is first pre-screened using the AOTF point 
spectrometer (PS), and subsequently samples of interest are 
analyzed by the LDTOF mass spectrometer. The goal of the 
AOTF PS is to identify the class(es) of underlying minerals 
and detect the presence (or lack) of co-located organics. The 
general operational concept for the PS is described below. A 
schematic of the PS optics (Fig. 1) shows its operation at a 
conceptual level. The spectrometer can be divided into 
source and detector subsections. 
 
 
Figure 1.  3D layout showing the AOTF point 
spectrometer optics. 
Light Source Optics— The source is a miniature tungsten IR 
lamp (effective temperature ~1900 K) with sapphire 
windows. Broadband lamp light is reimaged onto a 1 mm 
field stop to reject out-of-field rays, and then recollimated 
using anti-reflection coated ZnSe lenses. The tuning element 
is a TeO2 AOTF crystal, which transmits a narrow spectral 
slice, with peak transmittance of ~30-70%, depending on 
wavelength (only one linear polarization is transmitted). The 
wavelength of the output light is determined by the RF 
frequency applied to a transducer bonded to the AOTF. The 
spectral coverage of the AOTF-detector combination is 
~1.6–3.6 µm, requiring a frequency range for the RF drive 
signal of 30–75 MHz at the long and short wavelength 
limits, respectively, and drive power of 2-3 W.  The spectral 
resolution (R = ?/??) is wavelength dependent and ranges 
from ~200 to more than 400 over the wavelength tuning 
range, which is more than sufficient to resolve solid-phase 
spectral features, including those of ices. 
 
 3 
 
Detector Optics— The sample illumination and detector 
optics serve as a biconical reflectance spectrometer with 
small (~f/4) and large (~f/1) solid angles for source and 
reflected beams, respectively.  It consists of the sample 
surface and two 25-mm, 90-degree, off-axis parabolic 
mirrors that collect the scattered light and reimage it at 1:1 
magnification onto a thermoelectrically cooled (-65°C) 
MCT detector. Narrow-band source light is imaged by the 
sample mirror onto a small (< 2 mm diameter) spot on the 
sample surface. Reflected light then fills the aperture of the 
sample mirror, which reimages the illuminated sample spot 
on the detector.  The optics enclosure for the AOTF point 
spectrometer (minus the cover) is shown in Fig. 2, during 
initial alignment. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Photo showing the AOTF point spectrometer 
during component placement and initial testing.  The 
main components are labeled. 
The enclosure (empty mass of ~ 1.2 kg) was machined from 
a single block of 6061 aluminum in order to achieve 
maximum RF isolation between detector and AOTF, as well 
as to minimize stray light and provide for mounting 
flexibility. Otherwise, all non-essential material was milled 
away. The addition of optical components brings the mass 
of the fully operational optics unit to ~ 2.0 kg. Instantaneous 
power consumption during data acquisition consists of 
about 3 W for the detector thermoelectric (TE) cooler, a 2 
W IR lamp, and RF power of 2-3 W applied to the AOTF, 
depending on the wavelength setting. Our present operating 
mode consists of continuous sweep-averaging during data 
acquisition, with no spectral gaps. Other sampling 
approaches at selective wavelengths may be far more 
efficient in terms of time-average power requirements. 
 
In the standby state, only the 3 W TE cooler remains on.  
Except for the detector and preamp, which are housed in the 
optics unit, all other electronics – including the instrument 
controller, RF synthesizer, power amplifier, and batteries – 
are located in an adjacent “field case.” This field case has 
not been optimized for size or efficiency, and is connected 
to the optics unit by a short cable harness.  User data 
acquisition occurs via a USB connection between the field 
case and a laptop computer. Because of the relatively low 
efficiency of class-A RF power amplifiers (typically 25-
 30%), an additional 7-9 W of power external to the optics is 
required during data acquisition. Table 1 provides a 
summary of the instrument specifications, and the 
significant sources of power dissipation. 
 
Table 1.  AOTF Point Spectrometer Specifications 
 Wavelength Coverage (µm) 1.6 – 3.6 
 RF tunable range (MHz) 30 – 75 
 Spectral Resolution (?/??) 200 – 400 
 Sample field-of-view (mm) < 2.0 
 Optical enclosure, mass (kg) 2.0 
                                vol (cm3) 630 
 Power input (Watts) Standby Operating 
       TE cooler 3 3 
       IR lamp 0 2 
       AOTF 0 2-3 
       RF amplifier (external) 0 7-9 
       Total optics unit 3 7-8 
       Total spectrometer 3 14-17 
 
Data Acquisition— A sample mineral specimen is placed at 
the focus point of the spectrometer, approximately 25 mm 
below the optical centerline. The RF signal drives the AOTF 
crystal over the entire 30-75 MHz frequency range, as light 
covering a narrow wavelength range falls on the detector. 
The RF signal is effectively shut off (set to 0.01 MHz) at 
regular intervals throughout the data acquisition in order to 
correct the measurements for zero order and stray source 
light that falls on the detector. Measurements of an infragold 
plate, a Lambertian reflector whose reflectivity is uniform 
over the entire wavelength range, are also taken as a 
reference spectrum. A tuning curve was measured to define 
the wavelength scale of the AOTF by placing narrow-band 
IR filters in the optical path during measurements of an 
infragold sample. 
In an effort to quantify the noise level in our spectra, we 
measured the output voltage at the detector and computed 
the standard deviation and Noise Equivalent Reflectance 
(NER). For an average of 256 scans, the voltage (V) 
obtained by measuring the light reflected by the infragold 
reference sample is around 63 mV, with a standard 
deviation (?) of about 0.176 mV. The NER (=100 ? ?/V) is 
roughly 0.28%. These values were derived from the AOTF 
PS after it was integrated with the LDTOF, and represent 
the averages of three different measurements taken at three 
wavelengths within our spectral range. 
 
Spectral Survey of Aqueous Minerals 
Spectral detection of organic molecules on mineral surfaces 
first requires a thorough characterization of the host 
minerals, measured using the same instrument. In some 
cases it was difficult to find uncontaminated regions of a  
sample surface that would provide a useful spectral baseline. 
Prior to integration with the LDTOF mass spectrometer, we 
 
 4 
exercised the AOTF PS in the laboratory to acquire a suite 
of near-IR spectra of field samples.  Our sample set included 
evaporites (sulfates, carbonates), clays, and oxides, all of 
which can be linked to aqueous environments and are 
therefore of high astrobiological interest. The resultant 
spectra are shown in Fig. 3. 
 
Sulfates— In the case of gypsum, sulfate (-SO4) bands are 
directly observed only at longer wavelengths, but distinctive 
bound water features do appear at numerous wavelengths.  
Most diagnostic of gypsum at these wavelengths is the 
blended feature with reflectance minimum at ~1.9 µm.  All 
of these features are much weaker (or disappear entirely) in 
the anhydrous form (anhydrite, CaSO4). The solid line in 
Fig. 3(a) shows the spectrum of potassium jarosite 
(KFe3(OH)6(SO4)2).  The dominant feature is the strong 
cluster of Fe-OH features with reflectance minimum at 2.27 
µm [14, 15]. 
 
Carbonates— The sequence of bands that appear in Fig. 
3(b) are combination and overtone bands of the carbonate 
ion, and their sequence and prominence are indicative of 
carbonates.  As noted by [16], the wavelengths of the band 
reflectance minima depend on the metal cation. As shown in 
Fig. 3(b), the positions of these bands in dolomite 
(CaMg(CO3)2) lie  at systematically  shorter wavelengths 
than that of calcite (CaCO3), which allows these carbonates 
to be uniquely identified if spectral resolution and signal-to-
 noise ratio are sufficient. 
Clays— Both the Kaolinite and Montmorillonite (Bentonite) 
spectra in Fig. 3(c) show familiar clay absorption features 
near 1.9 and 2.2 µm, and a pronounced OH stretching 
vibration near 2.75 µm.  Strong features near 2.2 µm are 
metal-OH combination bands [17]. The shape, depth and 
minimum reflectance wavelength of these features depends 
on composition. In the case of Kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4), 
the feature is an Al-OH combination band that appears as a 
distinctive doublet.  The 1.9 µm feature is an OH-stretch, 
H2O-bend combination band that requires both H2O and OH 
to be present [18].  As shown by [19], the depth of this 
feature is dramatically reduced under low pressure-
 temperature conditions, which simulate the Mars 
environment. 
Iron Oxides— Although our focus is evaporites and clays, 
we also included iron oxides, as shown in Fig. 3(d), since 
they are ubiquitous in Martian soils.  Most spectral features 
distinctive of iron oxides or oxyhydroxides are found at 
shorter wavelengths (e.g. the steep UV-visible red slope due 
to the Fe3+ cation).  Within our wavelength coverage, 
Hematite (?-Fe2O3) is mostly featureless except for the 3 
Figure 3.  Laboratory measurements of reference samples using the AOTF PS. 
 
 5 
µm bound water absorption.  On the other hand, the 
hydrated form, Goethite (?-FeO(OH)),  shows broad 
infrared absorptions near 1.9 and 2.4 µm (see Fig. 3(d)). 
 
LDTOF Mass Spectrometer 
The LDTOF mass spectrometer was modified slightly from 
its original design to enable its integration with the AOTF 
PS. To provide accommodation of the AOTF spectrometer 
and to allow angle incidence of the laser, we built a new 
vacuum housing to replace the previous instrument housing. 
We outfitted the 8” chamber with turbomolecular pump, a 
custom top flange to accommodate laser transmission, a 
precision XYZ stage to allow in vacuo sample manipulation, 
and a dedicated 266 nm Nd:YAG laser. The base pressure of 
the chamber is in the low 10-7 Torr range, which is sufficient 
for our prototype. 
A new IEL also was installed on the LDTOF prototype. The 
IEL is essentially a thin tube extending to a few mm above 
the sample, with electrostatic lens elements set to voltages 
that accelerate positive or negative ions into the tube, where 
they are collimated for analysis in the LDTOF mass 
spectrometer.  In this hybrid LDTOF-AOTF instrument, we 
made several modifications to the IEL design compared to 
existing prototypes, which (1) accommodate the incidence 
and collection of light for the AOTF, (2) permit off-axis 
desorption laser incidence from one side of the sample 
region that is not occluded by AOTF components, and (3) 
are consistent with expected flight implementations and 
restrictions, under various mission scenarios.  Whereas in 
previous LDTOF instruments the laser illuminated the 
sample through a coaxial borehole in the analyzer, the IEL 
modification makes the sample accessible to the laser from 
an angle, thereby providing for scanning capability and 
promoting a more compact instrument package. 
The new IEL was used to acquire a series of mass spectra on 
a common sample suite, as described below. Excellent mass 
range and resolution has been demonstrated on these 
samples, indicating the successful implementation of the 
new IEL in our operational LDTOF prototype. Table 2 
provides a summary of the LDTOF mass spectrometer 
a
 b
 c
 Figure 4.  Integration of the AOTF PS into the LDTOF vacuum chamber.  (a) Photo of AOTF fixture attached to 
vacuum chamber mounting structure.  (b) Photo of AOTF PS inside LDTOF mass spectrometer chamber.  (c) Photo 
of the integrated AOTF-LDTOF spectrometers. 
 
 6 
instrument specifications. 
 
Table 2.  LDTOF Mass Spectrometer Specifications 
 Mass range (Da):  
       Reflectron mode 1 – 5000 
       Linear mode 1 – 150,000 
 Mass resolution (m/?m) ≤ 1000 
 Spatial resolution 50 – 100 µm 
 Instrument mass (kg) ≤ 7 
 Instrument power (W) ≤ 15 
 
The LDTOF mass spectrometer has a total mass of ~ 7 kg, 
consisting of the TOF-MS, laser, optical, electronics, and 
turbo pump subsystems.  The addition of the AOTF 
spectrometer fixture, with a mass of 2 kg, makes this paired 
instrument an attractive, low-mass option for landed 
platforms.  The power requirements of the AOTF PS are 
relatively low (~ 15 W), and because it is also a passive 
sensor, it has significant advantages over other techniques 
such as Raman spectroscopy. The AOTF PS is therefore 
well-suited to serve as a prescreening tool that can be used 
for quick-look diagnostics of surface samples to determine 
whether follow-up measurements with the LDTOF mass 
spectrometer are warranted. For comparative purposes, 
Table 3 lists a broad range of parameter values for 
instrument technologies that perform “stand off” in situ 
surface science and also complement measurements that can 
be made by the AOTF PS and the LDTOF.  These represent 
at most a few examples of instruments, and by no means the 
full range of capabilities. 
 
AOTF PS - LDTOF Mass Spectrometer Integration 
The culmination of our instrument development activities 
was the integration of the AOTF PS and the GSFC-built 
LDTOF mass spectrometer, which took place at NASA’s 
Goddard Space Flight Center in July 2012.  The resulting 
integrated instrument is shown in Fig. 4. 
 
Once the AOTF PS and LDTOF mass spectrometer were 
successfully inserted into the vacuum chamber, the chamber 
was pumped down to 5?10-7 torr, to achieve operating 
conditions for the LDTOF.  We acquired AOTF spectra of 
gypsum before and after the vacuum pump down (Fig. 5).  
In vacuum, gypsum loses adsorbed and structurally bound 
H2O in the top monolayers of the sample.  Similar results 
have been reported previously [20].  The long wavelength 
feature seen near 3.5 µm appears to be a C-H absorption that 
was initially suppressed by the broad H2O hydration band in 
the top (desorbed) layer. Analysis of these data is ongoing, 
but the in-vacuum gypsum reflectance spectrum in Fig. 5 is 
consistent with our pre-integration laboratory measurements 
as well as with published gypsum spectra. 
During our integration activities we conducted near-
 simultaneous measurements of reference samples with both 
the AOTF PS and the LDTOF mass spectrometer.  An 
example is shown in Fig. 6, which contains the AOTF 
spectrum of calcite (Fig. 6a) plotted along with the LDTOF 
mass spectrum (Fig. 6b). The integration of these two 
instruments aimed to coincide the focal planes of the two 
analyzers at the same vertical distance (z) from the bottom 
of the housing.  While characterizing the integrated 
Property Raman Mössbauer 
?-Particle X-Ray 
Spectroscopy 
Mass (kg) 2.5 0.050 1.7 
Volume (cm3)  225  
Power (W) 30 2 6-10 
Wavelength Range 50 – 3500  cm-1   
Spectral Resolution 6  cm-1   
Spot Size (mm) < 0.100 15 17 
Sampling Depth  0.2 – 3 mm 5 – 50 µm 
References [21-23] [24-26] [27] 
Brief description of 
operation and major 
science products 
measures the scattered 
light originating from a 
monochromatic laser 
source to identify the 
composition and structure 
of minerals and organic 
compounds as inferred 
from their vibrational 
modes 
used to determine the 
oxidation state, phase, 
and crystalline structure 
of a target element within 
minerals by measuring 
resonantly scattered X-
 rays produced by a 
passive radioactive power 
source 
provides bulk chemical 
analysis; sample is 
bombarded with alpha 
particles and X-rays, 
elemental abundance is 
determined from X-ray 
fluorescence 
Table 3.  Some Complementary Instruments for In Situ Surface Analysis. 
 
 7 
instrument, we determined that the ideal working distance 
for the LDTOF is slightly shorter by 2-3 mm than that of the 
AOTF PS.  Since our goal was to demonstrate the 
simultaneous analysis of a representative sample, the 
mineral surface was held at the ideal focal plane of the 
AOTF PS, and some minor degradation of the mass 
resolution is seen for the correlated LDTOF mass spectra.  
Future prototypes will incorporate design improvements to 
ensure that the working distance is ideal for both 
instruments, but it is important to note that the objective of 
the instrument integration was achieved:  simultaneous mass 
spectra and AOTF IR spectra were taken from a suite of 
mineral and organic samples that are representative of 
planetary surface materials.  As seen in Fig. 6, the post-
 integration mass spectrum still indicates the presence of Ca.  
This, along with the -CO3 features in the AOTF spectrum, 
supports the identification of the sample as calcite.  This is a 
prime example of the complementary nature of the two 
spectral data sets. 
In an effort to explore our ability to identify organics in the 
AOTF data, we acquired spectra of several mineral samples 
that were doped with various levels of organic standards, 
representative of compounds that could be present in 
planetary surface materials.  Figure 7 shows spectra of 
gypsum doped with phthalic acid, as well as gypsum doped 
with valine (each doped with a concentration of 1% by 
weight).  The long wavelength absorption (near 3.4-3.5 µm) 
in the valine spectrum is OH (in carboxylic acid) as well as 
CH; this feature is evident in the ratio spectrum shown in 
the right panel of Fig. 7, which also compares our results to 
those published in the NIST database. There are two 
additional obvious spectral features at 2.8 and 2.9 µm that 
are present with the dopant, but almost nondetectable in the 
initial hydrated gypsum sample.  These also differ in 
strength, as shown in the spectral ratio. The shorter 
wavelength feature is at the correct wavelength for OH 
absorption. Both features are likely to be OH bands, but this 
is still being examined. 
 
Figure 5. Water desorption seen in AOTF spectra of 
gypsum during pump down. 
A comparison can be drawn with a negative ion mode 
LDTOF mass spectrum acquired for a mixture of phthalic 
acid and valine, as shown in Fig. 8.  The deprotonated 
molecular ions of phthalic acid and valine can both be 
detected at m/z values of 165 and 116, respectively.  These 
data illustrate the benefits of negative ion mode, an 
instrument improvement that we have recently implemented 
in the LDTOF prototype.  In positive mode, we have 
observed that these organics readily form salt adducts in the 
presence of elemental species with low ionization energy, 
such as Na and K, and the mass peaks are therefore shifted 
in m/z according to the attachment of these cations, an effect 
that can complicate the interpretation of the resulting 
spectra.  In negative ion mode, in contrast, the intrinsic 
molecular ions can be readily identified at m/z of [M-H]-.  
The data sets shown in Figs. 7 and 8 illustrate the 
advantages of a combined instrument suite that includes the 
AOTF PS and the LDTOF mass spectrometer.  A screening 
measurement of the IR reflectance of a sample can reveal 
the signatures of mineralogy and organic content, and a 
subsequent mass spectrometric analysis in positive and 
negative ion modes will produce mass signatures that can 
provide further insight into the inorganic and organic 
composition of the sample. 
 
Figure 6. (a) AOTF spectrum of calcite.  (b) Coincident 
LDTOF mass spectrum of the same calcite sample. 
 
 8 
Finally, in order to completely exercise the AOTF PS while 
in a vacuum, we obtained spectra of an icy residue from 
GSFC’s Cosmic Ice Laboratory.  The residue was created 
by irradiating a benzene-CO-NH3 mixture, and was meant to 
represent a possible icy surface mixture that one might find 
in the outer solar system on a body such as Europa or Titan.  
The deposited residue formed a pale yellow film on the 
polished aluminum disk used as the ice sample plate. We 
dissolved and redeposited a portion of the icy material onto 
one of our sample stubs used in the LDTOF vacuum 
chamber. One challenge for the AOTF measurements was to 
generate an ice deposit thick enough that the AOTF could 
record its spectrum rather than that of the sample stub.  As 
seen in Fig. 9, we acquired a spectrum of the ice, whose 
spectral shape varies significantly from that of the metal 
plate, indicating that we are not measuring the substrate 
beneath the sample. 
The preliminary results from our integrated instrument 
suggest that the two technologies will yield highly 
complementary and synergistic information.  The AOTF PS 
provides near-IR reflectance spectra that probe molecular 
structure (e.g. C-H bonds on surface mineralogy), while the 
LDTOF yields mass spectra signatures of minerals, amino 
acids, and larger organic molecules.  We are in the process 
of developing chemometric algorithms to handle both data 
sets simultaneously and identify correlations between AOTF 
reflectance spectra and LDTOF mass spectra.  Once these 
processing tools are more mature, we will be able to 
quantify our detection limits for the AOTF PS more 
accurately and understand how its spectral resolution of ~ 
10 nm impacts the detection limits for a variety of 
molecules of interest. 
 
Figure 7. Left: AOTF spectra of gypsum (dotted line), gypsum doped with phthalic acid (dash-dot line), and 
gypsum doped with phthalic acid and valine (solid line).  Right: ratio spectrum highlighting valine absorption. 
Figure 8.  LDTOF mass spectrum of a phthalic acid-valine mixture. 
 
 9 
 
Figure 9.  AOTF spectrum of icy residue from GSFC's 
Cosmic Ice Laboratory. 
 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
The recent integration of the AOTF PS and the LDTOF 
mass spectrometer allowed for coincident spectral 
measurements of mineral samples, enabling a direct 
comparison between two complementary data sets.  The 
analysis of our initial data set from the integration period is 
still underway, and we continue to make combined 
measurements of reference samples (e.g. PAH’s and amino 
acids on mineral substrates). Future measurements to be 
made with the integrated instrument include a wider array of 
mineralogical samples, including those known to be 
inhabited by microbes. 
The ultimate goal for the AOTF PS is confident detection of 
IR functional groups in mineralogical samples.  The results 
from our first integration with the LDTOF mass 
spectrometer suggest that this goal is achievable through 
careful data analysis and interpretation of our AOTF data.  
The final phase of this project will be to characterize the 
relationship between spectral features in the AOTF data and 
elemental mass results obtained from the LDTOF 
measurements.  This will highlight the effectiveness of 
using IR reflectance measurements, such as those obtained 
with the AOTF PS, as a prescreening tool that can be used 
to inform subsequent mass spectroscopy data acquisition. 
Finally, the AOTF PS could also be deployed as a portable, 
stand-alone instrument to make in situ measurements.  We 
plan to demonstrate this capability over the next 12-24 
months in New Mexican field environments of high 
astrobiological interest.  In principle both the AOTF PS and 
the LDTOF can be operated in either daytime or nighttime 
conditions, provided that a context imaging camera is not 
required. 
4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This work was supported by grants from NASA’s 
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research 
(EPSCoR) and Astrobiology Science and Technology 
Instrument Development (ASTID) programs, specifically 
through award numbers NNX08AY44G (ASTID) and 
NNX08AV85A (EPSCoR). Additional support was 
provided by New Mexico Tech, NMSU’s Astronomy and 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Departments, the New 
Mexico EPSCoR program office, the NMSU Vice President 
for Research, and the NMSU ADVANCE Program.  We 
thank Drs. Reggie Hudson and Perry Gerakines from 
GSFC’s Cosmic Ice Laboratory for providing us with test 
samples of icy residues.  We thank R. Hull for his 
contributions to the AOTF PS electronics system and his 
participation in the AOTF-LDTOF integration activities.  
We also thank Dr. D. M. Kuehn for his contribution to the 
development and implementation of the AOTF PS data 
acquisition software. 
 
 
 10 
REFERENCES 
[1] Vision and Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade 
2013-2022, National Academy of Science, 2011.  
[2] O. Korablev, J.-L. Bertaux, A. Fedorova, D. Fonteyn, A. 
Stepanov, Y. Kalinnikov, A. Kiselev, A. Grigoriev, V. 
Jegoulev, S. Perrier, E. Dimarellis, J. P. Dubois, A. 
Reberac, E. Van Ransbeeck, B. Gondet, F. Montmessin, 
and A. Rodin, “SPICAM IR acousto-optic spectrometer 
experiment on Mars Express,” J. Geophys. Res. 111, 
E09S03, doi:10.1029/2006JE002696, 2006. 
[3] J.-L. Bertaux and 35 co-authors, “SPICAV on Venus 
Express: Three spectrometers to study the global structure 
and composition of the Venus atmosphere,” Planet. Space 
Sci. 55, 1673-1700, 2007. 
[4] D. A. Glenar, J. J. Hillman, B. Saif, and J. Bergstralh, 
“Acousto-optic imaging spectropolarimetry for remote 
sensing,” Appl. Optics 33, 7412-7424, 1994. 
[5] D. A. Glenar, J. J. Hillman, M. LeLouarn, R. Q. Fugate, 
and J. D. Drummond, “Multispectral imagery of Jupiter 
and Saturn using adaptive optics and acousto-optic 
imaging,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 109, 326-337, 1997. 
[6] D. A. Glenar, D. L. Blaney, and J. J. Hillman, “AIMS: 
Acousto-optic imaging spectrometer for spectral mapping 
of solid surfaces,” Acta Astronautica 1824, 1-8, 2002. 
[7] G. Georgiev, D. A. Glenar, and J. J. Hillman, “Spectral 
characterization of acousto-optic filters used in imaging 
spectroscopy,” Appl. Optics 41, 209-217, 2002. 
[8] N. J. Chanover, J. J. Hillman, and D. A. Glenar, 
“Multispectral near-IR imaging of Venus nightside cloud 
features,”  J. Geophys. Res. 103, 31335-31348, 1998. 
[9] N. J. Chanover, C. M. Anderson, C. P. McKay, P. 
Rannou, D. A. Glenar, J. J. Hillman, and W. E. Blass, 
“Probing Titan’s lower atmosphere with acousto-optic 
tuning,”  Icarus 163, 150-163, 2003. 
[10] T. J. Cornish, S. Ecelberger, and W. Brinckerhoff, 
“Miniature time-of-flight mass spectrometer using a flexible 
circuitboard reflector,” Rapid Communications in Mass 
Spectrometry 14, 2408-2411, 2000. 
[11] N. J. Chanover, D. A. Glenar, D. G. Voelz, X. Xiao, R. 
Tawalbeh, P. J. Boston, W. B. Brinckerhoff, P. R. Mahaffy, 
S. Getty, I. ten Kate, and A. McAdam, “An AOTF-LDTOF 
spectrometer suite for in situ organic detection and 
characterization,” 2011 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, doi: 10.1109/AERO.2011.5747295. 
[12] N. J. Chanover, R. Tawalbeh, D. A. Glenar, D. G. Voelz, 
X. Xiao, K. Uckert, P. J. Boston, S. Getty, W. B. 
Brinckerhoff, P. R. Mahaffy, T. Cornish, and S. 
Ecelberger, “Rapid assessment of high value samples: An 
AOTF-LDTOF spectrometer suite for planetary surfaces.  
2012 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings. 
[13] N. Chanover, D. A. Glenar, K. Uckert, D. G. Voelz, X. 
Xiao, R.  Tawalbeh, P. Boston, W. Brinckerhoff, S. Getty, 
and P. Mahaffy. “Miniature spectrometer for detection of 
organics and identification of their mineral context.” 
Presentation at International Workshop on 
Instrumentation for Planetary Missions, October 2012. 
[14] R. L. Frost, R.-A. Wills, W. Martens and M. Weier, 
“NIR spectroscopy of jarosites,” Spectrochimica Acta 62, 
869-874, 2005. 
[15] M. S. Gilmore, B. Bornstein, M. D. Merrill, R. Castaño, 
and J. P. Greenwood, “Generation and performance of 
automated jarosite mineral detectors for visible/near-
 infrared spectrometers at Mars.” Icarus 195, 169-183, 
2008. 
[16] S. J. Gaffey, “Spectral reflectance of carbonate minerals 
in the visible and near infrared (0.35-2.55 microns): 
calcite, aragonite, and dolomite,” American Mineralogist, 
47, 700-717, 1986. 
[17] J. L. Post and P. N Noble, “The near-infrared 
combination band frequencies of dioctahedral smectites, 
micas and illites,” Clays and Clay Minerals, 41, 639-644, 
1993. 
[18] R. N. Clark, Chapter 1: Spectroscopy of Rocks and 
Minerals, and Principles of Spectroscopy, in Manual of 
Remote Sensing, Volume 3, Remote Sensing for the Earth 
Sciences, (A.N. Rencz, ed.), New York:  John Wiley and 
Sons, 1999. 
[19] J. L. Bishop, C. M. Pieters, R. G. Burns, J. O. Edwards, 
and R. L. Mancinelli, “Reflectance spectroscopy of ferric, 
sulfate-bearing montmorillonites as Mars soil analog 
materials,”  Icarus 117, 101-119, 1995. 
[20] M. Craig, E. A. Cloutis, L. Kaletzke, K. McCormack, 
and L. Stewart, “Alteration of hydration absorption 
features in reflectance spectra of selected sulfates in a low 
pressure environment: 0.45 – 4.3 µm,” Lunar and 
Planetary Sciences Conference, 2006. 
[21] F. Rull, S. Maurice, E. Diaz, C. Tato, A. Pacros, and the 
RLS Team. “The Raman Laser Spectrometer (RLS) on 
the ExoMars 2018 rover mission.” Lunar and Planetary 
Science Conference, 2011. 
 
 11 
[22] European Space Agency. ESA - Robotic Exploration of 
Mars: The ExoMars Rover Instrument Suite: RLS - 
Raman Spectrometer. http://exploration.esa.int/science-
 e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=45103&fbodylongid= 
2130, November 2012. 
[23] D. Pullan, F. Westall, B. A. Hofmann, J. Parnell, C. S. 
Cockell, H. G. M. Edwards, S. E. J. Villar, C. Schröder, 
G. Cressey, L. Marinangeli, L. Richter, and G. 
Klingelhöfer. “Identification of morphological 
biosignatures in Martian analogue field specimens using 
in situ planetary instrumentation.” Astrobiology, 
8(1):119–156, 2008. 
[24] G. Klingelhöfer, R. V. Morris, B. Bernhardt, C. 
Schröder, D. S. Rodionov, P. A. de Souza Jr., A. Yen, R. 
Gellert, E. N. Evlanov, B. Zubkov, J. Foh, U. Bonnes, E. 
Kankeleit, P. Gutlich, D. W. Ming, F. Renz, T. Wdowiak, 
S. W. Squyres, and R. E. Arvidson. “Jarosite and hematite 
at Meridiani Planum from Opportunity’s Mössbauer 
spectrometer.” Science, 306: 1740–1745, 2004. 
[25] I. Fleischer, G. Klingelhöfer, D. S. Rodionov, E. N. 
Evlanov, M. Blumers, B. Bernhardt, J. Girones Lopez, J. 
Maul, O. F. Prilutskii, A. F. Shlyk, V. M. Linkin, and C. 
dUston. “The miniaturized Mössbauer spectrometer 
MIMOS II on the Phobos-Grunt mission.” In Second 
International Conference on the Exploration of Phobos 
and Deimos, 2011. 
[26] A. K. Klingerhöfer. “Miniaturized Mössbauer 
spectrometer for the mineralogical analysis of the surface 
of planet Mars.” iacgu32.chemie.uni-
 mainz.de/mimos.php, January 2013. 
[27] L. M. Pratt, C. Allen, A. Allwood, A. Anbar, S. Atreya, 
M. Carr, D. Des Marais, J. Grant, D. Glavin, V. Hamilton, 
K. Herkenhoff, V. Hipkin, B. Sherwood Lollar, T. 
McCollom, A. McEwen, S. McLennan, R. Milliken, D. 
Ming, G. G. Ori, J. Parnell, F. Poulet, and F. Westall. 
“The Mars astrobiology explorer-cacher (MAX-C): A 
potential rover mission for 2018.” Astrobiology, 
10(2):127–163, 2010. 
[28] S. A. Getty, W. B. Brinckerhoff, X. Li, M. A. M. Floyd, 
R. D. Arevalo Jr., J. Elsila, M. Callahan, T. J. Cornish, S. 
A. Ecelberger, N. Chanover, D. Voelz, X. Xiao, R.  
Tawalbeh, K. Uckert, and D. Glenar. “Laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry for 
future in situ planetary missions. Presentation at 
International Workshop on Instrumentation for Planetary 
Missions, October 2012. 
 
 
 
 
BIOGRAPHY 
Nancy Chanover is an Associate 
Professor  of Astronomy at New 
Mexico State University and serves 
as the Principal Investigator of this 
project.  She has been involved in 
the demonstration and 
implementation of AOTF 
technologies for planetary science 
since 1997.  Her research interests include the vertical 
structure and dynamics of planetary atmospheres and 
instrument development.  She earned her Ph.D. from New 
Mexico State University in 1997. 
David Voelz is a Professor 
in the Klipsch School of 
Electrical and Computer 
Engineering at New Mexico 
State University.  He has 
been involved in the 
development of optical 
systems involving AOTF 
components since 2002.  
His research interests 
include spectral and polarization sensing, laser beam 
propagation through turbulence, laser communications 
and imaging theory.  He earned a Ph.D. EE degree from 
the University of Illinois in 1987. 
David Glenar is an Emeritus 
planetary scientist at NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight 
Center, where his research 
interests included high 
resolution spectroscopy, 
applications of AOTFs for 
spectral imaging, and 
radiative transfer modeling. 
He is currently Senior 
Research Associate in the 
Astronomy Department at 
New Mexico State University 
and is also a member of the National Lunar Science 
Institute. 
 
 12 
Xifeng Xiao received her 
BS and MS degrees in 
physics from Xiamen 
University Fujian, China, 
in 1998 and 2001, 
respectively. She earned 
her MS and PhD degrees in 
electrical engineering from 
New Mexico State 
University in 2004 and 
2008, respectively, where 
she is currently a postdoc. 
Her main research includes 
simulation and modeling of free-space laser 
communication, liquid-crystal polarization, and 
demonstration and implementation of AOTF 
technologies. 
Rula Tawalbeh, is a 
Doctoral student in the 
Department of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering 
at New Mexico State 
University. She graduated 
from Yarmouk University, 
Jordan in 1997, and she 
earned her MSc from 
Jordan University of 
Science and Technology in 
2001. She is interested in free space optics, spectroscopy 
and optical networks. 
Kyle Uckert received 
his BS degree in 
astrophysics from Ohio 
University in 2010 and 
is currently a graduate 
student in the 
Astronomy Department 
at New Mexico State 
University. His 
research has focused 
on the analysis of 
stellar occultation data 
to study Neptune’s 
atmosphere, and he is 
currently working on 
the demonstration of 
the AOTF point spectrometer for astrobiology 
applications. 
 
 Penelope Boston is 
Director of the Cave and 
Karst Studies Program and 
a Professor in the Earth & 
Environmental Sciences 
Dept. at New Mexico 
Institute of Mining & 
Technology, in Socorro, 
NM.  Boston is also Associate Director of the National 
Cave and Karst Research Institute in Carlsbad, NM.  Her 
research focuses on geomicrobiology and astrobiology in 
extreme environments (caves, hot and cold deserts, high 
latitudes and altitudes); human life support issues in 
space and planetary environments; and use of robotics to 
assist exploration and science in extreme Earth and 
extraterrestrial environments. She has published over 130 
works in her career, including 96 refereed papers.  She 
has edited 4 volumes and has 2 books in process.  She is a 
Fellow of the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts 
(awarded 2000) and received the Lifetime Achievement in 
Science Award from the National Speleological Society 
(2010). Boston received her PhD in 1985 from the Univ. 
of Colorado (Boulder) on an Advanced Studies Graduate 
Fellowship from the National Center for Atmospheric 
Research (Boulder, CO) followed by a National Research 
Council Postdoctoral Fellowship at NASA Langley 
Research Center. 
Stephanie A. Getty is a 
member of the Planetary 
Environments Laboratory 
at NASA’s Goddard Space 
Flight Center.  Her 
research interests are in the 
area of scientific instrument 
development for in situ 
planetary science, 
particularly in the pursuit 
of understanding the origin, evolution, and processing of 
 
 13 
organic chemistry in our Solar System.  
 
  Xiang Li received his B.S. 
in Chemistry from the Peking University, China in 2003, 
and Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the Johns Hopkins 
University in 2009. He has been a Research Associate 
with a joint appointment at the University of Maryland, 
Baltimore County and NASA Goddard Space Flight 
Center since 2011. His research focuses on the detection 
of trace element and astrobiologically relevant organic 
molecules in planetary systems, like Mars. He is 
especially interested in the development of Time-of-Flight 
and Ion Trap mass spectrometers with various ionization 
and ion gating techniques. 
Will Brinckerhoff is a 
space scientist in the 
Planetary Environments 
Lab at NASA’s Goddard 
Space Flight Center in 
Greenbelt, MD with 
primary responsibility for 
the development of the LD-
 TOF mass spectrometer on 
this project. He has focused 
recently on the development of miniature laser-based 
mass spectrometers for future planetary missions along 
with basic experimental research in astrobiology and pre-
 biotic synthesis. Dr. Brinckerhoff is involved in the 
development of mass spectrometer for both the 2011 
Mars Science Laboratory and the 2018 ExoMars 
missions. 
 
 14 
 
