   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 Spacecraft-Level Verification of the Van Allen Probes’ RF 
Communication System 
Matthew J. Crowne, Dipak Srinivasan, Darryl Royster, Gregory Weaver, Daniel Matlin, Nelofar Mosavi 
Johns Hopkins University ~Applied Physics Laboratory 
11100 Johns Hopkins Rd, 
Laurel, MD 20723 
Matthew.Crowne@jhuapl.edu, Dipak.Srinivasan@jhuapl.edu, Darryl.Royster@jhuapl.edu,  
Gregory.Weaver@jhuapl.edu, Dan.Matlin@jhuapl.edu, Nelofar.Mosavi@jhuapl.edu  
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the verification process, lessons 
learned, and selected test results of the radio frequency (RF) 
communication system of the Van Allen Probes, formerly 
known as the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP).  The Van 
Allen Probes mission is investigating the doughnut-shaped 
regions of space known as the Van Allen radiation belts where 
the Sun interacts with charged particles trapped in Earth's 
magnetic field. Understanding this dynamic area that 
surrounds our planet is important to improving our ability to 
design spacecraft and missions for reliability and astronaut 
safety.  The Van Allen Probes mission features two nearly 
identical spacecraft designed, built, and operated by the Johns 
Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) 
for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA). The RF communication system features the JHU/APL 
Frontier Radio. The Frontier Radio is a software-defined radio 
(SDR) designed for spaceborne communications, navigation, 
radio science, and sensor applications. This mission marks the 
first spaceflight usage of the Frontier Radio.  RF ground 
support equipment (RF GSE) was developed using a ground 
station receiver similar to what will be used in flight and whose 
capabilities provided clarity into RF system performance that 
was previously not obtained until compatibility testing with the 
ground segments. The Van Allen Probes underwent EMC, 
acoustic, vibration, and thermal vacuum testing at the 
environmental test facilities at APL.   During this time the RF 
communication system was rigorously tested to ensure optimal 
performance, including system-level testing down to threshold 
power levels. Compatibility tests were performed with the 
JHU/APL Satellite Communication Facility (SCF), the 
Universal Space Network (USN), and the Tracking and Data 
Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).   Successful completion of this 
program as described in this paper validated the design of the 
system and demonstrated that it will be able to meet all of the 
Van Allen Probes's communications requirements with its 
intended ground segments. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
2. VAN ALLEN PROBES RF COMMUNICATION 
SUBSYSTEM ........................................................... 2 
3. TEST CONFIGURATIONS ................................... 4 
4. TEST FLOW ....................................................... 6 
5. COMPATIBILITY TEST DETAILS, LESSONS, 
RESULTS ............................................................... 7 
6. SELECTED TEST RESULTS ................................ 8 
7. CONCLUSION ................................................... 10 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ....................................... 11 
REFERENCES ....................................................... 11 
BIOGRAPHY ........................................................ 12 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents the verification process, lessons learned, 
and selected testing results of the RF communication system 
of the Van Allen Probes. 
The mission is part of the NASA Living With a Star 
Program. The two Van Allen Probes (designated A and B) 
will investigate the doughnut shaped regions of space field 
known as the Van Allen radiation belts where the Sun 
interacts with charged particles trapped in Earth's magnetic 
[1][2]. Understanding this dynamic area that surrounds our 
planet is important to improving our ability to design 
spacecraft and missions for reliability and astronaut safety.   
The Van Allen Probes mission features two nearly identical 
spacecraft designed, built, and operated by JHU/APL. Many 
aspects of the spacecraft design, including the RF subsystem 
were driven by need to operate reliably in the harsh 
environment of the radiation belts [3]. The Van Allen 
Probes successfully launched on an Atlas V 401 rocket on 
August 30th 2012 from Space Launch Complex 41 at the 
Cape Canaveral Air Force station.   
 
The Van Allen Probes’ launch and orbit insertion design 
imposed a unique set of requirements for validation of the 
RF subsystem’s performance with the three different space 
network operations that will be used during the mission: the 
JHU/APL SCF, USN, and TDRSS. The Van Allen Probes 
operate in an approximate nine hour, highly elliptical orbit 
with a perigee altitude of approximately 500 km and an 
apogee altitude of approximately 30,600 km. Orbit insertion 
was accomplished essentially at perigee altitude where both 
spacecraft exhibit a large tangential velocity component 
with respect to the Earth. Additionally, the stacked 
configuration of the spacecraft, along with their slightly 
different orbit geometries, required that separation from the 
Centaur booster be accomplished at different times. These 
launch and orbit insertion features created a circumstance 
where the first acquisition of signal (AOS) with spacecraft 
A occurred late in the available first pass over the USN 
Hawaii station with AOS of spacecraft B mostly 
unrecoverable until reaching the lower elevation available to 
the SCF [4]. Figure 1 shows a simulated view of the 
 
 2
 spacecraft trajectory shortly after both A and B had 
achieved separation. Note that the spacecraft have a nine 
hour orbit, completing roughly three orbits a day. 
 
Given this critical exchange between the USN and SCF 
ground stations during first AOS with brief acquisition 
windows for both spacecraft, select TDRSS assets were 
reserved for emergency contingency during launch and orbit 
insertion.  In this way, anomalies or malfunctions at the 
USN and SCF ground stations could be mitigated by relay 
through the geosynchronous TDRSS satellites back to the 
White Sands Complex (WSC) ground station.  
 
 
2. VAN ALLEN PROBES RF COMMUNICATION 
SUBSYSTEM 
The Van Allen Probes RF subsystem is designed to support 
a command uplink, a telemetry downlink, and accurate 
Doppler data to support navigation across all mission phases 
[5]. The RF system was designed to operate in certain preset 
“modes” that defined all of the necessary RF settings such 
as uplink and downlink bitrate, modulation, and encoding 
necessary for establishing communication. The modes are 
defined in Table 1. The primary coding scheme for the 
downlink system is rate ? Turbo. As Turbo encoding was a 
new feature to some of the intended ground stations, all 
Turbo sciences rates are mirrored with convolutional 
encoded version as a contingency in the event of the ground 
station Turbo decoding capability failing.  
The bulk of the RF subsystem resides on the inside of one of 
the spacecraft’s eight panels. The radio, a solid state power 
amplifier (SSPA), a low noise amplifier (LNA), diplexer, 
and splitter are all connected on that panel via RF semi-rigid 
coaxial cables.  The RF panel is shown in Figure 2.  From 
the splitter/combiner, the signals are routed to the top and 
bottom of the spacecraft via flexible coaxial cables to the 
two low gain antennas. The Van Allen Probes’ RF 
subsystem is single string. Without redundancy, box level 
 
  
 
Figure 2. Van Allen Probes RF Subsystem 
components mounted to the Spacecraft panel. 
 
Figure 1. Spacecraft line of sight angles to USN Hawaii and SCF (Laurel, MD) shortly after 
separation.  At this time, the two spacecraft were nearly co-located. 
 
 3
 reliability was of paramount concern. A block diagram of 
the complete RF system is shown in Figure 3. 
Two low gain antennas are mounted onto the spacecraft to 
provide as broad a coverage area as possible. One antenna is 
mounted to the forward side of the spacecraft and one to the 
aft. Each antenna provides > –4 dBic out to +/-70 degrees 
from bore sight.  Communications within the 40 degree 
“null band” about the spacecraft is not required.  
The first active stage in the uplink path is the external LNA. 
Keeping this critical first gain stage separate from the rest of 
the RF system isolates it from S-band spurious content 
potentially generated in the radio from clock harmonics, 
local oscillator (LO) and intermediate frequencies (IF) and 
their mixing products. The uplink signal is routed to the 
radio’s receiver where there is further S-band amplification. 
The LNA is also powered from the receiver through the RF 
connection, minimizing unnecessary harnessing.  
The downlink signal is outputted from the radio’s exciter to 
the SSPA. The SSPA amplifies the signal to 8W while 
consuming 33W of DC power from the 30V spacecraft bus.  
The SSPA contains a DC/DC converter for converting the 
spacecraft power into its necessary supplies. A custom 
ASIC is used for sensing and reporting voltage, current, and 
temperature data in the SSPA and this telemetry is collected 
by the radio through a data interface.   
The amplified downlink signal goes through the diplexer 
(which isolates it from the sensitive receiver path) and the 
splitter and is sent to both antennas. This switchless routing 
structure maximizes the simplicity and reliability of the 
system at the expense of broadcasting half the RF power 
away from the grounds station (and Earth) at any given 
time. 
The RF subsystem features the JHU/APL Frontier Radio as 
its centerpiece. The Frontier Radio is a software-defined 
radio (SDR) designed for spaceborne communications, 
navigation, radio science, and sensor applications [6][7].  
The radio was designed for high functionality, low mass, 
low power, and modularity. 
Table 1. Van Allen Probes RF System Preset Modes  
Preset 
state 
number 
Uplink bit rate  
(bps) 
Downlink bit rate 
(bps)
 NRZ-L 
Biphase 
Convolutional, 
Turbo PM, QPSK Description
 1* 125 1,000 Bi-  Conv PM 
Emergency,
 Power-on Default
 2 125 N/A N/A N/A N/A 
Low power (Rx 
only)
 3* 125 1,000 Bi-  Conv PM Space Weather
 4 2,000 125,000 Bi-  Conv PM  
5 2,000 250,000 Bi-  Conv PM  
6 2,000 500,000 Bi-  Conv PM  
7 2,000 1,000,000 NRZ-L Conv PM  
8 2,000 2,000,000 NRZ-L Conv QPSK  
9* 2,000 125,000 Bi-  Turbo PM  
10* 2,000 250,000 Bi-  Turbo PM  
11* 2,000 500,000 Bi-  Turbo PM  
12* 2,000 1,000,000 NRZ-L Turbo PM  
13* 2,000 2,000,000 NRZ-L Turbo QPSK  
14 125 N/A N/A N/A N/A CW Downlink
 *Operational modes used during mission 
 
 
Figure 3. Van Allen Probes RF System 
 
 4
 The Van Allen Probes version of the Frontier Radio features 
four functional “slices” that together form a closed-loop S-
 band communication system.  The power converter slice 
draws power from the 30V spacecraft bus and provides all 
the necessary voltages for the radio. The digital signal 
processing (DSP) slice handles mode and status 
communication with the spacecraft’s command and data 
handling (C&DH) subsystem, processes the uplink signal, 
and generates the downlink baseband signals.  The DSP 
slice uses an Actel RTAX-2000 Field Programmable Gate 
Array (FPGA) for signal processing and software execution.  
The receiver slice acquires the low power uplink signal and 
downconverts it to an intermediate frequency for the DSP 
slice to digitize and process. The receiver slice also has an 
ovenized crystal oscillator (OCXO) which serves as the 
master reference for the radio. The exciter slice receives the 
baseband downlink from the DSP slice and modulates it 
onto a high quality RF downlink signal. The downlink 
signal is coherent with the uplink, allowing for highly 
accurate Doppler data collection.  
The radio is the only functional electrical difference 
between the two spacecraft, as necessitated by the operation 
on separate RF channels. This difference is implemented 
entirely in software; the radio hardware is identical. 
Although this is a reprogrammable feature of the Frontier 
Radio platform, it has been hard-coded in the Van Allen 
Probes’s implementation to maximize reliability in the harsh 
environment of the radiation belts.  The use of two different 
RF frequencies requires that each radio has different LO 
frequencies used for up- and down-conversion which leads 
to different mixing products and spurious signals for each 
radio. The two RF systems therefore had to be fully tested, 
characterized, and qualified independently, including testing 
for compatibility with each ground link. 
The Van Allen Probes mission marks the first use of the 
Frontier Radio for a spaceflight mission. The radio 
incorporates many new technologies developed at 
JHU/APL. Due to the new technologies and the single string 
nature of the RF system, the radio’s engineering model 
(EM) went through a rigorous qualification process that 
greatly reduced the risk of incorporating the new design into 
a mission critical system [8].  The Solar Probe Plus mission 
[9], expected to launch in 2018, will feature a version of the 
Frontier Radio that has an X-band receiver, an X-band 
exciter, and a Ka-band exciter.  
 
 
3. TEST CONFIGURATIONS 
Performance testing of the RF system during Integration and 
Test (I&T) used a rack of RF ground support equipment (RF 
GSE) containing a mixture of custom and off-the-shelf test 
equipment. The RF GSE is described in detail in [10] and a 
simplified block diagram is shown in Figure 4.  The RF 
GSE was designed to emulate a typical ground station that 
will be used during the mission.  The RT Logic T70/70 XL 
ground station modem has the same hardware and software 
that the JHU/APL SCF and USN 13-m networks use.  
The uplink and downlink can be switched between the fore 
and aft antennas for testing both RF paths (during the 
mission, the orbit geometry will determine the antenna path 
used).  The uplink and downlink signals are first separated 
by a diplexer in the RF GSE. The downlink is then sampled 
with a coupler which routed to a spectrum analyzer, a 
frequency counter, and a power meter for measurement.  
The main downlink path then goes through a series of 
switches that can route the signal to any of the ground link’s 
compatibility-test GSEs or internally within the RF GSE for 
  
 
Figure 4. RF GSE Block Diagram 
 
 5
 local system performance testing.  
When configured for performance test, the signal is then 
downconverted to a 70-MHz IF and routed to an RT Logic 
T70/70 XL which demodulates the signal and syncs to the 
frame’s Attached Sync Marker (ASM) and passes the frame 
to an Avtec Programmable Telemetry Processor (PTP) 
where the turbo frames are reverse encoded. The use of the 
PTP’s reverse encoder to process the Turbo frames was a 
legacy of previous missions’ I&T GSE. A reverse turbo 
encoder can only process strong signal (relatively error free) 
frames. Because of this, Turbo performance was not tested 
in the standard Van Allen Probes I&T configuration. 
However, the T70/70 XL has a true Turbo decoder and can 
decode frames as the ground stations do in flight. This 
feature was used during a series of “special tests” where 
Turbo performance down to threshold was demonstrated.  
This test could be performed with the RF GSE by 
reconfiguring the software, leaving the integrity of the 
remaining I&T GSE intact. In addition, box-level 
verification of the radio included a similar RF GSE 
configuration (also described in [8]) including the ability to 
perform Turbo tests down to threshold levels and included a 
pseudo-system test arrangement with the flight LNA and 
SSPA and EMs of the Diplexer. This offered a direct 
comparison of box-level and spacecraft-level performance.   
The uplink commands are generated by the PTP and 
modulated onto a 70-MHz  IF by the T70/70 XL. The signal 
is upconverted to S-band and sampled by a coupler for 
measurement by the power meter and the spectrum analyzer 
before being routed through the diplexer and switch then to 
the spacecraft.   
Although the RF GSE can be run locally, during spacecraft 
testing it interfaces with L-3’s InControl Satellite Command 
and Control Software allowing for higher levels of scripting 
that can configure the spacecraft and the RF GSE 
simultaneously. 
One of the challenges passed onto the verification process 
was the requirement for two spacecraft to operate with three 
distinct ground segments as well as with RF GSE.  In 
addition, I&T logistics demanded that multiple major 
verification events occur concurrently without opportunity 
for manual reconfiguration and calibration.  In response, the 
RF GSE configuration was tailored to accommodate this 
environment. 
As show in Figure 5, the RF GSE served the dual role of 
both 1) simulating a ground station and 2) routing the RF 
path between the various inputs and outputs.  For I&T 
activities when the other ground segments were not present 
(such as during early performance tests), the RF GSE could 
generate uplink (modulated from commands sent over the 
digital gateway) and recover telemetry into digital frames.  
The RF GSE could simulate threshold and maximum link 
conditions as well as evaluate radiometric performance 
(such as Doppler noise).  In essence, the RF GSE simulated 
two independent ground stations. 
The RF GSE also provided isolated routing to the two Van 
Allen Probes.  While the spacecraft also employed both 
frequency and antenna polarization separation, the RF GSE 
further separated the RF paths to prevent interference.  
 
 
Figure 5. Network connections for compatibility tests and mission simulations 
 
 
 6
 Isolation was measured to confirm simultaneous testing 
would not interfere with threshold results.  RF isolation was 
also provided for six RF Compatibility Tests  (RFCT) where 
each of the ground stations demonstrated system 
compatibility with each of the spacecraft.  The USN, 
TDRSS, and SCF employed separated paths between their 
test apparatus and the RF GSE which would then 
electronically select the routing to either of the spacecraft.  
Space Link Extension (SLE) gateways between the Van 
Allen Probes Mission Operations Center (MOC) and each 
ground segment expanded the configuration to include 
mission simulation (MSIM) testing as well.  The MSIM 
included end-to-end flight operations which involved 
simultaneous contacts involving any two ground segments. 
For several MSIMs run locally at APL the RF GSE was able 
to stand in as a ground segment which made for a higher 
fidelity test. In summary, the verification configuration 
supported MSIMs, RFCTs with three ground segments, I&T 
RF tests, and other I&T activities involving either or both 
spacecraft simultaneously. 
 
4. TEST FLOW 
The test flow for the Van Allen Probes is shown in Figure 6.  
The RF system was integrated following a thorough safe-to-
 mate procedure that verifies all of the interfaces between the 
spacecraft and the RF system. This procedure checks the 
impedance of all pins, verifies voltage levels (loaded and 
unloaded) of all waveforms, and measures the inrush current 
of the SSPA and the Frontier Radio. Once the system is 
mated, basic functionality is checked via baseband 
commanding directly to the C&DH subsystem. 
Several tests were used to verify the performance of the RF 
system once integrated onto the spacecraft: Aliveness Test 
(No RF), Aliveness Test (w/RF), Functional Test, the 
Comprehensive Performance test (CPT), and special tests 
that were not part of a standard battery of tests. These tests 
were performed at points when the spacecraft underwent 
environmental stress or following a spacecraft move.   Two 
versions of the aliveness test were used because when the 
spacecraft were in their launch configuration (spacecraft A 
stacked on spacecraft B) there was not access to all of the 
antennas and no way to prevent free radiating of the RF 
signal. After the RF system performance was verified, an 
initial RFCT with the SCF, USN, and TDRSS was 
performed. Spacecraft environmental testing followed 
starting with an acoustic test at JHU/APL which simulated 
the sound fields that the spacecraft would experience during 
launch. Vibration and Shock testing followed, simulating 
the launch and separation respectively.  During TVAC 
testing, the I&T schedule required that CPTs and RFCTs 
overlap between the two spacecraft and that the MSIM 
could be executed between such batteries of testing.  This 
required extensive calibration in advance of all uplink and 
downlink combinations which was then confirmed by 
baseline data and periodically repeated.  Unexpected 
variables included RF interference (RFI) from nearby 
external sources [11] and RF leakage from the SCF that 
effected sensitive tests.  Additional time was also necessary 
for dry runs of the MSIM and other system level testing 
with the ground segments (such as timekeeping and 
navigation).  The streamlined use of the GSE in this 
verification configuration maximized the available time to 
be dedicated to testing and not into reconfiguration. 
Around the same time as spacecraft environmental testing, a 
component issue (unrelated to the testing underway) was 
discovered that required board-level rework of the radios.   
They were removed so that the rework could be performed 
and the spacecraft were shipped to Astrotech Space 
Operation’s (ASO) Florida facility for launch processing. 
The radio was reworked and then underwent regression 
 
Figure 6. RF System Test Flow 
 
 7
 testing that included EMC, Vibe, and TVAC components. 
Following this performance reverification, the radios were 
then reintegrated onto the spacecraft at the ASO facility. 
The rework affected the RF paths in both the exciter and the 
receiver.  It was critical to verify RF performance following 
reintegration with the spacecraft. On previous missions at 
JHU/APL testing down to threshold levels was only 
performed during compatibility testing. The RF GSE’s 
ability to perform turbo decoding down to threshold for 
frame error rate (FER) testing and the original RF system 
test plan that included these threshold tests enabled a direct 
comparison of pre- and post-rework testing of the downlink 
in its most sensitive condition. Uplink commanding tests 
with the GSE were also performed down to threshold levels 
and statistically analyzed for comparison to theoretical bit 
error rate (BER) curves before and after the rework. These 
tests provided a significant risk reduction following the 
rework without having to utilize the extensive resources 
required for compatibility tests. 
 
5. COMPATIBILITY TEST DETAILS, LESSONS, 
RESULTS 
Verifying compatibility between spacecraft’s RF systems 
and the three tracking networks required verification of 
system performance with three diverse sets of test 
equipment and configurations and required the ability to 
easily switch between these networks.   This section of the 
paper describes our test experience, contrasting results and 
lessons resolved under the Van Allen Probes RF 
compatibility testing.  Although RF compatibility was 
declared among all three space networks, an idiosyncratic 
list of minor discrepancies and operating constraints 
accumulated among the three communication systems.   
 
As described earlier, the Van Allen Probes’ transceiver 
supports several preset modes of communication. The 
definition of these modes were not only set within the 
transceiver firmware, but were also configured across the 
USN and SCF stations and RF GSE. This facilitated test 
conduction coordination, since instruction of test mode was 
then used to coordinate the current communication link 
throughout test. Of the preset modes, Mode 1 provides the 
highest margin for the communications link budget because 
the two-way data rates are low.  Mode 1 supports a 125 bps 
uplink and 1000 bps downlink using bi-phase PCM.  The 
mode also has the added downlink gain of convolutional 
coding, which is more common and requires less processing 
than Turbo block codes. Mode 1 was used in launch and 
orbit insertion across all three space networks.  
Consequently, key across RF compatibility testing was 
assured performance of Mode 1.   
 
TDRSS Compatibility 
 
As TDRSS was only required to support mission launch, 
orbit insertion, and emergency contingencies, TDRSS 
compatibility testing was constrained to Mode 1 
performance verification. The outstanding difference for 
testing Van Allen Probes’ RF system compatibility with the 
TDRSS was the need to incorporate a portable antenna and 
communications GSE for establishing a two-way link with 
an available TDRSS spacecraft.  In this manner, the portable 
link configured for compatibility testing emulated the space-
 to-space link of an in-flight Van Allen Probes spacecraft 
making a relay back to the ground station at WSC. 
Telemetry and commanding to and from the JHU/APL Van 
Allen Probes MOC was consequently sent via WSC during 
test, as it is also in flight operations. The incorporation of 
the TDRSS RF link, though necessary to conform to “test as 
you fly” policy, nonetheless added unexpected 
complications to the testing. Most prominent was the impact 
of assessing the downlink PCM quality threshold for Mode 
1 with respect to the required link budget from uncertainties 
induced by the portable antenna pointing.  Also troublesome 
was the incidence of EMI from terrestrial cellphone tower 
radiation, which had to be narrow band filtered in-line with 
the TDRSS link GSE.  
 
During test, the signal strength at the portable antenna was 
continuously monitored and the antenna was incidentally 
repositioned (re-peaked) to minimize contribution to the test 
measurements.  While this approach was effective for short 
duration tests of several minutes, like downlink acquisition 
threshold and uplink sweep acquisition, the determination of 
downlink telemetry down to threshold was always found 
problematic.  This is because at 1000 bps, an 8912 bit Van 
Allen Probes telemetry frame takes nearly 9 seconds to be 
transmitted and the required BER of 1E-5 needed nearly 34 
frames to be demonstrated error free. Consequently during 
test, it was difficult to determine the accuracy of the 
convolutional implementation loss to much better than 1 dB 
since the effectiveness of the antenna gain often wandered 
this much over the test duration.  Despite the limitations 
described, all parties involved agreed that the performance 
being measured was sufficient to demonstrate compatibility 
with the TDRSS network. 
 
USN Compatibility 
 
As the USN is a fully implemented ground station network 
across all Van Allen Probes mission modes, RF 
compatibility testing was extended to assess Mode 1 for 
launch and orbit insertion, five additional convolutional 
modes (modes 4 through 8) and five Turbo block coding 
modes (modes 9 through 13). The inclusion of handling 
Turbo decoding in support of space mission 
communications was novel to the USN prior to the Van 
Allen Probes mission. This meant that a configuration 
upgrade was required to be installed into the USN tele-
 commanding units with the realization that assessing system 
compatibility would be a test of not only the spacecraft RF 
hardware’s performance, but also the examination of the 
quality of the newly installed ground station Turbo decoding 
software. Moreover, as compatibility testing was 
 
 8
 accomplished at JHU/APL, the USN was required to set-up 
demonstration GSE, replicating a ground station, but not 
representing ground station equipment that would actually 
be used in-flight.  This added a managed risk to the Van 
Allen Probes communications as compatibility results could 
only be referred.  Therefore, verification of the 
compatibility of the Van Allen Probes RF subsystem with 
the USN required knowledge of the RF system’s 
implementation loss.  This often lead to an iterative 
resolution of test issues as communications discrepancies 
found with the USN configuration had to be parsed between 
the new capability of the USN equipment and the possibility 
of uncovered radio issues. The use of RF GSE with ground-
 station-emulating features for subsystem performance test, 
the use of a similar GSE configuration for box-level radio 
test, and the access to an on-site mission ground station in 
JHU/APL’s SCF for compatibility tests provided a high-
 confidence data set to use a reference during USN Turbo 
tests. 
 
Another upgrade passed into the USN for support of the 
Van Allen Probes was the need to supply Doppler 
navigation data to the MOC from the recovered downlink 
carrier at a precision of better than 5 mm/sec over 10 
seconds.  Fundamental to this requirement was the quality 
of the station clock, not just for accuracy to UTC which was 
performed by GPS time recovery, but overall reduction of 
frequency noise in the 1 to 10 s time interval.  This meant 
that a Rubidium gas-cell atomic clock with fractional 
frequency stability of less than 5E-12 per √? was required to 
be implemented in all USN ground stations, including the 
GSE used for compatibility testing. Here again, JHU/APL 
engineering data about the quality of the coherent radio 
downlink was necessary to assure the validation of end-to-
 end system performance.  
 
SCF Compatibility  
 
The configuration issues described above for the TDRSS 
and USN were somewhat anticipated and the inclusion of 
JHU/APL’s SCF was planned for providing a baseline in the 
assessment of the Van Allen Probes RF subsystem 
compatibility because of its co-location with the spacecraft 
integration and test area and the Van Allen Probes MOC. 
The configuration of SCF into compatibility testing 
included the RF routing through the ground station’s 
receiver LNA and transmitter power amplifier paths and the 
actual MOC flight SLE gateway interface (which was not 
present for the other ground link’s compatibility tests).  
Therefore, SCF compatibility test offered the greatest extent 
of assessing compatibility of actual flight equipment and 
interfaces among the three space networks.  The co-location 
of SCF also allowed interim development and RF subsystem 
integration testing to corroborate engineering test results 
collected under laboratory environments. Unlike the USN, 
the capability to decode Turbo and provide Doppler 
navigation data at the precision required by the Van Allen 
Probes were already established at SCF.   
 
One RF Subsystem Compatible Three Different Ways         
 
The experience discussed from the Van Allen Probes 
compatibility test campaign demonstrated the sometimes 
problematic nature of interoperability.  In the Van Allen 
Probes, one RF subsystem for each spacecraft was 
characterized by three space communications networks with 
the expectation that a convergent performance would be 
recovered across the measurement sets. This expectation 
was derived from the notion that the individual 
contributions of the three networks, though known to have 
variation, were insubstantial to assessing the Van Allen 
Probes RF subsystem compatibility.  However, in the 
aggregate case, it was the engineering knowledge of the 
individual tested RF subsystems (acquired via Radio level 
and Spacecraft level testing with the ground-station-like RF 
GSE) which allowed the resolution of test issues and 
discrepancies found within the three communication 
networks.  
 
In many performance areas, such as uplink command 
threshold and sweep acquisition, the results across the three 
networks were found to be in good agreement, and 
performance compatibility was issued by all three network 
operations. Yet, the complexity of modern space 
communications practice clearly became evident as testing 
issues emerged from the diversity of equipment, test 
configuration and network implementations. Van Allen 
Probes offered a rich insight into the design and 
implementation of the JHU/APL Frontier Radio in the RF 
system from the concurrent exposure to the three ground 
communication systems all critically planned into one 
mission operation. 
 
 
6. SELECTED TEST RESULTS 
The CPTs were run several times during spacecraft testing 
(pre-environmental, TVAC Hot and Cold, and post radio  
reintegration during launch processing) with the RF GSE 
measure such  characteristics as RF power out, non-coherent 
downlink frequency (which is mathematically related to the 
on-board oscillator frequency), Doppler noise, measured 
received power, and end to end commanding and telemetry. 
All measurements came within expected ranges, including 
expected deviations following the radio rework. 
Several additional tests were built into the test plan that 
provided insight into the most sensitive aspects of the RF 
system.  These tests became especially important following 
the removal of the radio for rework late in the spacecraft 
testing cycle. Along with repeating the CPTs, uplink BER, 
downlink FER using turbo encoding (as previously noted), 
and a receiver “drag and drop” test were run before and after 
the radio rework. 
Drag and Drop 
The drag and drop test was so named because the test 
consisted of dragging receiver with the uplink carrier 
 
 9
 frequency to just outside the edge of the radio’s tracking 
range and then dropping the uplink by disabling the carrier 
and monitoring the receiver’s drift back to its natural Best 
Lock Frequency.  
The drag and drop test begins with the transceiver locked to 
an uplink signal. Using the GSE, the carrier is then swept up 
(or down) in frequency, slow enough for the transceiver to 
track it. The carrier is swept past the receiver’s tracking 
range causing the radio to lose uplink lock. The uplink 
signal is disabled entirely providing a noise-in/maximum 
AGC gain condition.   The tracking loop is still at the far 
extreme of the tracking range and with no signal to lock to 
will slowly drift back to nominal center frequency. 
Therefore, the receiver passes through the entire tracking 
range within the maximum gain condition while the receiver 
frequency and receive power telemetry are monitored. 
Spurious signals and undesired mixing products are also 
maximized in this condition. If there is sufficient power in 
those signals the radio’s received power telemetry will 
indicate that it detects that energy and the receiver 
frequency telemetry will indicate its location. If the spurs 
are strong enough the radio could lock to them, which 
would be a serious concern. This test provides a virtual 
window into both the magnitude and frequency of spurious 
signals without resorting to taking the radio out of its flight 
operating configuration giving maximum confidence in the 
results. 
Figure 7 shows a plot of the static phase error (SPE), a 
measure of receiver frequency, and the uplink carrier 
amplitude and lock indicator during a positive drag and drop 
test on Van Allen Probe B. 
This test was a useful and unique test used throughout RF 
subsystem verification. The test provided insight into 
spurious signals within the transceiver after the box was 
completely closed up for flight and access to IF sections 
were lost. This meant that all through integration, even 
when the transceiver was in its final flight configuration on 
the spacecraft (following all of the handling, bolting, and 
staking that is required, and after vibration, thermal cycling 
in TVAC, and final transport) verification of a sufficiently 
spurious free RF environment within the transceiver was 
possible. 
Uplink BER 
Verifying uplink BER at the spacecraft level was 
challenging as the nominal method for performing box-level 
BER testing was not allowable at that higher level of 
integration.  There was no way of reading back individual 
uplinked bits to compare to the transmitted bits.  Instead, a 
series of no-operation commands (no-ops) were sent at 
various uplink Eb/N0s, and a “command rejection rate” 
(CRR) was recorded as the measurable performance metric.  
Since the metric for uplink performance used to-date was 
uplink BER, the measured CRR had to be converted to BER 
to assess any changes in performance since box level 
testing.  
Because the uplink signal is uncoded, the probability of one 
rejected command, ????  (equivalent to the CRR),  is 
equivalent to the sum of the probabilities of one (and only 
 
Figure 7. Positive Drag and drop results for Van Allen B 
 
 10
 one) bit error, two (and only two) bit errors, and so forth up 
to the probability on N bit errors (with N representing the 
length of the no-op command) is given as 
???? ? ?? ? ?? ? ?? ??,                    (1) 
 
where ?? is the probability of exactly N errors in one 
command.  The probability of exactly n bit errors as a 
function of N and the BER (??) is the binomial distribution 
given as 
 
?? ? ????1 ? ??????????                     (2) 
 
Using these two equations and solving for Pe  yields 
??? ?  ?? ? 1 ? ?1 ? ?????? ??                  (3) 
 
Using this statistical conversion, the measured CRR was 
converted to an equivalent uplink BER, thereby allowing 
verification of no degraded uplink performance on both 
spacecraft without access to individual bits. The derived 
BER curves are shown in Figure 8 for both spacecraft level 
testing using CRR and radio level testing using a BER tester 
and a pseudorandom uplink signal. 
Downlink FER 
For Turbo encoded downlink modes, performance is 
expected to be error free until the onset of threshold. Once 
threshold is reached performance degrades drastically 
creating a near vertical line on an FER plot between error-
 free and complete rejection of frames. This makes FER a 
highly sensitive indicator downlink link performance.  
The enabling factor which allowed us to measure FER 
curves throughout testing was our use of ground-station-like 
RF GSE featuring the RT Logic T70/70XL’s turbo decoder. 
In addition, RF GSE racks used at the spacecraft testing 
level included digitally controlled attenuators in 0.1 dB 
steps allowing for multiple data points along the steep FER 
curves. The RF GSE allowed verification of Turbo 
performance much earlier in the test cycle than with 
compatibility tests and allowed for direct comparison of 
results on the different testing platforms.  The FER results 
using the RF GSE and from the ground networks during 
compatibility tests are shown in Figure 9 for mode 13 
(QPSK, Turbo, 2Mbps), the RF systems highest datarate 
mode.  
7. CONCLUSION 
Figure 10 shows the downlink performance across all 
operating modes of the RF system for all ground link 
compatibility tests as well as with the RF GSE. It reflects 
several different calibration environments, various test 
equipment, and multiple testing teams from both JHU/APL 
and the external ground networks. The use (and verification) 
of multiple ground segments presented unique challenges to 
the RF system test team. The use of an RF GSE system that 
can emulate all key ground station functions and could 
provide clarity into RF system performance down to 
threshold levels greatly reduced the amount of time and 
effort needed to focus on troubleshooting activities. The use 
of such RF GSE for radio-level and spacecraft-level testing 
down to threshold also proved critical in evaluating RF 
system performance after the rework to the radio without 
needing the full resources required for compatibility testing.  
Successful completion of this program as described in this 
paper validated the design of the system and demonstrated 
 
 
Figure 9. Downlink FER Mode 13 with RF 
GSE and The APL SCF for Van Allen A 
  
 
Figure 8. Van Allen Probes uplink BER derived 
from CRR for Van Allen B along with radio-level 
results 
1.00E-06
 1.00E-05
 1.00E-04
 1.00E-03
 1.00E-02
 1.00E-01
 1.00E+00
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 FER
 EB/N0
 Turbo 
Coded
 +1 dB
 +2 dB
 RF GSE
 SCF
 1.00E-07
 1.00E-06
 1.00E-05
 1.00E-04
 1.00E-03
 1.00E-02
 1.00E-01
 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
 BER
 EB/N0
 Uncoded
 +1dB
 +1.5dB
 125 Spacecraft
 2k Spacecraft
 125 Radio
 2k Radio
 
 11
 that it will be able to meet all of the Van Allen Probes' 
communications goals with its intended ground segments. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was performed with the support of the Radiation 
Belt Storm Probes mission under NASA’s Living with a 
Star program. The authors would like to thank Rick 
Fitzgerald and Kim Cooper, Van Allen Probes project 
managers at JHU/APL for supporting this work. There are 
many at JHU/APL who contributed to the development and 
verification of the RF system. Significant technical 
contributions were made by: Christopher Haskins, Bob 
Wallis, Matthew Angert, Laurel Funk, Joe Sheehi, Wesley 
Millard, Norman Adams, Lloyd Ellis, Sheng Cheng, John 
Daniels, Phillip Huang, Avi Sharma, Carl Herrmann, David 
Jones, Brian Bubnash, Melanie Bell, Horace Malcom, 
Michael Pavlick, Mark Bernacik, Christopher Deboy, Bob 
Bokulic, Sharon Ling, Albert Hong, Erik Hohlfeld, Judy 
Bitman, William Dove and Tony Garcia. Significant 
contributions were also made by the USN and TDRSS 
compatibility test teams. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] Sibeck, D. G.; Mauk, B. H.; Grebowsky, J. M.; Fox, N. 
J, “The Living With a Star Radiation Belt Storm Probes 
Mission and Related Missions of Opportunity”, 
American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2006.  
 
[2] Ukhorskiy, A. Y., Mauk, B. H., Fox, N. J., Sibeck, D. 
G., Grebowsky, J. M., “Radiation belt storm probes: 
Resolving fundamental physics with practical 
consequences,” Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-
 Terrestrial Physics Vol. 73, Issues 11-12, July 2011, 
Pages 1417-1424.  
 
[3] K. Kirby, S. Bushman, M. Butler, R. Conde, K. Fretz, C. 
Herrmann, A. Hill, R. Maurer, R. Nichols, G. Ottman, 
M. Reid, G. Rogers, D. Srinivasan, J. Troll, B. Williams, 
“Radiation Belt Storm Probe Spacecraft and Impact of 
Environment on Spacecraft Design,” Proceedings of the 
2012 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky Montana, 
USA, March 3-10, 2012 
 
[4] Copeland, D.J., DeBoy, C.C., Royster, D.W., Dove, 
W.C., Srinivasan, D.K,. Bruzzi, J.R., Garcia, A., "The 
APL 18.3m station upgrade and its application to lunar 
missions," Aerospace Conference, 2010 IEEE , vol., no., 
pp.1-10, 6-13 March 2010 
 
 
 
Figure 10. FER/BER performance for all downlink modes for RF GSE, SCF, USN, and TDRSS 
 
 12
 [5] Srinivasan, D. K., Artis, D. A., Baker, R. B., Stilwell, R. 
K., Wallis, R. E., “RF Communications Subsystem for 
the Radiation Belt Storm Probes,”  Acta Astronautica, 
vol 65, issue 11-12, December 2009, Pages 1639-1649 
 
[6] Haskins, C. B., Millard, W. P., “Multi-Band  Software 
Defined Radio for Spaceborne Communications, 
Navigation, Radio Science, and Sensors,” 2010 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, March 2010. 
[7] Haskins, C. B., Millard, W. P., Adams, N. H., Srinivasan, 
D. K., Angert, M. P., “The Frontier Software-Defined 
Radio: Mission-Enabling, Multi-Band, Low-Power 
Performance,” 61st  International Astronautical Congress, 
IAC-10.B2.5.11, October 2011 
[8] Crowne, M.J.,  Haskins, C. B., Wallis, R. E.,  Royster, 
D.W, “Demonstrating TRL-6 on the JHU/APL Frontier 
Radio for the Radiation Belt Storm Probe mission,” 2011 
IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2011.   
[9] Lockwood, M. K., Kinnison, J., Fox, N., Conde, R., 
Driesman, A., “Solar Probe Plus Mission Definition,” 
63rd  International Astronautical Congress, IAC- 
12.A3.5.2, October 2012. 
 
 [10] Bitman, J., “An In-Depth Look at the Radio Frequency  
 Ground Support Equipment for the Radiation Belt Storm  
 Probes Mission,“ IEEE Autotestcon, 2011, September  
 2011 
[11] Adams, N.H., Bitman, J., Copeland, D. J.,  Srinivasan, D. 
K.,  Garcia. A., “RF Interference at Ground Stations 
Located in Populated Areas,” 2013 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, March 2013.  
 
BIOGRAPHY 
Matthew J. Crowne is a member of the 
Senior Professional Staff of the RF 
Engineering group in JHU/APL’s 
Space Department. He received his B.S. 
from Johns Hopkins University in 2000 
and his M.S. from the same university 
in 2009, both in electrical engineering. 
Matthew joined JHU/APL in 2007 
where he has been working on the 
development of radios for spaceflight communications 
systems. Prior to joining JHU/APL, he worked for 
Integrated Defense Systems Inc., where he developed solid 
state power amplifiers for electronic warfare and 
communication systems. Matthew was the integration and 
test lead for the Van Allen Probes RF communication 
system and is currently working on the Solar Probe Plus 
mission. 
 
 
Dipak K. Srinivasan is the supervisor of 
the RF Systems Engineering Section in 
the JHU/APL Space Department. He 
received his B.S. and M.Eng. in electrical 
engineering in 1999 and 2000 in 
electrical engineering from Cornell 
University, and an M.S. in applied 
physics from The Johns Hopkins 
University in 2003. Dipak joined the APL Space 
Department in 2000, where he has served as the lead RF 
Integration and Test Engineer for the CONTOUR and 
MESSENGER spacecraft and lead mission system 
verification engineer for the New Horizons project. He is 
currently the Lead RF Telecommunications Systems 
Engineer for the MESSENGER and Van Allen Probes 
missions and chairs technical sessions at the annual 
International Astronautical Congress.  
 
Darryl W. Royster is a member of the 
Senior Professional Staff in the RF 
Engineering Group at JHU/APL.  He 
led compatibility testing for the Van 
Allen Probes, STEREO, and 
MESSENGER missions.  Previously, 
he was the System Engineer for the 
Satellite Communications Facility at 
JHU/ APL and the lead RF Integration 
and Test Engineer for the STEREO 
spacecraft.  Prior to joining the 
JHI/APL Space Department in 2001, Mr. Royster designed 
cellular and land mobile radio products for Ericsson, GE, 
and Motorola.  He received his B.S. and M.S. in electrical 
engineering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University in 1982 and 1984, respectively. 
Gregory L. Weaver joined the Senior 
Professional Staff of JHU/APL in 2003 
and works within the RF Engineering 
Group of the Space Department.  He is 
a technologist with extensive 
background in the technical and 
business aspects of the frequency 
control industry and has held positions 
as a senior design engineer, technical 
manager and marketing strategist over 
a 25 year career history, including vice president positions 
with Bliley Technologies Inc. and the former Piezo Crystal 
Company. He received his M.S. in Technology Management 
from the University of Pennsylvania in 1993 and his B.S. in 
Physics from Dickinson College in 1982.  He is a licensed 
professional engineer in the state of Pennsylvania, member 
of the IEEE and the UFFC Society.  He has contributed to 
the technical proceedings of the IEEE International 
Frequency Control Symposium, Precise Time and Time 
Interval Systems and Application Meeting and the European 
Frequency and Time Forum.  
 
 
 13
 Daniel Matlin is an Associate 
Professional Staff at JHU/APL and a 
member of the RF engineering group 
in the Space department.  He went 
through a dual Bachelors/Masters 
program at Johns Hopkins University 
graduating with his Bachelor of 
Science in Electrical Engineering in 
2008 and his Masters of Science in Engineering from the 
Electrical Engineering department in 2009.  As a student, 
he specialized in RF systems design.  Mr. Matlin started at 
the JHU/APL in February of 2010 and in his short time with 
the lab has been privileged to work on various tasks 
supporting the RBSP program, including supporting a 
successful launch and early operations.  Mr. Matlin assisted 
in the qualification testing for the flight DSP slices as well 
as the integrated flight transceivers.  He also carried out 
electrical testing and flight qualification of the newly 
designed Hypertronics stacking connectors as well as 
components and cables used for the RF subsystem. 
 
Nelli Mosavi is an EMC and RF 
Engineer in the JHU/APL Space 
Department, RF Systems Engineering 
section. She received a B.S. degree in 
Electrical Engineering from Oakland 
University Michigan in 2004 and an 
M.S. in Electrical Engineering from 
The Johns Hopkins University in 2010. She is currently 
working toward her Ph.D. at the University of Maryland, 
Baltimore County. She joined APL in 2009 and has since 
been working on RF and EME issues on the Van Allen 
Probes mission. Nelli previously worked for SENTEL 
Corporation, General Motors, DENSO International, and 
Molex Automotive. 
 
