Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation in a Satellite 
Communication Network 
Thomas V. Huynh and David C. Gillen 
Lockheed Martin Management & Data Systems 
3200 Zanker Rd. 
San Jose, CA 95 124 
t.huynh@lmco. com 
408-473-5623 
Abstract - Common multimedia applications such as 
interacting computing, bulk transfers (e.g., http sessions), 
video conferencing, and video on demand all require large 
bandwidth and resources for high-quality transmission. 
Since satellite communications networks offer wide earth 
coverage, high-bandwidth, and star topologies suited for 
such broadcast/multicast applications, extension of 
terrestrial networks to include satellite communication links 
becomes attractive. Asynchronous transfer mode ( A m ,  a 
technology that has promised to revolutionize satellite 
communications, enables efficient transmission of 
multimedia traffic with different quality-of-service (QoS) 
requirements. Demand-Assignment Multiple-Access 
(DAMA) protocol, a channel access method, is important in 
system capacity and QoS provisioning. Our work deals 
with ATM satellite communications networks employing 
DAMA, whose algorithm must be efficient and robust. Its 
efficiency ensures a fast response to a connection's demand 
for bandwidth. Its robustness ensures satisfaction of the 
connection's required QoS and its integrity under 
unpredictable traffic burstiness. 
Computational practicality dictates that only heuristic 
DAMA algorithms be implemented in an ATM satellite 
communications system. But these heuristic algorithms need 
be validated and benchmarked before they are fielded. In 
this work, we employ the orthogonal array experiment (or 
the Taguchi method) to allocate bandwidth in a satellite 
communications network. We also validate and benchmark 
the Taguchi assignments with the results obtained by 
mathematical optimization. This benchmarking process 
allows us to quantitatively assess the performance of our 
approach and is recommended to be employed when 
developing heuristic algorithms. The close agreement 
between the results produced by the orthogonal array 
experiment method and the conventional integer 
programming solution methods underscores the feasibility of 
the orthogonal array experiment approach. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. "IRODUCTION 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  COMPARISON OF RECWLTS 
DAMA ASSIG"T PROBLEM AS 4 NONLINEAR MIXED 
INTEGER PROGRAM 
SOLUTION TO THE LINEARIZED M  ASSIGNMENT 
SOLUTION BY ORTHOGONAL W Y  EXPERIMENTS 
PROBLEM 
6. CONCLUSION 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Common multimedia applications such as interacting 
,computing, bulk transfers (e.g., h#p sessions), video 
conferencing, and video on demand all require large 
bandwidths and resources for high-quality transmission. 
Since satellite communications networks offer wide earth 
coverage, high-bandwidth, and star topologies suited for 
such broadcastlmulticast applications, extension of 
terrestrial networks to include satellite communication links 
becomes attractive. Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), a 
technology that has promised to revolutionize satellite 
communications, enables efficient transmission of 
multimedia traffic with different quality-of-service (QoS) 
requirements [2]. Bandwidth allocation on demand must 
dynamically maintain a reasonable balance between link 
utilization and QoS parameters like CLR (cell loss), CTD 
(cell delay), and CDV uitter) [l]. Demand-Assignment 
Multiple-Access (DAMA) protocol, a channel access 
method, is important in system capacity and QoS 
provisioning. Our work deals with ATM satellite 
communications networks employing DAMA, whose 
algorithm must be efficient and robust. Its efficiency 
ensures a fast response to a connection's demand for 
bandwidth. Its robustness ensures satisfaction of the 
connection's required QoS and its integrity under 
unpredictable traffic burstiness. 
Computational practicality dictates that only heuristic 
DAMA algorithms be implemented in an ATM satellite 
communications system. In order to accurately assess their 
3-1221 
performance, these heuristic algorithms should be validated 
and benchmarked before the system is deployed. There are 
several ways to validate and benchmark such algorithms - 
simulation or comparison against an optimization approach. 
Since Simulation is often expensive, optimization appears to 
be a preferred option. For any such a system to be deployed 
with a heuristic DAMA algorithm, we propose that an 
optimal solution be generated to validate and benchmark it. 
But optimization approaches present two challenging 
problems: (1) mathematical problem formulation and (2) 
solution approaches to the resulting mathematical 
optimization problem. 
The problem of bandwidth allocation on demand involves 
maximizing satisfaction of requests for bandwidth (i.e., RF 
channels and TDMA timeslots) from connections while 
meeting certain transmission and capacity constraints, 
maintaining fairness, and minimizing cell delay variation. 
In this paper we formulate the allocation of bandwidth on 
demand in an ATM satellite communications system as a 
nonlinear mixed integer assignment problem and elucidate 
the fine points of formulating such a problem. We then 
solve the nonlinear mixed integer assignment problem using 
the orthogonal array experiment approach, also kncim as the 
Taguchi method used in quality control [6, 71. To validate 
the Taguchi results with optimization, we first linearize the 
nonlinear mixed integer assignment problem and then solve 
the resulting linear mixed integer assignment problem using 
the commercial software tools known as AMPL and CPLEX 
[SI. The use of the linear integer programming solution 
tools, AMPL and CPLEX, requires linearization of the 
nonlinear problem. 
The use of specially constructed tables known as orthogonal 
ar rays  for designing robust products and processes was 
originally developed by G. Taguchi in Japan in the 1950s 
and 1960s. References 6 to 8 contain a detailed description 
of the Taguchi method. Our work here extends the 
exploratory work reported in [5] ,  a novel application of 
orthogonal array experiments to assignment problems. Its 
extension is elaborated later in this paper. 
The scope of this paper is to elucidate the maihematical 
formulalion of the DAMA assignment problem as a 
nonlinear mixed integer program (NLMIP) and to 
emphasize the mechanics of applying the Taguchi method to 
solve the DAMA assignment problem. We therefore 
contine our discussion of the Taguchi method to the DAMA 
assignment problem at hand, without delving into all the 
statistical background and details of the Taguchi method as 
it applies to quality control. 
Our goals in this paper are: 
Discuss the mathematical formulation of the DAMA 
assignment problem. 
0 Explain and illustrate our exploratory work in extending 
the orthogonal array experiment alpproach to solving the 
DAMA assignment problem. 
Compare the results obtained with our approach to 
those generated by optimization. 
Emphasize the necessity and value of validating and 
benchmarking of DAMA assignment algorithms with 
optimization. 
e 
0 
The resit of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 
we define the problem of bandwidth assignment, i.e., the 
DAMA assignment problem, and formulate it as an NLMIP. 
We linearize the nonlinear DAMA problem in Section 3 in 
order to' solve the resulting linearized problem with Ah4PL 
and CPIXX. In Section 4 we solve the DAMA assignment 
problem using the orthogonal array experiment method. 
Section 5 compares the results obtained with the orthogonal 
array experiments and to those generated by AMPL and 
CPLEX. Section 6 contains some concluding remarks. 
2. D A W  ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM AS A 
NONLINEAR MIXED INTEGER PROGRAMMING 
PROBLEM 
As shown in Fig. 1, a generic satellite communications 
network consists of subscriber terminals (STs), a network 
controller (NC), and satellites. The network controller, the 
central control for the network, manages the uplink 
bandwidth allocation to all STs. Since all STs share a 
common pool of bandwidth, the NC must be responsible for 
allocating bandwidth to the STs, and hence the DAMA 
assignment algorithm must therefore reside at the NC. Any 
other components of a DApvlA algorithm may reside at the 
STs. In this paper we address only the DAMA assignment 
problem. 
Each ATM service category has a certain priority level. A 
request for bandwidth specifies the m j i u m  and maximum 
numbers of slots needed for each priority level. The 
assignment algorithm is invoked when there are requests for 
bandwidth fiom the STs. Of course, the local conditions at 
each ST precipitate such requests. For example, a request 
for additional bandwidth is made when an ST needs to 
establish a new ATM connection. 
Likewise, a request for a reduction in bandwidth is made 
when connections are torn down. Also, when transmit queue 
lengths and instantaneous arrival rates change, requests for 
bandwidth updates are sent to the IVC. The assignment 
algorithm allocates available bandwidth (channels and time 
slots) to satisfy the requests fiom the: STs, collected at the 
beginning of each assignment cycle. In other words, the 
assignment algorithm responds to a collection of requests at 
a time. It allocates available bandwidth to this collection of 
requests, while satisfying certain transmission and capacity 
constraints. These constraints are described below. 
3-1222 
GBNCC 
I S T  3 
Fig. 1. A Generic Satellite Communications Network' 
In addition to maximizing the satisfaction of each request, 
the assignment algorithm must also minimize the cell delay 
variation (CDV) and maintain fairness among the STs. In 
our view, faimess among the STs may be achieved by 
" k i n g  the differences in the percentage satisfaction 
levels of each ST. CDV is minimized by equally 
distributing the assigned time slots across a frame. 
Let I denote the set of subscribers terminals (ST), J the set 
traffic (or service) priority levels, K the set of channels 
(frequencies), and L the set of time slots (or just slots) in a 
channel. Except where noted, i, j ,  k, and I hereinafter 
represent elements of the sets I, J, K, and L, respectively. 
VARZABLES 
Let the "sandwich" variables, lbj and ubj denote the lower 
bound and upper bound, respectively, on the percentage 
satisfaction level of each request with priority j .  The 
percentage satisfaction level is the ratio of the total number 
of slots allocated above the minimum number of requested 
slots to the difference between the maximum and minimum 
numbers of requested slots. It is expressed mathematically 
in (7). 
PARAMETERS 
We now introduce the so-called availability, capacity, and 
sizing parameters -- au, cb and min, and max,, respectively. 
The binary availability parameter, aH, specifies the unused 
or open time slots in all channels and is defmed according to 
1, if time slot 1 in channel k is available 
0, otherwise akl = 
The capacity parameter, ck, is the number of available slots 
in channel k. The sizing parameters, min, and max,, denote 
the minimum and maximum numbers of slots requested by 
ST i at priorityj. Also, let ch,, denote the maximum 
number of channels that can be assigned to an ST. 
CONSTRAINTS 
An ST can transmit only on one frequency (channel) during 
a time slot; that is, 
We now introduce the so-called packing, sizing, channel, x lk ]  I 1 Vi ,  I .  (1) 
and spacing variables -- x , ~ ,  z,, Ylk, and , respectively. k 
The binary (0,l) packing vdable, xIu, represents the 
assignment of slots and channels to an ST and are defined by only one ST cm be assigned to an czwdable time slot; that 
is, 
1, if ST i is assigned slot I in channel k c xlkl 5 akl  v k , l .  (2) 
0, otherwise I 
Since the number of slots per channel assigned to an ST 
cannot exceed the number of slots available in the channel, 
we have 
{ X l k l  = 
The integer sizing variable, z,, specifies the number of slots 
assigned to satisfy requests from ST i for traffic with priority 
j .  The binary channel variable, yjk, represents the number of 
channels assigned to ST i and is defined by (3) 
1, if ST i is assigned any slots in channel k 
This constraint couples the packing Xik] and channel 
Y i k  variables. 
The binary spacing variable will12 is defined by 
Also, since the number of channels assigned to an ST cannot 
exceed ch-, we have 
1 ,  if ST i uses both slots ZI andZ2, but no slots in between 
0, otherwise c v i k  5 ch,, vi. (4) 
k 
= 
The total number of slots packed into the channels assigned 
to an ST must be equal to the number of slots needed to 
satisfy requests with all priorities; that is 
' Visio, developed by Visio Corporation, and EXTEND, 
developed by Imagine That, were used to create this network 
cartoon. 
3-1223 
This constraint couples the packing xjk]  and sizing zv 
variable:;. 
The size of each assignment must be within the range of 
requested time slots; that is, 
Within ia priority level, the percentage satisfaction levels 
among all STs should be as close to equal as possible. To 
achieve this, we impose 
and we " i z e  the difference between the bounds, 
explicitly shown in the objective function below. 
Finally, the definition of the spacing variables willlz above 
suggest this nonlinear constraint 
Clearly, if ST i is not assigned slot I j ,  then the first term in 
the product in (8) becomes zero. If ST i is not assigned slot 
I, then the second term in the product becomes zero. If ST i 
is assigned any slots between II and 12, then the third term 
becomes zero. 
OBIECTIVE FUNCTION 
We now introduce the nonlinear objective function 
+ i l , c ( u b j  - lb j ) .  
i 
The first component within .the absolute: value, 
will12(12 - I l ) ,  represents the distance (i.e., the number of 
slots) between the slots I j  and I, assigned to ST i. The 
second component is the optimal distance between any two 
assigned slots if Di slots are assigned to ST i , where Di is 
the average of the minimum and maximum number of slots 
requested by ST i; that is 
I Vi. 
2 
D, = 
As defined, D, ensures that extreme distances are not 
chosen. We must mention that, unless the objective function 
need not be linearized, the selection of D, may require 
further investigation. For instance, one may choose 
D, = I : x , k l  , but such a selection increases the degree of 
nonlinearly of the objective function and linearization will 
drastically increase the dimension of the optimization 
problem. Minimizing the negative of the sum of the zv 
variables is equivalent to maximizing ihe supported demand. 
Minimizing the sum of the difference of ub, and lb, in effect 
forces the satisfaction level for each ST (as defined in the 
constraint (7)) to be a close to equal as, possible. 
k,1 
Finally, the weights a. , ax, and ;1, allows an adjustment of 
the contribution of each of the three components to the 
objective function. Their values are chosen such that 
ao+ax-b4 = I .  
The complete nonlinear mixed integer program is thus: 
Miniminme (9) subject to the constraints (1) - (8). 
We now linearize the NLMIP problem and solve the 
resulting linear MIP problem using AMPL and CPLEX. 
3. SOLUTION TO THE LINEARIZED AMA 
ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM 
The objective function in (9) is nonlinear because it contains 
the nonlinear term w ~ ~ , ~ ~  defined in (8). Therefore, we need 
to linearize the objective function in order to employ the 
commercial optimization tool AMPL and CPLEX [SI. We 
introduce the variable 
1, if ST i uses slot 1 in any channel 
0, otht:rwise = F xikl = { 
Note that the constraint in (1) renders vi! a binary variable. 
Using a standard technique [9, 101 for linearizing the 
product of two binary variables while taking into account the 
definition of wil,+, and its feasibility, we obtain from (8) 
and 
3-1224 
Appendix A contains the derivation of (10) and (11). The 
nonlinearly of (10) necessitates the introduction of another 
binary variable, uilr , defined as uill' = vilvil, and the 
following two constraints 
vi] +vi/'  2 2u,, Vi, l  < I' (12) 
vil + vile - 1 5 uillo Vi,l < I' (13) 
The constraint in (10) now becomes 
where M is some sufficiently large integer. 
To remove the absolute value in the objective function (9) 
we add two sets of non-negative variables, piil12 and qill12 ,
and the following constraint set 
If the difference inside the absolute value in (9) is a positive 
number, then piil12 takes that number while qill12 is zero. If 
the difference inside the absolute value is a negative 
number, then qiili2 takes that number while piil12 is zero. 
We remove the last term fiom (15), which involves the 
priority levels, because its inclusion requires a large 
orthogonal array that is not available to us at the moment. 
The objective function (15) then becomes 
The linear h4lP problem is thus: Minimize (16) while 
satisfying the constraints (1)- (7), (1 1)-(14). 
4. SOLUTION BY ORTHOGONAL ARRAY 
EXPERIMENTS 
The approach discussed in this section is based on and 
extended fiom [SI, which explores the applicability of the 
orthogonal array experiments (or the Taguchi method) to 
solve assignment problems. 
We need the following information in order to formulate a 
DAMA assignment problem: the size of a network, the 
transmission and capacity constraints, the bandwidth 
demand imposed on it, and the state of the network at the 
time of assignment. The cardinality of the sets I, K, and L 
determines the size of the network. The maximum number 
of channels used by an ST and the ST transmission 
restriction are the transmission and capacity constraints. 
The number of available channels and slots defines the state 
of the network. The minimum and maximum numbers of 
slots requested by the STs constitute the bandwidth demand. 
For illustration and comparison, we choose 11 = 3, IKI = 4, 
ILI = 10, and chaw= 2. Since a maximum bandwidth 
allocation is considered more important than optimal 
spacing of assignments, the objective function in (16) will 
be evaluated with lo = 0.1 and Ax = 0.9. The traffic 
demand will be randomized; the detail of the randomization 
is discussed in Section 5. 
THE ORTHOGONAL RRAY EXPERLME~T 
R A. Fisher first introduced factorial design of experiments 
in the 1920s. For a f i l l  factorial design the number of 
possible conditions or experiments is Lm , where m is the 
number of factors and L is the number of levels for each 
factor. Taguchi's partial factorial design requires only a 
smaller number of unique factorAeve1 combinations 
captured in a table called an orthogonal array. As shown 
later by the orthogonal array used in this work, all 
combinations of levels occur an equal number of times in 
every pair of columns of an orthogonal array. This 
combinatorial property ensures the orthogonality property 
[6]; all columns of the array are thus orthogonal to each 
other. 
Definition of Factors and Levels 
A key step in designing orthogonal array experiments is 
defining the factors and their levels [6]. There is no 
systematic way to define factors and levels for problems 
treated in this paper. Care should be exercised to choose 
factors and levels appropriately so as to take advantage of 
the established orthogonal arrays and so as to minimize the 
dimensions of the arrays (that is, the number of columns) 
151. 
Unlike the problem treated in [5 ] ,  the problem at hand 
indicates two tiers of assignment: STs to channels and STs 
to time slots in the assigned channels. Since each channel 
has 10 time slots and there are 4 channels, the total number 
of time slots is 40. Since each time slot (also a factor) can 
be assigned to only one ST, each time slot has three levels: 1 
for ST1,2 for ST 2, and 3 for ST 3. 
A SPECIFIC DAMA ASSIGNUENT PROBLEM The Orthogonal Array Experimental Design 
3-1225 
At the outset, for the problem at hand, an experiment is 
neither a computer simulation nor a laboratory experiment 
with hardware; rather, it is the computation of the objective 
function associated with a trial allocation of the time slots 
(and hence channels) to the STs. 
The full factorial experiment for the problem at hand would 
require 340 or 1.2~10'~experiments. It would be 
impractical to run such an exorbitant number of 
experiments. The use of orthogonal arrays reduces the 
number of experiments drastically. 
Taguchi and Wu [7] have constructed a number of 
orthogonal arrays, which can be conveniently used for 
experiment design. As pointed out in [ 5 ] ,  the nature of an 
assignment problem of interest dictatw the selection of the 
factors and their levels and orthogonal arrays. For the 
problem considered here, we employ the orthogonal array 
L,,(340) in Table 1 for the 40 factors (i.e., time slots) with 
three levels (again corresponding to the three STs). The 40 
columns of the array correspond to thc: 40 slots. The values 
that go into all the columns correspond to the number of 
STs, namely, 1, 2 and 3. There are thus at most 81 
experiments or conditions or trials to carry out. 
Table 1. The Orthogonal Army L,,(340) 
Table 2. 
i 15 -33.9 42 
5 16 -33.9 43 
The Responses of 81 Trials from a Monte Carlo 
Run 
-33.7 69 -34.9 
-35.4 70 -34.6 
’ 9 I -33.5 I 36 1-34.8 I 63 1-33.6 I 
1 26 1 -33.9 1 33 I -34.9 
‘ 27 I -34.3 I 54 I -34.5 
j 10 I -33.9 I 37 I -33.9 I 64 I -33.7 
I 11 1-34.1 I 38 I -34 I 65 1-345 
80 I -33.7 
81 I -34.4 
12 I -34 I 39 I -33.7 I 66 I -34.4 
j 13 I -33.8 I 40 I -34.3 I 67 I -34 
14 I -34.3 I 41 I -34.4 I 68 I -345 I 
Experimental Procedure 
A computer program was written in C and run on a PC to 
read the orthogonal arrays in Table 1 and the input data such 
as the size and state of the network, the traffic demand, and 
the operational constraint parameters. The values of the 
objective function, calculated for each row or trial, are 
called the responses in the Taguchi parlance. These 
responses, tabulated in Table 2, are then analyzed by the 
computer program. 
Data Analysis 
As in [5] ,  the data analysis performed here consists of the 
so-called standard analysis outlined by Taguchi [6] and the 
extension of it to handle optimization problems with 
constraints. The extension is necessary, because the 
standard approach does not consider constraints. The 
purpose of the data analysis is to study the main effects of 
each of the factors (slots) in order to identify the optimal 
condition [6].  The main effects indicate the general trend of 
the influence of the factors; that is the effect of a factor on 
the objective function when it goes from one level to 
another. The analysis of the main effects involves the 
calculation of the averages for the levels of all factors. We 
describe the data analysis next. 
Let u(r, c) denote the level of the cth column (slot or factor) 
in the rth row (trial, experiment, or condition), <(.)the 
response (i.e., the objective function) of the rth row. Each 
column corresponds to a particular channel and a particular 
slot, i.e., c is a function of k and I. In this example, since 
four channels each have 10 slots, 
c(k, I) = 10(k - 1) +I, k = 1 ,..., 4, I = 1 ,..., 10 . Then the average 
performance (i.e., the objective function) of the cth factor 
(slot) at the ath level, denoted by ( f c a ) ,  is calculated 
according to 
In the expression above, qca ,  the number of rows or trials 
or experiments in which the cth slot is assigned to the ath 
ST, is given by 
where the value of N ,  , the number of experiments or rows 
in the orthogonal array, is 81. Also, . 
1, if a(r, c) = a 
0, otherwise 
6(a(r, +a)= 
Note that 
Since the quality characteristic* for the problem at hand is 
“the smaller the better” performance (the overall objective 
function), the levels of the factors are identified according to 
the minimum average response. In this work, we implement 
the standard Taguchi data analysis differently; instead of 
using ( f c i  ) = min (fca ) to assign the cth column (i.e., some 
channel k and some slot I )  to the ith ST, we form an ordered 
set which contains the average responses (fca) ranked 
from the smallest to the largest value and make assignments 
from the set. Table 3 contains a typical ordered set of the 
responses from a Monte Carlo run. 
9 ca = N , independent of c. 
a E I  
acl  
~n the quality control parlance 
3-1227 
Table 3.. A Typical Ordered Set of the Responses from a 
Monte Carlo Run 
Since c is a known function of the channel-slot pair (51) , 
and, again, for the problem at hand, 
c(k, I) = 1 O( k - 1) + I, k = 1 ,..., 4, I = l,.. . ,lo , can now 
transform an assignment of ST i to a channel-slot pair (kJ) 
to the usual assignment variablex, . In the absence of 
constraints, these two ways of implementing the standard 
Taguchi analysis are equivalent, in tht: sense that they yield 
an identical final allocation. Appendix B contains the proof 
of this assertion. Our implementation enhances the chance 
of satistying the requested minimum time slot constraint as 
long as feasible solutions exist. 
we 
Incorporation of Constraints 
The constraints are handled in a specific manner. First of 
all, the rninimum number of slots requested by the STs must 
be satisfied (the minimum part of coinstraint (6)). Starting 
with the smallest value of the ordered set, denoted by Q, , 
we map its elements to assignments x , ~  that satis@ fmt the 
constraint (2) and then the constraint (4), until C x,kl = - I for all ic I .  Clearly, the elements of Q, 
that are successfully mapped to the total of the minimum 
numbers, of requested slots need not be consecutive. Let 
@‘=Q,-Q,,,, where@,, is the set of all the average 
responses that correspond to the al1oc:ation of the minimum 
numbers of slots requested by the STs. If no such 
Q, , exists, then the Taguchi approach provides no feasible 
solution to the DAMA assignment problem. 
k,l 
The set Q,’ remains an ordered set. Again, starting with the 
smallest value of the ordered set Q, ’ . we map the elements 
of CO’ to assignments x , ~  that satisfy the constraints (2) and 
(4), respectively, until C x,w 5 lzlix I for all ic I (the 
maximum part of constraint (6)). The final DAMA 
assignment is thus obtained, for which the objective function 
is then calculated. 
k,] 
5 .  COMPARISON OF IQSULTS 
We conduct a Monte Carlo analysis to compare the 
performance of the orthogonal array e:xperiment approach to 
that of the optimization method. It involves repeating the 
orthogonal experiments and running the optinktation code 
1000 times, and each time the state of the network and the 
bandwidth demand are randomized as follows. 
The minimum number of slots requested by each ST is 
uniformly distributed between one and five. 
The maximum number of slots requested by each ST is 
ten for all runs. 
0 The number of unavailable slots per channel is 
2-1 238 
Table 4. A Comparison of DAMA Assignments by Orthogonal Array Experiments and Optimization 
RUn 
3 
Solution Objective 0P-q 
Dama Assignment Results 
Methad 1 FunctionValue lD"rl 
-21.5 
-17.5 
-16.7 
uniformly distributed between one and six. 
The location of these unavailable slots in each channel 
is also uniformly distributed between one and ten. 
0 
For the purposes of illustration, we show the results of only 
three Monte Carlo runs in Table 4. Since assignment 
problems of this kind are known to have multiple optimal 
solutions, we need to compare only the values of the 
objective function obtained from the orthogonal array 
experiments and the mathematical optimization. In addition 
to the values of the objective function, Table 4 contains also 
the DAMA assignments and the extent of departure from 
optimality. The slots in Table 4 marked with x are 
unavailable at the time of assignment, while those with 0 
remain unassigned. The slots marked with 1, 2, and 3 are 
assigned to ST 1, 2, 3, respectively. As shown, Run 1 
corresponds to no departure (best case) from optimality, Run 
2 13% departure (average case), and Run 3 41% (the worst 
case). 
The Monte Carlo analysis indicates that our approach yields 
near-optimal assignments. The values of the objective 
3-1229 
function obtained with our approach are, on average, 87% of 
the values produced by the optimization method. In other 
words, our approach achieves, on average, a 13% departure 
from optimality. While Run 3 in Table 4 is intended to 
convey the least optimal result of all the runs, its probability 
of occurrence is only 0.1% (Fig. 2). That is not surprising, 
because more than 80% of optimality is achieved at more 
than 90% of the time. Moreover, the standard deviation of 
the relative percentage difference of the value of the 
objective: functions is rather small (6.8). Furthermore, an 
independent performance metric, defined [ 121 by 
where pidenotes the ratio of the Taguchi allocation of the 
slots to the optimal number of slots for ST i, indicates that 
the Taguchi allocation is, on average, 96% of the optimal 
allocation 
180 
160 
100 
90 * 
80 E 
20 1 i 
0 
Fig. 2 Histogram and Relative Cumulative Frequencies 
of Degree of Optimality Achieved 
Based on the Monte Carlo results, the way the constraints 
are hand]-ed thus appear to be effective; the orthogonal array 
experiment method appears to be an appropriate solution 
technique for multi-dimensional assignment problems of this 
kind. Additionally, the short runtime of the orthogonal array 
experiment method makes it suitable for real-time bandwidth 
allocation in a satellite communications network. 
6. CONCLUSION 
As in [5], our exploratory work here establishes the 
applicability of the orthogonal array experiment (or the 
Taguchi method) to allocate bandwidth in a satellite 
commurications network and to this class of assignment 
problems. An advantage offered by our approach is that it 
does not call for linearization of the nonlinear integer 
programming problems. The orthogonal array experiment 
approaclh allows us to solve a nonlinear integer- 
programming problem directly, by carrying out the smallest 
possible number of experiments and determining the 
solution from the responses of the experiments. To preserve 
the orthogonality, the constraints are riot incorporated in an 
experiment. Their satisfaction is examined after the result 
(allocation) is obtained. The close agreement between the 
results produced by the orthogonal array experiment method 
and the conventional integer programming solution methods 
for the ]problem at hand underscores the feasibility of this 
approach. In addition, it is very efficient; its runtime is 
extremelly short as compared to that of AMPL and CPLEX. 
While we believe that the orthogonal array experiment 
approach may be implemented far real-time DAMA 
assignment, further research is still needed to find the best 
approach to applying the orthogonal array experiment to this 
type of multi-dimensional assignment problems. For 
example, our constraint handling technique may need 
refinement when, in particular, the experiments produce 
equal responses. Also, as mentioned before in the 
mathematical formulation of the assignment problem, the 
selection of 0, needs further investigation. 
Finally, we also validated and benchmarked the Taguchi 
assignments with the results obtained by the mathematical 
optimization using AMPL and CPLEX. We recommend this 
process (i.e., optimization) be employed as a validation and 
benchmarking tool when developing real-time heuristic 
DAMA algorithms. The benefits of such benchmarking 
process are: (i) ad hoc assessment of the performance of a 
heuristic, algorithm is avoided and, hence, confidence in the 
algorithm is increased; and (ii) a quantitative conclusion can 
be made about the sufficiency of the performance of a 
heuristic: algorithm. The latter benefit aids in determining 
when further development or improvement of an algorithm 
is no longer necessary. 
REFERENCES 
[l] S .  K. Biswas and Rauf Izmailov, ‘Besign of a Fair 
Bandwidth Allocation Policy for VIBR TrafEc in ATM 
Networks, ” IEEEACM Trans. Networking, Vol. 8, NO. 2, 
212-223, April 2000. 
3-1230 
[2] D. McDysan and D. Spohn, ATM Theory and 
Applications, McGraw-Hill, 1999. 
[3] A. Bendell, J. Disney, and W. A. Pridmore, Editors, 
Taguchi Methods, Applications in World Indusw, IFS 
Publications/Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
[4] T. W. Pao, M. S. Phadke, and C. S. Sherrerd, 
“Computer Response Time Optimization Using Orthogonal 
Array Experiments,” Taguchi Methods, Applications in 
World Industry, IFS Publications/Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
[5] T. V. Huynh, “Optimal File Allocation in a Distributed 
Computer Network by Orthogonal Array Experiments,” 
1997 IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference Proceedings, 
Vol. 4, 105-114, February 1-8, 1997. 
[6] R Roy, A Primer on the Taguchi Method, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1990. 
[7] G. Taguchi, “Off-line and On-line Quality Control 
Systems,’ Intemational Confwence on Quality Control, 
Tokyo, Japan, 1978. 
[SI R. Fourer et al., AMFL: A Modeling Language for 
Mathematical Programming, Duxbury Press, 1993. 
[9] W. W. Chu, “Optimal File Allocation in a Multiple 
Computer System, ” IEEE Trans. On Computers, Oct. 1969. 
[lo] T. V. Huynh and J. J. Kohfeld, “Optimal Functional 
Allocation in a Tactical BWC3I System,” 1994 Symposium 
on Command and Control Research and Decision Aids, 
Monterey, CA, June 21-23, 1994 
[ 1 11 M. Minoux, Mathematical Programming: Theory and 
Algorithms, Wiley, 1986. 
[12] R Jain, The Art of Computer Systems Performance 
Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1991. 
APPENDIXA 
In this Appendix we derive (10) and (1 1) from (8) in the 
main text. With the introduction of the variable vi] defined 
in the main text, (8) becomes 
If the term [Q(l-vi1)) were absent from (Al), the 
standard technique [9, 101 for linearizing the product of two 
binary variables would yield 
vi/, + vi/, - 1 I willl, Vi, Il < 1, 
To account for its presence we modify (A2) and (A3) as 
follows: 
1, -1 
v. + vi,, - 1+ Vi] I wi/ll* 
1’1 [ I=1,+1 ] 
where M is some sufficiently large integer. 
Vi,ll < I 2  (A4) 
Vi,ll < 1, (A5) 
To justify the modifications, consider the following 
example, which is unrelated to the cases studied here. 
I ( 1  ( 2  ( 3  ( 4  15 ( 6  ( 7  1s ( 9  110 ( 1 1  ( 1 2  
vi/ 10 10 ( 1  10 ( 0  11 10 l o  11 10 ( 0  ( 1  
With the two non-consecutive slots assigned to ST i namely, 
1, = 3 and l2 = 9, (A4) becomes l+122wi3, +--1 , 
which implies wi3, 10. Also, (A5) becomes 
1+1-(1+1) 5 Wi3, , which implies 0 I wi39 . 
Consequently, wi39 = 0 ,  which is the correct result. 
1 
M 
The constraints (A4) and (A5) thus seem to linearize of (8) 
in the main text. However, one subtle problem still exists. 
Consider the case in which I, = 2 and I, = 4 .  Clearly (A4) 
becomes 0 + 0 2 2wiz4 + -. 1, which can’t be satisfied for 
any value of wj24. To rectify this unfeasibility, we modify 
(A4) as follows: 
1 
M 
The constraints (A6) and (A5) are, respectively, the 
con?raint (10) and ( 1 1) in the main text. 
3-1231 
APPENDIX B 
To satisfy the "the smaller the better" quality characteristics 
the usual implementation of the Taguchi analysis of the 
responses uses ( f c l  ) = min (fc, ) , for all factors c (i.e., 
some channel k and some slot I), to determine a complete 
assignment of STs to channels and slots. In our 
implementation, we form an ordered set, which contains the 
average responses (fc, ) ranked from the smallest to the 
largest value, and assignments are made as we traverse the 
set in the direction of increasing (f,, ) . We now prove the 
claim that, in the absence of constraints, the assignments of 
STs to channels and slots resulting from our implementation 
are identical to those generated by the usual Taguchi 
implementation. 
,€I 
The transformation from K x L to the set of columnsc , 
defined by c(k,I)+LI(k-l)+I,k=l,  ..., IKI ,I=l ,  ... ¶ I L l ,  
maps ( j r c a )  to a function qakl which takes the value of 
(fca ) for a E I . We now form an ordered set 
ranked fiom the smallest value to the largest value: 
of 
where a,,k,,and I m i n @ Z k ,  takevaluesin I , K , a n d  
L ,respectively,and m =1,2,3,...,111~1KIxIL,l. 
In 111111 
Now, consider channel k, and slot I, . As we traverse @ 
in the direction of increasing values of 4: it , , we obtain 
the following subset, corresponding to the ( k , ,  I, )- 
combination, 
"8 m m  
in which the superscripts have been reordered. The 
minimum element in this example is @A,kolo , which implies 
that slot I, in channel k, is assigned to ST a, . 
The inverse of the (k,l) H c -transformation above then 
maps @ k,l, to 
Dr. Tona Huynli is a Technical 
Consultant with Advanced Network 
Solution Group, Lockheed Martin 
Management & Data Systems, San 
Jose, CA. During his tenure at 
Lockheed Martin, he has engaged in 
research in computer network 
perfomance, computer timing 
control, bandwidth allocation, .... I 
heuristic algorithms, nonlinear estimation, perturbation 
theory, diflerential equations, and optimization. He has 
also developed and led development of simulations of 
satellite surveillance networks, and battle 
management/command, control, and communications 
(BMC3) systems. Dr. Huynh is al:so a lecturer in the 
Mathematics and Computer Science department at San Jose 
State University. He obtained simultaneously a BS in 
Chemical Engineering and a BA in Applied Mathematics 
@om UC' Berkeley and an MS and a PhD in Physicsji-om 
UCLA. 
David Gillen'is a System Engineer 
with Advanced Network Solution 
Group, Lockheed Martin 
Management & Data Systems, San 
Jose, CA4. During his tenure at 
Lockheed Martin, he has engaged in 
research in bandwidth allocation, 
IP and ATM network performance 
analysis, optimization, heuristic 
algorithm development, and computer system fault detection 
and isolation. Prior to joining Lockheed Martin, he worked 
at the National Security Agency as an operations research 
analyst. He obtained a BA in Mathematics f iom 
Southwestern University and an A B  in Mathematical 
Sciences ji-om Clemson UniversiQ. 
According to the usual Taguchi implementation, 
(f,,,, ) .= 2 (fc,, ) implies that slot I, in channel k, are 
assigned to ST a, where ( f c O , ) c  F . The same 
assignment is thus obtained. This completes the prclof. 
3-1232 
