Description of the StarLight Mission and Spacecraft Conceptl 
William D. Deininger, Mike A. Weiss, Doug. J. Wiemer, and Charlie N. Hoffman 
Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp. 
P. 0. Box 1062 
Boulder CO 80306-1062 
and 
G. Curt Cleven, Keyur C. Patel, Roger P. Linfield, and Leslie L. Livesay 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena CA 91109 
Abstract-StarLight, conceived as the third NASA New 
Millennium Program space technology mission (ST3) and 
now part of the Planet Finder Program within the NASA 
Origins Theme, is focused on validation of key 
technologies for future separated spacecraft 
interferometers, such as Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) 
and the Micro-Arcsecond X-ray Imaging Mission 
(MAXIM). The main technologies to be demonstrated by 
StarLight are precision formation flying and separated 
spacecraft interferometry. This mission uses two 
spacecraft, launched together into an Earth-trailing 
heliocentric orbit on a Delta 2925, to validate these 
technologies. Launch is planned for September 2005. After 
on-orbit checkout, the spacecraft separate and are 
maintained within a range of 40 m to 1000 m. The 
formation flying sensors and control capabilities are 
validated over a 3 month period followed by Combiner- 
mode and separated spacecraft interferometry operations. 
This paper describes the mission concept, the instrument 
complement, and the two spacecraft in more detail. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
7. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
LAUNCH AND MISSION DESIGN 
FLIGHT SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
TECHNOLOGY PAYLOADS 
SPACECRAFT BUS SUBSYSTEMS 
STARLIGHT NEAR-TERM PLANS 
SUMMARY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
light coming from the remote planet itself. The planet 
detection goals of TPF require a telescope arrangement 
some 50 to 100 m long though a capability to expand the 
array to 100’s of meters in size would greatly enhance 
mission capabilities. TPI is the follow-on to TPF and will 
create images of the planet’s surface features. TPI might 
require a telescope array spanning thousands of kilometers, 
surely requiring a separated spacecraft approach. Each 
would need nanometer resolution optical path control. 
Both TPF and TPI rely on a capability to image the exo- 
planets directly, a difficult activity due to the bright light 
emitted from the parent star. Researchers have proposed 
and refined a nulling interferometric method of selectively 
removing the bright StarLight before detection, by 
superimposing the on-axis light from two telescopes 
(apertures) so that the stellar wavefronts interfere 
destructively enabling detection of the weaker off-axis 
light from exo-planets[2-51. 
The Micro-Arcsecond X-ray Imaging Mission (MAXIM). 
MAXIM and its precursor, called MAXIM Pathfinder, 
would require 2 or more spacecraft or clusters of 
spacecraft separated by tens to thousands of kilometers. 
These missions will use interferometry at X-ray 
wavelengths to achieve extremely high angular resolution 
for astrophysical studies. They would need submillimeter 
position control in some directions. 
The Planet Finder Program (PFP) StarLight Project, 
previously called ST3, is focused on validating separated 
spacecraft interferometer methods in space using two free- 
flying spacecraft as the two apertures[5-9]. StarLight will 
launch in September 2005 into an Earth-trailing 
Human interest in finding extrasolar planets is very strong, heliocentric orbit. The technologies of formation flying 
particularly Earth-like planets. Several missions are and separated spacecraft interferometry (SSI) will be 
proposed to search for extrasolar, E h - l i k e  planets demonstrated. Precision formation flying [ 101 iS required 
including Terrestrial Planet Finder ( n F )  [I] and to maintain proper alignments and spacings between the 
Terrestrial Planet Imager (TPI). TPF is planned for launch two spacecraft to enable use of the inkrferometer 
in 2012 and will for the fist time isolate and analyze the instrument payload. StarLight will validate an ability to 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 Q 2001 IEEE. 
1 - 1  87 
control two independent spacecraft so that their relative 
velocity is less than 42. micronsls while maintaining 
separation distances of up to 1000 m to a precision of 10 
cm. Once this capability is established, the interferometer 
metrology system will be used to tighten relative velocity 
control to less than 7 micronsls for spacecraft separations 
of 40 to 600 m. StarLight will then measure fringe 
amplitudes within the interferometer as an SSI technology 
demonstration. 
. 
Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp. was selected by JPL 
as the prime contractor for StarLight in November 1999. 
JPL is responsible for the formation flying sensors and 
interferometer instruments. Ball provides the two 
spacecraft (called the Combiner and Collector), system 
integration and test, and supports operations over the 
twelve-month mission duration. This paper summarizes the 
current mission concept and describes the technology 
payloads and two spacecraft in detail. A companion paper 
at this conference discusses the issue of glint fkom the 
Collector spacecraft on the Combiner spacecraft.[ 1 I] 
The Delta 2925 3-m (IO-ft.) fairing is baselined for the 
StarLig,ht mission. The mission will use the standard 
3712C Delta payload attach fitting (PAF) interface. The 
cluster configuration is being designed to comply with 
center-of-gravity and thermal launch constraints for the 
Delta IIL 
After 5ormation acquisition, the spacecraft will begin the 
three month-long formation flying check-out and 
experiment period. Formation flying capability will be 
validated over a separation range of 30 to 1000 m. This is 
followed by the three-month Combiner-mode 
interferometry check-out and observation period in which 
only tbe Combiner instrument is used. The Collector stays 
in formation with the Combiner. The baseline technology 
demonstration mission is completed by executing a six- 
month :separated spacecraft-mode interferometer check-out 
and observation period (relative spacecraft ranges from 40 
to 600 im). The maximum Earth-spacecraft distance will be 
reached at the end of the mission and is expected to be 
-0.06 AU. Communications with Earth is through 34 m 
DSN using the Combiner high gain X-band system. 
2. LAUNCH AND MSSION DESIGN 
3. FLIGHT SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The StarLight Combiner and Collector spacecraft are 
stacked on a Delta 2925 and launched. The spacecraft are 
designed and stacked to allow bus and formation flying 
sensor checkout in a cluster mode. This helps to ensure a 
safe formation acquisition immediately after separation. 
The Delta II third-stage solid motor directly injects the two 
spacecraft into an Earth-trailing heliocentric orbit, see Fig. 
1, and then separates from the two-spacecraft cluster. 
90 
The two-spacecraft StarLight concept is shown stacked in 
the launch fairing in Fig. 2 while the two spacecraft are 
shown in their deployed configurations in Fig. 3. The 
Combiner spacecraft carries the major interferometry 
instrumentation while the Collector spacecraft houses a 
siderostat to steer star light to the Combiner. The mission 
drivers included formation flying accuracies of 10 cm over 
separation distances of up to 1000 m, packaging of the two 
spacecraft onto a single launcher with adequate mass 
margin:;, and a low onboard jitter environment to enable 
the interferometer to lock-on and track fiinges. 
Figure 1. StarLight Earth trailing trajectory vvith 
respect to Earth for a 01 September 2005 launch. 
Sta 413 
270 
Delta II 3m-3 Stage Fairing 
Combiner 
-Collector 
Dimensions in inches 
Figure 2. StarLight Launch Stack in the Delta 2925, 
Ten Foot Fairing. 
, / c m  
1-188 
Star Trackers (2) 
HGA & Cvnbal , 
slm Sensors (3) 
AFF Aft Facmg 
A n m m  Plate - Fonvard AFT plate 
UHF L S-Band 
Antemas (2 each 
2 sun Sensors 
LIHF L S-Band 
Antennas (2 each) 
‘ kployed Shade 
8 Thrusters on each 
1 Sun %mor on each 
a) Combiner Spacecraft 
sun Sensors (3) Collector @hcs & Bench 
AFFfnward antmaplate  
UHF & S-Band 
SepSrahon H a r d w e  (4) 
Star Trackers (2) 
Antermss(2 each) 
Antennas (2 each) 
‘ Thruster M d e s  (2) 
8 “ s t e m  on each 
1 Sun Sensor on each 
AFT Suppm S r m c ~ e  
h x e d  sun Shade’ 
b) Collector Spacecraft 
Figure 3. Combiner and Collector Spacecraft Flying in 
Formation. 
The main performance characteristics of the two spacecraft 
include a total mature launch mass of approximately 765 
Kg, an attitude control capability of 0.67 arcmin, relative 
velocity control in formation flying mode of 42 microds, 
and jitter characteristics above 10 Hz of better than 0.05 
arcsec. The general spacecraft mass budget is shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. StarLight Flight System Mass Budget. 
Component and subsystem commonality are maximized 
between the two spacecraft buses to simplify integration 
and test and ensure low cost. Both spacecraft have 
identical guidance, navigation and control (GNC), 
avionics, and spacecraft control computers. The structure, 
power and cold gas propulsion systems are virtually 
identical, with the Combiner having a larger solar array 
area and two propellant tanks instead of one. The Collector 
spacecraft has a fixed sun shade with an outer diameter 
equal to the inner diameter of the Delta II ten foot fairing 
dynamic envelop. Since the Combiner solar array occupies 
the Delta 11 ten foot fairing diameter, the Combiner 
spacecraft uses a deployable sunshade. The sun-shades are 
sized to keep the formation flying sensors and 
interferometer instrument optics in shadow, reduce glint 
between the two spacecraft, and match their mass/area 
ratios to minimize effects of solar radiation pressure. 
General Description and Functional Architecture 
The StarLight constellation consists of two three-axis 
stabilized spacecraft buses with integrated interferometer 
and autonomous formation flying (AFF) sensor instrument 
suites. Each StarLight spacecraft consists of separate, 
functionally distinct subsystems-structure; mechanisms; 
electric power and distribution subsystem (EPDS); 
telecommunications (TT&C); command and data handling 
(C&DH), GNC; software, thermal control system (TCS); 
and propulsion-along with the formation flying and 
interferometer instruments suite. 
Figure 4 presents the overall StarLight Combiner 
spacecraft functional block diagram. The Collector 
spacecraft is identical except for the following differences: 
one propellant tank, 2.1 m2 of solar array area, no 4 GB 
memory card, inclusion of the structural interface to the 
launcher PAF, and the Collector payload instruments. 
The architecture for both the Combiner and Collector 
spacecraft is based on Ball’s ASPEN avionics suite. 
ASPEN is a modular, VME-based system that uses circuit 
cards in a central electronics unit for all spacecraft control 
functions. Hardware interfaces are standardized (RS-422), 
which simplifies mission-specific modification. The 
largely single-string StarLight configuration provides 
critical redundancies. Hardware design is also modular, 
enabling parallel manufacturing and test flows. 
Interferometer Instrument Accommodation. 
Figure 5 shows the two spacecraft-constellation in 
operation and the 25.6-degree half-angle shadowing 
provided by the sunshades. Each spacecraft is designed to 
fully accommodate its StarLight instrument suite. 
Collector spacecraft total (we4 I 283.9 
Total flight system stack mass I 764.8 
1-189 
Figure 4. StarLight Coimbiner Spacecraft General Block Diagram. 
Composite top decks on both spacecraft provide the 
support needed for interferometer instruments (see Fig. 3). 
These composite top decks also provide the required 
dimensional stability and stifhess, along with completely 
unobstructed fields-of-view (FOV). The AFF antennas on 
both spacecraft are located on ground plane plates at the 
edge of the solar panels to maximize horizontal and 
vertical separation distances without any deployments and 
to minimize multipath interference. The single-piece, 
structural, ground plates also enable precise thermal 
control of the formation flying components. 
The deployable sunshade on the Combiner provides 
complete blockage of the sun over a *25.6" angle (see Fig. 
5) for the interferometer instrument and has an outer 
diameter of 338 cm. It is made from RF-transparent, non- 
reflecting materials to minimize multipath effects. It also 
cants down fiom the mounting plane to further reduce 
multipath effects and provide cleaner FOVs. 
1-190 
The fixed Collector sunshade provides complete blockage 
of the sun over a lt25.6" angle (see Fig. 5) and has an outer 
diameter of 274 cm. It is also made from RF-transparent, 
non-reflecting materials to minimize multipath effects. It 
has a knife edge and cants down from the mounting plane 
to reduce multipath effects and provide cleaner FOV. The 
knife edge minimizes edge glint towards the Combiner 
spacecraft, see Ref. 10. The cant angle is steeper to ensure 
reflected light from the remaining portion of the launch 
adapter ring 'does not reach the Combiner spacecraft. 
Finally, it is oversized to enable the mass/area ratios of the 
two spacecraft to be similar. 
Figure 5. Two StarLight spacecraft flying in formation 
and conducting separated spacecraft interferometry. 
The 25.6 degree shadowing provided by the sunshades is 
shown along with the instrument's and star tracker's 
fields-of-view. 
The use of composites enables tailoring of the 
interferometer mounting environment to minimize 
vibrational and thermally induced distortions. The easily 
accessible external mounting interfaces for the optical 
instruments on both StarLight spacecraft and AFF 
antennas enable rapid and simple alignments during I&T. 
4. mCHNOLOGY PAYLOADS 
The technology payloads consist of the interferometer 
instruments and formation flying package (FFP). 
Interferometer 
The interferometer instrument is described in detail 
elsewhere[5-81 and summarized here. The optical layout is 
shown in Fig. 6. The Combiner spacecraft includes a 
fixed-baseline, stand-alone interferometer. Here, a pair of 
outboard siderostats feed into an afocal gregorian 
compressor with a fieldstop at the internal focus. The 
incoming beams are then compressed and fed through 
delay lines, one fixed and one moveable, to the Combiner. 
An outer annular portion of each beam is stripped off for 
guiding, and the central portion of one interfering output 
beam used for fringe tracking. The central portion of the 
other beam is dispersed in a prism and integrated 
coherently on a CCD fringe spectrometer. 
The moveable delay line can be fed directly with StarLight 
or be fed by a beam from the Collector spacecraft to 
accomplish SSI. The fixed delay line in the right arm 
provides a 14-m delay to compensate for the extra path 
length in the dogleg path of the Collector instrument. 
When the Combiner instrument is used in its stand-alone 
capacity as an interferometer, the variable delay line is set 
equal to the fixed delay line and StarLight from the same 
star is acquired using both the right- and left-hand 
siderostats. In the 3-month Combiner-only-interferometry 
phase, the AFF system must keep the Collector beyond a 
minimum range from the Combiner for safety reasons. The 
Collector's thruster firings will establish and maintain 
adequate range, and its reaction wheels will constrain it to 
attitudes suitable to avoid glint problems. 
I-B = 120 m-=
ST3 Maximum 
Baseline 
CO nf ig ura ti0 n 
Figure 6. Interferometer Layout 
In order for the Combiner/Collector interferometer system 
to work properly, it must have the proper on-orbit 
geometry. During SSI, the Collector spacecraft lies on the 
surface of a paraboloid, whose focal length is equal to half 
the 14 m length of the fixed delay line. The Combiner 
spacecraft resides at the focus of a paraboloid (see Fig. 7). 
As long as the two spacecraft maintain this geometry (and 
the proper orientation relative to each other), the two 
optical path lengths will be equal. 
1-191 
StarLight SSI requires the two spacecraft to point at a 
common target, and to use bearing and range data to 
establish the desired parabolic position offset. Then the 
system must respond to fme adjustments of position and 
attitude to assist in white-light fringe acquisition using the 
instrument's metrology system. These operations depend 
critically on AFF sensor linearity and accuracy in 
measuring bearing and range, which are needed to estimate 
optical path difference (OPD) and to acquire fringes 
quickly. 
formation operating geometries (achieved by antenna 
placement and choice of spacecraft materials). 
Measurement errors due to the spacecraft system design 
must be minimized. 
5 .  SPACECRAFT BUS SUBSYSTEMS 
Each of the main subsystems is described in more detail 
below. 
Structure 
Along Entire Locus '%> 
Mother at Focus 
V e r t e x l  
Figure 7. Parabolic On-Orbit Geometry Enables 
Interferometry with Two Spacecraft. 
Formation Flying Package (FFP) 
The FFP enables the two spacecraft to achieve a precise 
enough relative position and orientation that the delay lines 
can allow SSI. The FFP must measure inter-spacecraft 
relative distances and angles to *1 cm and *0.3 milliradian 
(both to lo). Further, the actuators must have small enough 
control authority so that the relative velocity between the 
two spacecraft is <7 p d s  to enable coupled operations 
with the interferometer instrument during SSI. 
The AFF system will be integrated with the GNC hardware 
and software, enabling on-orbit calibration operations to 
measure the accuracies of the AFF sensor outputs. The key 
to this process will be validating that time references and 
range, range rate, and bearing data achieve their specified 
performance levels. 
The autonomous formation flying (AFF) sensor uses GPS- 
like signaling with Ka-band transceivers on the two 
spacecraft.[9] Each spacecraft transmits a carrier and 
pseudorange signal which is received by multiple antennas 
on the other spacecraft, see Fig. 8. Multiple patch antennas 
on each spacecraft allow for both -471 steradian coverage 
as well as determination of relative angle and range. 
Figure 8 also shows the operational geometry. 
To achieve required AFF sensor performance, the AFF 
antennas must have transparent lines of sight at all 
14in 
The two StarLight spacecraft use nearly identical, unibody, 
composite structures to minimize mass and closely match 
interferometer optical bench characteristics. The common 
primarj structure is a simple, rectangular-box-shaped 
unibody with top and bottom decks. The Collector 
spacecr.aft also includes a thrust tube/launch vehicle 
adapter conical section that transitions the loads from the 
square bus cross-section to the round v-band separation 
system on the Delta II upper stage launcher interface ring. 
The top deck of the Combiner spacecraft supports the 
primary interferometer instrument payload. Radiator fins 
are attached at the corners on the spacecraft to allow the 
removal of excess heat. The spacecraft bus components are 
mounted on the interior and exterior surfaces of the 
sidewalls of the unibody. 
AFF Sensor (envisioned) 
One ST-3 S/C 
(shown with 4 receive antennas) 
Figure 8. Envisioned Ka-Band AFF Sensor Package 
Layout on Spacecraft. 
1-192 
The structure is constructed of graphitekyanate-ester 
composite face sheets bonded to a honeycomb core with 
embedded metal attach fittings. The fixed, disk-shaped 
solar panels attach to the bottom deck of each spacecraft 
and are stiffened with struts as shown in Fig. 2. The solar 
panel substrates are also made of graphitekyanate-ester 
composite facesheets on honeycomb similar to the 
construction of the main structure. 
The instruments will be mounted on the spacecraft using 
kinematic mounts to prevent mounting stresses on the 
instrument optical benches. The baseline is to have a true 
three-point kinematic mount consisting of mono-ball, 
double anti-rotation link, and single anti-rotation link. 
Mechanisms 
During launch, the two spacecraft are .held together with 
four electronically-activated separation nuts. The 
separation nut uses redundant-shaped memory alloy 
triggers to open a segmented nut and release a bolt with up 
to a 2500-lb preload. M e r  release, there are four separate 
spring canisters, located adjacent to the separation nuts, 
which provide the force to separate the spacecraft. 
The sunshield on the Combiner spacecraft is a deployable 
torus structure made from fiberglass slats covered with a 
Kapton film. It is deployed after the spacecraft separate 
from each other. The sunshield is attached to the outer 
perimeter of the solar panel substrate. Prior to deployment, 
it is stowed in a small toroidal volume along the backside 
edge of the solar panel. 
Telecommunications Subsystem 
There are two telecommunications subsystems on each 
StarLight spacecraft:. an Ultra High Frequency (UHF) 
intersatellite link and an X-band satellite-ground 
subsystem. Identical UHF intersatellite link systems are 
used on both spacecraft and are sized to enable 
communications out to 200 Km in case anomalous 
behavior causes the spacecraft to drift beyond the 2-Km 
specification. The intersatellite link provides a data rate of 
500,000 bps, full-duplex, at 2000 m and communications 
capability out to 200 Km in any attitude. A detailed 
command and telemetry link analysis shows substantial 
margins for all modes of UHF operation, see Table 2. 
Both spacecraft also use Small Deep Space Transponder 
(SDST)-based X-band systems for satellite-Earth 
communications. Both spacecraft have two receive and 
two transmit patch antennas for near-Earth (early mission) 
communications and emergency mode. The Combiner 
spacecraft acts as the constellation’s primary link with 
earth through the use of an X-band high gain antenna 
(HGA) and associated switches to facilitate high data rate 
StarLight constellation earth-ground communications. The 
Combiner spacecraft RF system supports uplink rates from 
7.8125 bps to 2000 bps, along with downlink rates of up to 
39,816 bps at a range of 0.1 AU using the 34-m DSN 
ground stations. The X-band link budgets are shown in 
Table 2. 
Table 2. StarLight Telecomms Links Summary with 
Command and Data Handling (C&DH) 
The bus-based ASPEN C&DH architecture provides a 
significant level of software-based, higher order processing 
within a modular, fully integrated spacecraft control unit 
(SCU) using a RAD 750 processor. The SCU localizes all 
processing needs in a central computer with remote 
sensors and actuators. This concept differs from previous 
avionics architectures by allowing higher order 
“processing” functionality previously accomplished in 
hardware to be transferred to software applications on the 
central computer. This transfer allowed a reduction in the 
number of recurring hardware components and provides 
functional flexibility through data table configurable 
software applications. 
Each spacecraft will have an SCU which consists of a 
RAD 750-based central processor unit (CPU) module, a 
256 MB flash non-volatile RAM card, telemetry collection 
module (TCM), command and telemetry module (CTM), 
instrument interface module, as well as modules for 
general purpose I/O, battery charge control (CCM), power 
distribution (PDM), thermal management (TM), GNC and 
propulsion module, and a low-voltage power supply (PS). 
The Combiner spacecraft SCU also includes a 4 GB flash 
memory card. Throughput capacity of the RAD 750-based 
SCU is 35 M I P S .  The SCU can be reprogrammed on-orbit 
through software updates. Interface boards in the SCU 
provide control of the entire spacecraft. The SSR, used for 
interim payload data storage, is located on the Combiner 
spacecraft. 
Critical functionality, including limited core command and 
telemetry services, emergency mode power control, 
attitude determination and control, and thermal control, is 
provided independent of the main processor to ensure 
spacecraft survival modes are not compromised. 
1 - 1  91 
Software 
Parameter 
&mum impulse bit 
AFF 30 
Solar radiation press 30 
RSS 30 Value 
RSS 30 Requirement 
Filtered AFF data 30 
Marjyn 
StarLight will use Deep Space 1 (DS1) flight software as 
the baseline. This flight software was developed using the 
C programming language for its strong exception handling 
capabilities. The ASPEN hardware improvements, 
although significant, require only minimal changes to DS 1 
flight software and include: 
AFF control, 
Interferometer control capabilities, and 
Mass-memory recording capabilities. 
Combiner4o-Collector command and telemetry links, 
GNC inter-spacecraft pointing and fault protection, 
Position Velocity Error 
Error (cm) ( p d s )  
*3 h6.7 
*3 *300 
k1.4 i 2 8  
*4.5 i41.6 
*IO *IO0 
122% 140% 
*3 *30 
Fault Protection. 
The flight software protects the StarLight Combiner and 
Collector spacecraft against fault conditions. Fault 
conditions autonomously cause fault recovery steps to be 
initiated, allowing the software to gracefully recover from 
software and/or hardware anomalous conditions. 
Spacecraft fault conditions such as under-voltage 
conditions, data transients, and single event upsets (SEU) 
are all supported. GNC fault conditions, such as orbit 
propagation errors, orbit velocity errors, attitude control 
calculation errors, and wheel over-speed errors are also 
supported. 
A watchdog timer is used to protect against losing 
processor control resulting from SEUs, operator errors, and 
other anomalies. The watchdog timer is continuously 
monitoring the flight software for correct operation, and if 
a problem occurs, it will force a processor reset and bring 
the spacecraft into a known safe operational state. 
Guidance, Navigation and Control Subsystem (GNCY 
The GNC subsystem provides continuous six-degree-of- 
freedom (6-DOF) control capability during all phases of 
the StarLight mission. The architecture of both the 
Combiner and Collector spacecraft GNC are identical to 
provide flexibility and reduce costs. 
Attitude determination is accomplished using coarse sun 
sensors, star trackers, a fiber-optic rate sensor, and inputs 
fkom the AFF sensor. Each spacecraft includes two Ball 
CT-633 star trackers. One of these will be the primary 
attitude reference for all phases of the mission. The other is 
a backup. 
Primary attitude actuation is accomplished using three 
reaction wheels (a fourth wheel is onboard for redundancy) 
when the instrument is not in use. Momentum is managed 
in the background using thrusters, based on wheel speed 
limits. The wheels are off during interferometer data 
collection. Small wheels provide low jitter operation while 
providing sufficient momentum capability to compensate 
for solar pressure torques during no-thrust periods. 
A comprehensive control system analysis was performed 
to determine GNC performance for all StarLight mission 
modes. A detailed simulation of the StarLight sepafated 
spacecraft interferometry mode was created to demonstrate 
the coimpliance of the StarLight GNC system with the 
mission requirements. In addition, a translational and 
rotational control system was simulated to show the ability 
of the proposed StarLight GNC system to maneuver and 
orient the Combiner and Collector spacecraft during this 
mode, while satisfying all performance parameters. Table 
3 illustrates the translational control budget for the 
Combiner and Collector spacecraft. Solar radiation 
pressure forces are included, along with the assumed 
minimum impulse bit from the thrusters. 
Electric Power Subsystem (EPS) 
The Elall StarLight EPS concept (identical on both 
spacecraft except for solar array size) exploits ASPEN 
avionics architecture, leading to substantial weight 
savings;. The performance of the EPS on each spacecraft 
for the main operating mode is summarized in Table 4. 
Power is available for each spacecraft to operate at full 
capacity for all phases of the mission except during the 
cluster-.mode check-out period. Power available in cluster 
checkout mode is derived only from the Collector solar 
array and must power both spacecraft. 
The power control circuitry (PCC) provides autonomous 
battery charge control, undervoltage, overvoltage, 
overtemperature, overpressure, and battery imbalance fault 
protection. The PCC also controls the fault-protected 
relays lhat switch power to the essential bus (ESB), non- 
essential bus (NEB), and the power switched components. 
The NEB supplies power to the StarLight instruments. 
1-194 
Item 
Combiner Bus Power 
Value 
213.5 
AFF Power 
Combiner Instrument Electronics 
Total Combiner Spacecraft 
Available Combiner Array Power (EOL) 
30 
212 
455.5 
823.6 
I Collector Power Margir? 1 53.5 I 
Combiner Power Margin 
Collector Bus Power 
AFF Power 
The solar arrays provide continuous prime power to each 
spacecraft in all but emergency mode. The solar panels 
have a total projected area of 3.2 m2 for the Combiner 
spacecraft and 2.1 m2 for the Collector spacecraft. Solar 
array switches and power bus relays are in the relay box. 
The Collector spacecraft array is basically a circle 180 cm 
in diameter, interrupted by only the launch attach ring. The 
Combiner spacecraft array covers an annulus fkom 180 cm 
ID to 269 cm OD. They are populated with GaAs cells 
similar to the type used on Cloudsat. The direct radiating 
configuration of the arrays allows them to run cool and 
efficiently. 
368.1 
163.2 
30 
The battery is used during launch to provide power to the 
critical spacecraft components. The battery will only be 
used on-orbit if the spacecraft enters the emergency mode. 
A nickel hydrogen, 22-cell, single-pressure vessel (SPV) 
battery with a rated capacity of 15 A-hr is baselined for 
use. 
Collector Instrument Electronics 
Total Collector Spacecraft 
Available Collector Array Power (EOL) 
Thermal Control Subsystem 
85 
2 78.2 
331.7 
The TCS uses passive thermal design techniques (sun 
shades, multilayer insulation (MLI) blankets, paint and 
thermal tape, and localized radiators) coupled with limited- 
use active heaters to allow continuous operations in all 
allowed sun angles and modes of operation. The composite 
structure is also part of the TCS. Based on our GFO 
experience with composite spacecraft, we will use K1 100 
fibers in the layup of the structure to aid in moving the 
heat dissipated in the boxes to the radiator fins mounted at 
the edges of each spacecraft. There are no moving parts. 
The arrangement of internal equipment is also used to aid 
thermal control and minimize the need for supplemental 
heaters. 
Propulsion 
An initial trade was done to select the reaction control 
propulsion subsystem which resulted in the selection of a 
nitrogen cold gas propulsion system. The spacecraft cold- 
gas propulsion system consists of the propellant storage 
tank( s), pressure regulator, sixteen 7.5-mN thrusters, latch 
valves, filters and service valves along with tubing, 
bracketry and field joints. The tanks are located to 
minimize CG shifts during on-orbit operations and enable 
simple balancing within the launch fairing. The thruster 
locations and orientations are selected to minimize the 
possibility of payload equipment contamination, while 
allowing the necessary attitude and translation maneuvers 
to be conducted. The nitrogen cold gas thrusters operate at 
a nominal specific impulse of 60 s. The choice of the cold 
gas system is currently being revisited in light of potential 
long-term, cold gas leakage concerns, a longer mission life 
(1 year), a 2 year-slip in the launch date to September 
2005, and the moving of StarLight from the NASA New 
Millennium Program to the NASA Planet Finder Program. 
6. STARLIGHT NEAR-TERM PLANS 
StarLight is currently refining requirements and 
conducting architecture, instrument, and spacecraft trade 
studies. The System Requirements Review (SRR) and 
Mission Definition Review (MDR) are scheduled for April 
2001. The Program PDR is planned for early 2002 with the 
CDR expected to occur in early 2003. Launch is planned 
for September 2005. 
7. SUMMARY 
This paper has summarized the StarLight mission concept, 
instrument complement, and two spacecraft in detail. 
StarLight, conceived as the third NASA New Millennium 
Program space technology mission and now part of the 
NASA Planet Finder Program, is focused on validation of 
key technologies for future separated spacecraft 
interferometers, such as TPF and MAXIM. The main 
technologies to be demonstrated are autonomous formation 
flying and separated spacecraft interferometry. This 
mission uses two spacecraft called the Combiner and 
Collector, launched together, to validate these 
technologies. After on-orbit checkout, the spacecraft 
separate and maintain a range of 40 m to 600 m. 
Both StarLight spacecraft are stacked on a Delta 2925 and 
launched, currently planned for September 2005. The 
Delta II third-stage solid motor directly injects the two 
spacecraft into an Earth-trailing heliocentric orbit and then 
separates from the two spacecraft. The spacecraft are 
designed and stacked to allow complete bus and payload 
checkout in a cluster mode. This helps to ensure a safe 
formation acquisition immediately after separation. After 
formation acquisition, the Collector spacecraft deploys its 
sun-shade, and the three month-long formation flying 
check-out and experiment period begins. This is followed 
by the 3-month Combiner-mode interferometry check-out 
and observation period in which only the Combiner 
instrument is used. The baseline mission is completed by 
’ 
1-195 
executing a six-month separated spacecraft-mode 
interferometer check-out and observation period. 
The StarLight mission is focused on validating separated 
spacecraft interferometer methods in space using two free- 
flying spacecraft as the two apertures. Precision formation 
flying is required to maintain proper alignments and 
spacings between the two spacecraft to enable use of the 
interferometer payload. StarLight will validate an ability to 
control two independent spacecraft so that their relative 
velocity is less than 42 microns/s while maintaining 
separation distances of up to 600 m to a precision of 10 
cm. Once this capability is established, StarLight will 
measure fringe amplitudes within the interferometer as a 
SSI technology demonstration mission. 
The mission drivers included formation flying accuracy’s 
of 10 cm over separation distances of up to 600 m, 
packaging of the two spacecraft onto a single launcher 
with adequate mass margins, and a low onboard jitter 
environment to enable the interferometer to lock on and 
track fiinges. The main performance characteristics of the 
two spacecraft include a total launch mass of 
approximately 765 Kg, an attitude control capability of 
0.67 arc&, relative velocity control in formation flying 
mode of 42 microds, and jitter characteristics above 10 Hz 
of better than 0.05 arcsec. 
Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp. was selected by JPL 
as the prime contractor for StarLight in November 1999. 
JPL is responsible for the formation flying sensors and 
interferometer instruments. Ball provides the two 
spacecraft, system integration and test, and operations over 
the year-long mission duration. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work described in this paper was developed by a team 
of people at JPL and Ball Aerospace & Technologies 
Corp. as part of the NASA Origins Theme StarLight 
Project. The authors would like to thank design team for 
their efforts. 
REFERENCES 
[l] C. A. Beichman, N. J. Woolf, and C. A. Lindensmith, 
editors, “The Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) - A NASA 
Orgins Program to Search for Habitable Planets,” JPL 
Publication 99-3, May 1999. 
[2] R N. Bracewell, “Detecting Nonsolar Planets by 
Spinning m a r e d  Interferometer,” Nature, Vol. 274, 1978, 
[3] P. M. Hinz, J. R P. Angel, W. F. Hofhann, D. W. 
McCarthy, Jr, P. C McGuire, M Cheselka, J. L. Hora, and 
N. J. Woolf, “Imaging Circumstellar Environments with a 
Nulling Interferometer,” Nature, Vol. 395, 1998, pp. 25 1. 
pp. 780-781. 
[4] K. Wallace, G. Hardy, and E. Serabyn, “Deep and 
Stable Interferometric Nulling of Broadband Light with 
Implications for Observing Planets Around Nearby Stars,” 
Nature, Vol. 406, Is. 6797, pp. 700-702,2000. 
[5] R. P. Linfield and P. W. Gorham, “Science 
Capabilities of the ST3 Mission,” Dana Point Conference, 
1999. 
[6] K. Lau, M. Colavita, and M. Shao, “The New 
Millennium Separated Spacecraft Interferometer,” Dana 
Point Conference, 1999. 
[7] 0. P. Lay, G. H. Blackwood, S. Dubovitsky, P. W. 
Gorharn, and R. P. Linfeld, “Design of the ST3 Formation 
Flying Interferometer,” Dana Point Conference, 1999. 
[8] P.W. Gorham, W. M. Folkner, and G. H. Blackwood, 
“Enabling Concepts for a Dual Spacecraft Formation- 
Flying Optical Interferometer for NASA’s ST3 Mission,” 
Dana Point Conference, 1999. 
[9] W. D. Deininger, M. C. Noecker, D. J. Wiemer, J. S. 
Eterno. C. Cleven, K. C. Patel, G. H. Blackwood, and L. L. 
Livesay, “Space Technology Three: Mission Overview and 
Spacecraft Concept Description,” IAA-L- 1107, May 2000. 
[10]G. Purcell, D. Kuang, S. Lichten, S. C. Wu, and L. 
Young., “Autonomous Formation Flyer (AFF) Sensor 
Technology Development,” AAS 98-062, 1998. 
[11]M. C. Noecker, J. Fleming, and P. Gorham, 
‘‘Preliminary Stray Light Analysis for ST3,” Paper ID 278, 
200 1 IIZEE Aerospace Conference, March 200 1. 
William D. Deininger is the Ball Aerospace lead system 
engineer for the StarLight Program. He has a BS in 
physics from SUNY Cortland, an MS in physics from 
Colora(do State University, and a Doctorate in aerospace 
engineering from Politecnico di Milano, Italy. He spent 8 
years at JPL working in electric propulsion, 9 years at 
FiatAvio in Italy working on electric propulsion and 
satellite systems, and the Iast 3 years at Ball Aerospace 
working as a satellite systems engineer. 
Mike .4. Weiss is the Ball Aerospace bus technical 
manager for the StarLight Program. He has a BS in 
electrical engineering from Michigan Technical 
University. He worked in antenna design for Boeing and 
RF sysifems for Fairchild prior to joining Ball Aerospace. 
While at Ball he has served as the technical manager on 
various satellite programs. 
Doug. J.  Wiemer is the Ball Aerospace formation flying 
system lead for the StarLight Program. He has a BS in 
electrical engineering from Iowa State and a MS in 
robotics from Colorado State University. He spent 5 years 
at Sunstrand working on aircraft controls and the last 15 
years at Ball on spacecraft control systems. He is currently 
the ADlCS Group Leader at Ball Aerospace. 
1-196 
Charlie N. Hoffman is the Ball Aerospace 
structures/mechanicaI lead for the StarLight Program. He 
has a BS in Civil Engineering +om the University of 
Colorado, and has been the structuredmechanical leads 
for numerous satellite programs at Ball Aerospace. 
G. Curtis Cleven is the JPL spacecraft bus manager for 
the StarLight Project. He has a BS in physics +om San 
Diego State University. He has worked at JPL for 41 years 
and covered flight power systems design through system 
engineering. His recent work has included TOPEX; Mars 
Pathfinder, and Deep Space I .  
Keyur C. Patel is the JPLJlight system manager for the 
StarLight Project. He has BS and MS degrees in aerospace 
engineeringfrom Cal-Poly Pomona. He has worked at JPL 
for 15 years. His started out as the Voyager ADCS 
engineer, worked Mars Observer, and was Supervisor of 
avionics integration and test group. 
Roger P. Linjield is the JPL project scientist for the 
StarLight Program. He received his B.S. in astronomy 
from Michigan State University and his Ph.D in astronomy 
+om Caltech. 
Leslie L. Livesny is the JPL project manager for the 
StarLight Project. She has an BS California Polytechnic 
Univerity, San Luis Obispo in applied mathematics, and an 
MS in electrical engineering ji-om University of Southem 
Califrnia. She has been at JPL for 15 years and worked 
in telecom hardware engineering and recently moved 
project management including Mars Pathfinder Telecom 
and spacecraft manager for Deep Space 1. 
1-197 
