Formulation of Discovery-Class Mission Concepts 
Benton Clark, Cynthia Faulconer, and Terry Gamber 
Lockheed Martin Space Systems Astronautic Operations 
Denver, Colorado 80201 
Benton.c.clark@lmco.com 
POBox 179 . 
303-971-9007 
Abstract-A key feature of the NASA Discovery Programs 
is the strategy of allowing a single scientist with a “good 
idea” to form hisher own team of scientists and engineers to 
generate a concept which is credible and attractive to a 
complete body of independent peers. The Principle 
Investigator (P.I.) must accept responsibility for all aspects 
of the mission. A wide variety of mission types have been 
found to fit the Discovery mold, including flyby’s, orbiters, 
landers and even sample return missions. To edance this 
fit, it has been necessary for scientists and engineers to work 
closely in: evaluating spacecraft risks, setting data 
throughput requirements and methods of their amelioration, 
focusing on key objectives; and deriving strict instrument 
and experiment requirements from overall goals and 
engineering realities. Discovery is loaded with challenges, 
but likewise represents the most promising opportunities for 
affordable, frequent scientific advances in planetary 
exploration. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. DISCOVERY ~ ~ I S S I O N S  To DATE 
2. DISCOVERY PROCESS 
4. SYSTEM APPROACH 
5 .  DEFINITION OF SCIENCE OBJECTIVES 
6. STRAW DESIGNS AND IMPLEMENTATION OPTIONS 
7. HARD DECISIONS 
8. DESCOPE OPTIONS 
9. COST AND RISK ASSESSMENTS 
10. FINAL DECISIONS BEFORE SUBMITTAL 
11. REALITIES OF SELECTION 
12. TRANSITIONING To FLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION 
13. CONCLUSION 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The NASA Discovery program has been innovative and 
remarkably successful in obtaining very high science value 
per dollar of mission investment. At the same time, 
constraints on total mission cost and an aversion to technical 
and programmatic risks have also been hallmarks of the 
program. A central feature of this approach has been the 
shift in selecting science goals and how to craft a mission 
from those goals. In the past, the approach has been to use 
NASA-selected science committees, commonly called 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
I 
Science Definition Teams or Science Working Groups, to 
set up science objectives, then turn these over to an 
engineering team for their implementation. It is typical for a 
Discovery round of competition to result in over two to 
three dozen highly qualified proposals. This has been 
possible because numerous space-savvy P.I. ’s have been 
highly motivated by the opportunity to devise their own 
mission, from A to Z. Likewise, the other team members 
have the opportunity to interact productively with scientists 
to develop detailed designs, which can meet the scientist’s 
needs for the data to be generated, with the additional 
prospect of demonstrating to the P.I. how goals can be 
adjusted to minimize cost and risk. 
In some cases, team members have found ways to enhance 
the results that can be obtained with little additional impact 
on the mission itself. Missions of many differing objectives 
have been found to be compatible with Discovery 
constraints, including proposed missions to all the planets 
from Mercury to Jupiter, and numerous asteroid and 
cometary missions, as well as to the Earth’s moon and the 
moons of Mars. Mission modes from flyby’s to landers to 
sample return and even to airplanes and balloons have been 
proposed. Before this series of proposals, it was widely 
thought that several of these mission types were far too 
ambitious to be achievable at an intermediate cost scale, and 
could only be cast as megaclass missions. It is a tribute to 
all the partners involved - NASA, academia and industry - 
that a large number of very valuable missions have been 
implemented under this program, with many more highly 
worthy candidates still progressing through the proposal and 
selection process. 
Discovery missions that feed forward technologies or 
capabilities may then enable other flagship missions. For 
example, the Stardust and Genesis sample return missions 
are helping to pave the way for the long-sought, but more 
difficult Mars sample return missions of the future. 
2. DISCOVERY PROCESS 
The two-step Discovery selection process was carefully 
established to insure the selection of science missions that 
are well thought out, with a spacecraft design that can be 
implemented within margins. The Discovery process starts 
with the PI developing ideas for a planetary investigation 
1-15 
that will be key to adding to scientific knowledge of the 
solar system or planetary origins. The PI is in conlrol of the 
mission and has the responsibility to select a NASA Center 
or another appropriate institution to help in management and 
a competent spacecraft contractor. The first round of the 
Discovery competition emphasizes the science investigation 
more than implementation. However, cost estimates for the 
Total Mission Cost (TMC) are required to be sure that the 
mission fits within the current $300 M cost cap. Tlhe launch 
vehicle, mission operations, and Deep Space Network 
(DSN) telecommunications costs are included in this total. 
The launch vehicle must be selected from an approved list, 
with the Delta II being the largest permitted. Development 
must be streamlined, and cannot require more than 36 
months. About 20 to 30 proposals are usually submitted in 
the first step with three to five missions proceeding to the 
second step. Reviewer comments are made available in 
thorough, private briefings to each of the missions; selected 
or not selected. 
A four month Concept Study follows, and includes 
submission of a fm proposal as well as conducting an 
onsite orals review. This second step of Discovery requires 
more information on the spacecraft design and mission 
implementation in a 100 page proposal. The 25 pag,e science 
section is usually not modified in the second step. Program 
schedule and cost reserves must be sufficient to overcome 
any difficulties in development. A 20% to 25% cost reserve 
is typically considered sufficient. The final selection panel 
evaluates Technical, Management, Cost, and Opportunity 
factors (TMCO) as well as risk. Oral reviews are also 
conducted with each of the step one winners. The 
culmination of this process is the selection or one or two 
missions for proceeding to the Flight Project stage. 
3. DISCOVERY MISSIONS To DATE 
A total of eight discovery missions have been awarded 
in the last ten years. They include two missions to planets 
(Mars and Mercury), one to the:Moon, one to collect solar 
material, one to an asteroid, and three missions to comets. 
The first two missions were implemented in-house by Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and Applied Physics 
Laboratory (APL) to prove the approaches of rapid 
development and low cost. The Near Earth Asteroid 
Rendezvous, NEW [l]  was awarded to APL, who used a 
heritage spacecraft design based on a previous spacecraft 
(MSX) to rendezvous with the asteroid Eros. This mission 
is now near completion with most of the reconnaissance 
phase and a possible landing on the asteroid on February 
200 1. 
JPL was awarded the Pathfinder mission 121 to demonstrate 
new entry and landing techniques on Mars. Pathfiider 
successfully demonstrated direct entry and an airbag landing 
on Mars in 1996. The lander carried a rover technology 
experiment, Sojourner, which created a high level of public 
interest. Public outreach is a key factor in the selection of 
Discovery missions. 
The third Discovery mission, Lunar Prospector [3], was a 
low cost lunar science orbiter built by Lockheed Martin. 
The low cost spinner design was developed by P.I. Dr. Alan 
Binder over a period of several years prior to the Discovery 
competition. Ames Research Center was the NASA lead 
center. The spacecraft cost was kept low with a single 
string d.esign and no spacecraft computer. The mission 
discovered an abundance of hydrogen near the lunar poles, 
suspected by many scientists to be evidence of water ice in 
the permanently shadowed regions. 
Stardust, [4] comet and interstellar dust sample return 
mission, was the first mission selected for flight using the 
full set of Discovery competitive selection procedures. The 
P.I. is Prof. Don Brownlee of Washington University. 
Launched in February 1999, Stardust was built by Lockheed 
Martin Astronautics (LMA) teamed with JPL and uses 
common avionics and software with the Mars Surveyor 
missions. This mission features the first small Sample 
Return Capsule (SRC). The SRC, with its aerogel comet 
dust collectors, has a mass of less than 50 kg compared to 
previous 300 kg entry capsules. Stardust performed an Earth 
gravity assist in December 2000 and will encounter Comet 
Wild-2 in 2004. The Sample will be returned to Earth 
(UTTR) in 2006. 
The Genesis [5] and CONTOUR [6] missions were selected 
in the next round of Discovery. Genesis is the second 
Discovery sample return mission and is led by Prof. Don 
Bumett with a team of California Institute of Technology, 
JPL and Lockheed Martin Astronautics. The single-deck 
spacecraft is a spinner and again uses heritage hardware 
from Surveyor and Discovery. Collector plates of extremely 
high purity materials absorb solar wind, from the L1 halo 
orbit. The Genesis spacecraft has been built and 
environmentally tested, and will launch in July, 2001. 
CONTOUR is a multiple m e t  Nucleus TOUR mission to 
flyby a variety of comets. It is led by Dr. Joseph Veverka of 
Cornel1 University. The APL spacecraft inherits hardware 
from the NEAR and TIMED missions. Multiple Earth 
flybys are used to target the spacecraft to two or three 
different comets. A newly discovered comet may be added 
if the opportunity arises and funding permits. Operations 
costs are kept low by placing the spacecraft in a spin- 
stabilized hibernation mode between encounters. 
CONTOUR is slated for launch in 2002. 
The Messenger [7] and Deep Impact [SI missions were 
selected in the most recent Discovery competitive round. 
The Messenger P.I. is Dr. Sean Solomon of the Carnegie 
Institution of Washington and is teamed with APL. The 
spacecraft again uses inherited designs from NEAR and 
CONTOUR. It has a conventional biprop propulsion 
system to reach Mercury orbit. This is made possible by 
innovative trajectories using multiple gravity assists. 
Considerable development and testing was done on the solar 
arrays for survival in the hot Mercury orbit. Messenger is 
scheduled to launch in 2004. Deep Impact is led by Prof. 
Mike A’Hearn of the University of Maryland, and 
developed by a Ball Aerospace and JPL team. It will launch 
to intercept a comet in 2004. This is the third comet 
mission in the Discovery series. It features a carrier 
spacecraft and a 500 kg copper impactor that is guided to hit 
the comet nucleus. Imaging of the impact crater from the 
carrier will accomplish the science mission. 
4. SYSTEMS APPROACH 
The overall methodology for designing a self-contained 
mission within tight constraints must be a systems-driven 
process. As seen in the flow diagram below, science 
objectives are foremost in the process. but must in the end 
be tempered by the cost, schedule, risk and launch 
constraints mandated by the Discovery Program. The 
essence of the differences from previous design approaches 
for science-driven missions is that the classical approach 
selects objectives via the advisement of an independent 
science group and then endeavors to meet all objectives via 
spacecraft design and/or accommodation of pre-selected 
instruments. Under Discovery, the requirement for staying 
below ‘cost “caps” (maximum allowed cost), for obtaining 
highest value in science results for the costs expected, and 
for finding a solution which does not entail major technical, 
reliability or programmatic risk is the responsibility of the 
P.I. and hisher teammates. Give and take are part of the 
design process from the very beginning, and reassessment of 
science objectives is not only permitted but expected to be a 
touchstone of the process. 
Science team evaluations by independent, non-conflicted 
science panels include judgments not only of the absolute 
science value and timeliness of the mission, but also are 
most likely influenced by the incremental increases in 
science achieved for the scope and cost of the proposed 
mission. In other words, a key aspect of this iterative 
process by the P.I.’s is to search for the most science value 
for the least cost in the overall context of exploration of 
solar system. When conducting these iterations, the concept 
can be considered to have reached maturity with path (a) is 
that being followed. In many circumstances, it has been 
necessary to follow path (c) and adjust the objectives. 
Likewise, a total end-to-end systems engineering analysis is 
inevitably needed just to assess cost and risks within the 
accuracies set. Restriction of trade options to individual, 
isolated subsystems can result in the pitfall of unnecessary 
subsystem optimization or edification at the expense of cost 
or risk for the overall system. Programmatic risks such as 
not meeting cost caps or finn schedule limits (C/D 
development time) are just as serious as technical or 
reliability risks. Any of these can result in loss of the 
opportunity for scientific advance, whether from non- 
selection in the first place, from outright mission failure, or 
from mission cancellation by the Discovery program itself. 
5. DEFINITION OF SCIENCE OBJECTIVES 
Science objectives must conform with overall objectives of 
the NASA space science program, and its recommendations. 
However, within that broad mandate there is a large set of 
potential types of missions and the instrument suite that best 
accomplish them. Each target object, or class of objects, has 
its own prospects. It is the judgment of the guiding 
scientists, the P.I. and hisher team of co-investigators and 
collaborators, which must be constantly, folded into the set 
of potential mission implantation approaches. Their 
maturity and expertise is essential to selecting objectives, 
which can pass through the wider peer review and survive 
comparison with competing proposed missions. In addition, 
they must pass judgment on all compromises necessary to 
make the mission fit inside Discovery program constraints. 
Prioritization of science objectives has been of considerable 
value in the past, for conducting trades and for setting 
descope options and the decision plan for how they should 
be exercised, if necessary. Finally, it is of overriding 
importance that the science objectives be crisply and fully 
defined; fuzzy logic or nebulous goals do not provide the 
conceptual framework within which concrete decisions can 
be made so that the concept can proceed. 
6. STRAWMAN DESIGNS AND IMPLEMENTATION 
OPTIONS 
It is important that the P.I. choose experienced teammates. 
Engineering approaches to mission implementation, such as 
type of spacecraft and critical subsystems, can be rapidly 
evaluated at a top level for many mission types, based upon 
proven past designs. Yet, the tradespace for options can 
remain quite large even for variations on the theme of 
something as rudimentary as a flyby spacecraft (e.g., 
variations in spacecraft designs for the Stardust, CONTOUR 
and Deep Impact missions. Because of the large number of 
potentially viable proposed missions, with little advanced 
guidance on likely outcomes, rapid and efficient selection of 
a nominal baseline concept is essential if the most subtle or 
more difficult options are to receive adequate attention 
before proposal submittal. 
In many cases, new approaches or technologies must come 
into play. Examples include airbag landers (Pathfinder), 
sample return capsules (Stardust, Genesis), Discovery 9 
proposals such as Venus probes (VAMP), asteroid 
rendezvous via solar electric propulsion (New World 
Explorer and others), stimulated release of samples (Europa 
Ice Clipper, Aladdin, and (Deep Impact), planetary airplanes 
(Kitty Hawk), or r e m  of samples from the lunar farside 
(Moonraker). In such cases, the designs must be thoroughly 
investigated and justified because heritage is tenuous or not 
-- 1-17 
previously established. Technology validations are often 
best provided by other programs. For example, the risk- 
averse Discovery program has not yet selected a mission 
based on solar electric propulsion. However, the Space 
Technology mission known as DS-1 has now demonstrated 
the long-life and space qualification of the NSTARS ion 
thruster system so that it can be considered with much 
greater confidence in the future. 
Figure 3- Genesis Spacecraft, with solar arrays deployed. 
7. HARD DECISIONS 
Figure 2- Stardust Spacecraft, in launch configuration. 
The science team must push for that amount of science that 
reaches the threshold of credibility by self-examination and 
by their evaluation peers. Yet, they must be willing to make 
the hard decisions on those reductions which still do not 
cross this threshold. By being a tightly integrated team that 
is constituted from the very beginning, the engineers 
become educated in the specific science needs and desires (a 
key distinction) of the given mission, while the scientists 
become educated in the engineering and programmatic 
realities and limitations on what they are achieving. 
I Options I n  
Decisions 
v 
Cost and Risk Descope 
Options 
I 
1 Yes 
Wile and 
Submit Proposal 
Figure 1- Block Flow Diagram of the Concept Definition, Selection and Refinement Process 
1-18 
The process is both enlightening and valuable to the two 
groups. Discovery as a process shines brightly in this fusion 
of all parties who must come together to transform these 
dreams and concepts into a cold, hard reality. As a result, 
all parties must make hard decisions. Some science has to 
be left behind; some engineering has to be as complicated as 
is necessary to achieve the threshold level and quality of 
science. Trade options must be made at truly the highest 
systems level conceivable - viz., with the inclusion of 
malleable science objectives and implementation risks. 
To evaluate options for implementation, the two principal 
criteria, beyond preservation of science, have been those of 
achieving sufficiently low cost and maintaining acceptable 
levels of risk for the mission and the program itself. Cost 
and risk are all too often diametrically opposed. Wherever 
possible, clever design approaches are used to reduce cost 
with minimal effect on risk. For example, mass can be 
minimized to enable lower-cost launch vehicles, and any 
attendant increases in risk with lost-mass structure (for 
example) may be mitigated through mechanical testing of 
engineering development units (EDUs) at relatively minor 
cost impact. 
The abbreviated schedules mandated for the Discovery 
class, especially when coupled with the cost constraints, 
lead almost inevitably to the adoption of the Proto-Flight 
approach of developing flight hardware. It is incumbent on 
the development team to judiciously choose which EDUs, if 
any, should be fabricated and to identify certain higher-risk 
areas for additional testing during development. Certainly, 
if technical risk were the dominant criterion for Discovery 
missions, they would take longer and require higher budgets 
for their development. 
One valuable approach to achieving reliability is to 
maximize the heritage of the system, through use of 
previous subsystem designs or use of their components. An 
even stronger approach would be to simply rebuild the same 
spacecraft for a second mission. As laudable as this latter 
concept is, it turns out that this is not possible for most 
planetary missions. This regrettable conclusion results from 
a convolution of the circumstances that (a) the planets and 
small bodies of the solar system are so different f?om one 
another, and (b) their exploration is in different stages of 
progress as a result of the past history of exploration. 
Nonetheless, it has proven quite feasible to employ similar, 
and in many cases identical, components, for many 
subsystems. Even s o h a r e  is highly reusable on differing 
missions, minimizing both the cost of development of the 
new portions of code and the risk that that code will contain 
intrinsic failure modes (“bugs”). 
An additional method of mitigating the risks of the 
protoflight approach is via the use of simulators. It is 
LMAO standard practice in these and other streamlined 
programs to retain the well-proven approach of developing a 
complete simulator of the integrated spacecraft and its 
subsystems, including the science instruments. In the most 
critical areas, this “Spacecraft Test Laboratory” (STL) 
consists of identical hardware components, such as the 
Command and Data Handling (C&DH) system. For other 
components, it is made up of electrical, electronic and/or 
software simulators. The important aspect is that it 
’ encompasses the entire system. The STL actually leads the 
flight hardware itself in its development, and can also serve 
as the pathfinder, testbed and trouble-shooter for the fight 
software (FSW). In turn, leading the STL is a “SoftSim” 
version, whereby the key modules are emulated in software 
to provide a testing environment for early hosting of key 
portions of FSW, as well as to test out software simulator 
components of the STL. These development items have not 
only been invaluable in reducing programmatic risk, 
through early detection of problems, but have also been key 
to the smooth in-flight operability experienced by the Mars 
Global Surveyor (MGS), Stardust and the cruise phases of 
the MSP-98 spacecraft. Before commands are sent to these 
spacecraft, they are verified by runs on the STL equivalents 
to assure that they execute as planned. Through this 
disciplined approach, several problems in detailed command 
sequences have been revealed and corrected prior to being 
sent to the vehicles, avoiding costly and potentially serious 
anomalies in space. 
Most Discovery missions reach a point in their development 
where cost and/or schedule constrain their successful 
completion. Pressures mount to find solutions which might 
compromise programmatic or performance risk. Through 
top-level management attention and a willingness to make 
decisions rapidly, many mission teams have avoided such 
compromises and made the hard decisions necessary to 
move forward with the program. Descopes are difficult to 
accept. Science instrumentation is virtually never 
“finished”, yet hard delivery dates require that further 
refinements be cut off. Often, science improvements are 
envisioned or are embodied late in the program; they must 
simply be rebuffed unless their implementation can be 
configured to be a very minor (trivial) impact on the 
program itself. Such changes have been found in certain 
important cases, but not without much hard work to render 
them acceptable. 
8. DESCOPE OPTIONS 
A required constituent of any Discovery mission is a set of 
descope options related to the science objectives. From the 
instruments selected, science descopes may be implemented 
with changes in performance of some instruments, or 
outright deletion of instrumental measurements not critical 
to certain requirements. In the interest of streamlining 
mission objectives, however, the instrument complement is 
often small. Descopes are only useful for alleviating cost, 
schedule, mass, power or data problems if they can be taken 
early enough to affect these resources. Hence, descopes 
often need to be taken at the time of the Preliminary Design 
Review (PDR), rather than later. On the other hand, 
.&&&a- 1-19 
problems of these types most often arise after PDR and 
cannot so easily be identified before PDR for a well- 
developed mission concept. P.L’s and their Project 
Managers (P.M.) must be very careful at the outset not to 
propose descope options which could so compromise the 
integrity of the project, either scientifically or 
programmatically, as to jeopardize its value or its success. 
The descope options selected “today” could be exercised 
“tomorrow” with severe consequences. For these reasons, 
the descope options are among the most challenging aspects 
of a well-structured project plan. 
9. COST AND RISK ASSESSMENTS 
Once a mission and project is fully planned, it can be costed. 
For Discovery, preliminary costs must be accurate and 
therefore require significant attention. The need for well- 
founded cost estimates drives one to propose a highly 
developed design. By combining individual, detailed 
estimates (“bottoms-up costing”) of new or different 
components, with parametric estimating techniques for 
fundamental spacecraft systems and subsystems solidly- 
based on experience for previous programs, it is possible to 
obtain well developed costs. 
A cost estimate is only as good as the understanding of the 
programmatic risks of the program itself. Most IXscovery 
programs can be accomplished with high confidence, 
provided the 35 months for phase C/D are wailable. 
However, because of planetary alignments and the need for 
efficient trajectories because of limitations 011 launch 
vehicles, some missions have launch dates, which may not 
be compatible with the fully authorized lmgth of 
development. In these cases, it is necessary to evaluate 
programmatic risk against the prudence of proposing at 
some later opportunity. An additional reason for delay 
arises when a particular launch opportunity is not 
energetically optimum and results in small initial mass 
margins. To assure greatest likelihood of programmatic 
success, especially cost, it is important to have large mass 
margins available as a safety-net in the event a subsystem 
item, science instrument, propulsion performance or other 
component of mission mass causes a problem. 
System reliability risk is mitigated by selection .of space- 
qualified or, better yet, space-proven hardware and 
software. Providing redundant subsystems strengthens the 
case for reliability, especially for longer-term missions 
(typically, over one year). Costs are significantly higher for 
fully redundant systems, but in terms of mission success for 
longer missions, these expenditures may be well worth it. 
10. FINAL DECISIONS BEFORE SUsmrra 
A number of circumstances have conspired io render 
difficult the choices for mission design. The very success of 
Discovery has resulted in a large number of missions being 
selected (eight at the time of this writing). Many of the 
more obvious streamlined missions are now either fait 
accompli or in development, including a barebones lunar 
orbiter mission (Lunar Prospector) and several flyby 
missions to small bodies. Follow-on missions a of more 
ambitious nature, such as rendezvous missions to comets, or 
major asteroidal types requiring electric propulsion, will 
intrinsically be more expensive than the simpler flyby’s. 
Round four of Discovery retained the same cost caps as 
round three, without increases for inflation, for increased 
costs for the same launch vehicles, for additional oversight 
and reliability assurance demonstration, or for anticipated 
need for larger cost reserves in order to be considered 
credible. Indeed, it is possible to speculate that the 
MESSENGER mission to the planet Mercury [3], which 
was very close to the cost caps when selected in round three, 
might have been too costly for round four. These reasons 
have combined to make several candidate missions for 
round four untenable, and therefore it has been necessary to 
drop them late in the proposal preparation process outlined 
above. These decisions are always difficult for the teams 
involved, because of the hard work in developing the 
concepts in the first place and the disappointment of the 
scientists in being close, but not under the cost or feasibility 
limits. 
As another example, the Pathfinder Mars mission was in the 
Discovery class, as initially defined. Yet, its sequel, the 
Mars Athena rover mission, in order to be worthwhile 
scientifically is far outside the current Discovery box in 
terms of the cost caps and could no longer be proposed as a 
Discovery class mission. 
1 1. REAL,ITIES OF SELECTION 
Discovery is highly competitive. P.I.’s ha!ve invested 
considerable time, often to the neglect of their scientific 
career, to form and work with their team to construct a high 
quality concept and proposal. Non-selection is often a great 
disappointment for many of the participants. l?urthermore, 
the scope of Discovery is quite broad, encourag,ing all types 
of proposals. Each round has fetched between two and three 
dozen proposals, for which two winners are typically 
selected. For any given proposal, the probability of success 
is considerably less than 10%. Most winners have 
submitted more than once, and there are cases now of 
proposals which have already been submitted three times 
without selection but nevertheless are submitted a fourth 
time because no fatal flaw in the soundness of their 
approach has been identified. Scientists are often so highly 
committed to the goal of seeing their scienc:e objectives 
addressed that they persist in the face of this low-probability 
opportunity. 
On the other side of this equation is the dilemma of being 
selected. A very real danger is that some aspect of the 
mission has been overlooked, or underestimated, and that 
1-20 P 
the project will become burdened with agonizing decisions 
to avoid de-selection. Many P.I.’s for Discovery have only 
minimal experience with flight hardware development, not 
to speak of a panoply of potential problems imbedded in 
trajectory optimization, spacecraft development, or mission 
operations. Once a mission begins to be implemented, the 
P.I. will have a whole new burden added to their career, but 
with these risks. All seem to relish this possibility, but must 
live with the consequences. Making it all happen means 
that the P.I. must carefully surrounded him- or herself with a 
highly competent and strongly motivated group of 
teammates. Wise recruitment is the key. 
12. TRANSITIONING To FLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION 
Although there is the opportunity for limited phase B 
activities before final approval and confirmation, a 
Discovery proposal that has been formally selected cannot 
afford either the costs or the impacts of extensive analyses 
or testing of design options. The designs that are 
formulated during the initial proposal stage and further 
elaborated in the concept study prepared during the final 
competition among the down-selected subgroup, need to be 
highly mature so as to minimize the probability of further 
deviation. Maturity and soundness of design are paramount. 
Detailed plans of all types must be established, ffom science 
requirements definition through spacecraft implementations 
and the mission operations approach. 
13. CONCLUSIONS 
Discovery missions are a challenging milieu within which 
all elements of a project ffom science to operations must be 
fully defined and analyzed. The field is very challenging 
with infrequent reward. For example, one major aerospace 
organization has written over 55 proposals during the four 
competitive rounds of Discovery, with, as of this date, two 
flight projects as a result. The process itself requires a 
systems approach which includes the scientists, an iterative 
definition of objectives, hard decisions among 
implementation options, descope options, and realistic 
determination of costs and reserves. The program is 
demonstrably of great value to NASA because of the high 
science return at minimal cost, and-can be very rewarding to 
those who persist and are selected. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 Robert Farquhar, ‘?\TEAR So Far: Applied Physics Lab,” 
Fourth IAA Conference on Low Cost Planetary Missions, 
May 2,2000. 
[2] P. Matthew Golombek, “The Mars Pathfinder Mission,” 
Journal of Geophysical Research 102, 3953-3966, 1997. 
[3] W. C. Feldman, D. J. Lawrence, R. C. Elphic, B. L. 
Barraclough, S. Maurice, I. Genetay, and A. B. Binder, 
“Polar Hydrogen Deposits on the Moon,” Journal of 
Geophysical Research 105, 41 75-4196,2000 
[4] Bredt Martin (Martin Consulting), Joseph Vellinga and 
Rick A. Price (Lockheed Martin), “Stardust: Implementing a 
New Manage-to Budget Paradigm,” Fourth IAA Conference 
on Low Cost Planetary Missions, May 2,2000. 
Joseph M. Vellinga (Lockheed Martin Astronautics), 
“Implementation Approach for Discovery Class Missions,” 
2001 IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 10,2001 
[5] Chester Sasaki, “The NASA Discovery 5, Genesis 
Mission,” 4th IAA International Conference on Low-Cost 
Planetary Missions, IAA-L-0203, May 2-5,2000. 
[6] Edward Reynolds, et al, “The Contour Discovery 
Spacecraft: Applied Physics Lab,” Fourth IAA Conference 
on Low Cost Planetary Missions, May 2, 2000. 
[7] Sean C. Solomon, Messenger: A Discovery Mission to 
Mercury; Fourth IA4 Conference on Low Cost Planetary 
Missions, Carnegie Institute May 2,2000. 
[8] William H. Blume, Deep Impact: Mission Design 
Approach for a New Discovery Mission; Jet Propulsion 
Lab; Fourth IAA Conference on Low Cost Planetaiy 
Missions, May 2,2000. 
ACJSNO WLEDGEMENTS 
We wish to thank and acknowledge the excellent assistance 
provided to us by Tandy Bianco in preparation of the final 
manuscript. 
1-21 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
four decades of aerospace experience, encompassing 
development of flight instrumentation Vor Gemini, Skylab, 
Viking, Giotto and others), design of spacecraft missions, 
and analyses of space science results. As Director, 
Advanced Planetary Studies in Lockheed Martin Space 
Systems Astronautics Operations (LMAO), he has led 
L M O ’ s  technical development team for Discoveiy missions 
since the program’s initiation in 1992. He is currently a 
member of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute and a Co- 
Investigator on the Stardust, CONTOUR, Genesis and 
Engineer for Advanced Planetary Studies. With nearly four 
decades in aerospace, his flight experience includes major 
involvement in mission development and operations for the 
Viking missions to Mars and the Magellan radar mapping 
spacecra$ for Venus. He has led the early design phases of 
numerous advanced Mars missions, sample return .missions, 
special planetary studies, and has personally developed a 
number of highly rated Discovery mission design concepts. 
experience in various aspects of spacecraft design, 
development and operation for DOD and NASA systems. In 
addition, she has spent the last 6 years as Manager of 
Business Development and Advanced Programs for 
planetary spacecraft at Lockheed Martin Space Systems 
Astronautics Operations. In her current position, she has 
oversight for all Bid and Proposal and Independent 
Research and Development for planetary- related activities. 
1 - 2 2  
