Advanced Test Cell Diagnostics for Gas Turbine Engines1 
Michael J. Roemer Ron Howe Sqrd.Ldr. Richard Friend 
Gregory J. Kacprzynski SA-ALCLDAD Propulsion Directorate 
Michael Schoeller 308 Avionics Avenue (AFXUPRT) 1950 Fifth Street, 
Impact Technologies Kelly AFB, TX 78241 Bldg. 18, Room D129 
125 Tech Park Drive (210) 925-6271 Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433 
Rochester, NY 14623 ron.howe@kelly.af.mil (937) 255-2734 
(716)424-1990 RikFriend@aol. com 
mike.roemer@impact-tek.com 
Abstract-Improved test cell diagnostics capable of 9. REFERENCES 
detecting and classifying engine mechanical and performance 10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
faults as well as instrumentation problems is critical to 
reducing engine operating and maintenance costs while 
optimizing test cell effectiveness. Proven anomaly detection 1. INTRODUCTION 
and fault classification techniques utilizing engine _Gas path 
- Analysis (GPA) and statisticaVempirica1 models of structural 
and performance related engine areas can now be 
implemented for real-time and post-test diagnostic 
assessments. Integration and implementation of these proven 
technologies into existing USAF engine test cells presents a 
great opportunity to significantly improve existing engine test 
cell capabilities to better meet today’s challenges. 
A suite of advanced diagnostic and troubleshooting tools 
have recently been developed and implemented for gas 
turbine engine test cells as part of the Automated Jet Engine 
Test Strategy (AJETS) program. AJETS is an innovative 
&AF program for improving existing engine test cells by 
providing more efficient and advanced monitoring, 
diagnostic and troubleshooting capabilities. This paper 
describes the basic design features of the AJETS system; 
including the associated data network, sensor validation and 
anomaly detectioddiagnostic s o h a r e  that was 
implemented in both a real-time and post-test analysis 
mode. These advanced design features of AJETS are 
currently being evaluated and advanced utilizing data from 
TF39 test cell installations at Travis AFB and Dover AFB 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. DATA ACQUISITION AND NETWORKING 
3. SENSOR VALIDATION 
ASPECTS OF AJETS 
4. ENGINE VIBRATION DIAGNOSTICS 
Since 1979, several USAF engine test cell systems have been 
developed and fielded based on an original Mission Need 
Statement (h4NS) that was proposed by the USAF that 
described the need for upgrading the jet engine test capability 
at the base level. Since then, the capability and availability of 
new technologies and the need for their implementation in 
direct support of the modern war fighter has grown at an 
unprecedented rate. Based on this growth, the U.S. Air Force 
and DOD propulsion management teams have been 
confronted with several new problems requiring solutions, 
including hardware and software obsolescence, database and 
information management, and specialized equipment needs for 
newer engines. 
In addition, this rapid growth has also spawned the 
development of various engine health monitoring 
technologies that have focused on the ability to classify 
engine faults as predicted by either model-based (GPA, 
rotordynamic, etc.) or rule-based systems. Technologies 
such as neural network classifiers, fuzzy logic decision 
analysis, and expert system analysis have been implemented 
to address a number of these issues. However, engine test 
cell operation that includes automated instrumentation, 
mechanical & performance diagnostics as well as post-test 
troubleshooting has not yet been fully realized within USAF 
depot-level test cells. Therefore, a strong need still remains 
for an advanced diagnostic and monitoring system that is 
capable of statistically assessing anomalous engine behavior 
that will result in high confidence levels for isolating and 
identifjling various engine fault scenarios. 
5. ENGINE TRACKED-ORDER ANALYSIS 
6. ENGINE PERFORMANCE DIAGNOSTICS Based on these needs, the goals and technical approach for 
Engine Trending and Diagnostics (ET&D) have been 
updated and are described in the U.S. Air Force documents; 
7. BAYESIAN BELIEF NETWORK FOR ENHANCED 
TROUBLESHOOTING 
AFI 63-1201, AFMC 21-132, ACCI 21-152, and T.O. 00- 8. CONCLUSIONS 
0-78036599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
6-2915 
25-257. These goals of ET&D are primarily focused on; 
(1) reducing maintenance costs associated with Air Force 
turbine engines, (2) increasing safety of flight, (3) increasing 
aircraft utilization rates, and (4) providing the propulsion 
and maintenance teams with quality information. Improved 
testing, troubleshooting, and data collection in the test cell is 
consistent with a cradle to grave maintenance concept for 
engines. 
To achieve these overall system benefits, the AJETS 
program was structured in two phases. In Phase I the 
AJETS hardware and software is integrated into the test cell 
to demonstrate the concepts of high speed, networked 
measurement capability, collect costibenefit data and 
demonstrate the diagnostic and troubleshooting software off- 
line. In Phase II the hardware and software are further 
developed, particularly the advanced diagnostic capabilities, 
to achieve overall system goals. Phase II is projected to 
integrate and install the AJETS software in many other Air 
Force test cells and cabs. The project has recently 
completed Phase I. 
2. DATA ACQUISITION AND NETWORKING 
ASPECTS OF AJETS 
A critical step towards enhancing existing test cell 
diagnostic capabilities involves improving data acquisition, 
networking, and insuring that data is of the highest integrity 
at all times. The signal conditioning system utilized within 
the AJETS system is shown in Figure 1, which is mounted in 
the engine bay of the engine test cell. This photo shows 
pressure signal calibration being performed by Precision 
Measurement Electronics Lab (PMEL) personnel. Figure 2 
shows the TF-39 installed at the Travis AFB. The control 
room houses the ADAS 5000TM workstation, Master Control 
Unit (MCU) for the throttle, the vibration analysis system 
(PBS-4100R)TM, and the unintermptable power supply. 
Additional information on the capabilities and application of 
USCA’s and the ADAS 5000TM is provided in Reference [l]. 
Figure 1 - Engine Bay Signal Conditioning 
Figure 2 - TF-39 Test Cell at Travis AFB 
A significant enhancement to the data acquisition system is 
related to obtaining vibration data. The existing vibration 
analysis system installed in the TF39 test cells uses the 
Mechanical Technology, Inc. PBS-4100TM vibration 
acquisition system. The PBS-4100TM features both 
balancing and vibration analysis algorithms. The vibration 
analysis system includes tracking filters whose center 
frequencies are at the fan and core speeds and displays both 
broad-band and tracked vibration outputs. As part of the 
current effort, routines have been developed to relate 
frequency and amplitude of vibration to specific rotating 
components on the engine. The use of these tracked-order 
and waterfall vibration plots, and their associated diagnostic 
features, has been shown to yield great benefits in terms of 
isolating rotordynamic faults (Roemer and Atkinson, 1997). 
6-2916 
Specifics regarding the engine vibration analysis and 
diagnostics are provided later in the paper. 
Another key to reducing overall test cell operating and 
support costs is to implement a network of shared resources. 
The vision is to have each test cell fully networked to a 
central engine test cell host site. Each test cell will utilize a 
local network that will be linked to the test cell main 
computer, data acquisition system, and vibration analyzer. 
The test cell local network will link to a host computer that 
must gain or provide access to other systems. The systems 
will include: 1) engine trending sites for correlation of flight 
data with test cell data on an individual Engine Serial 
Number (ESN) basis; 2) using commands for access to 
engine metrics and test cell metrics; and 3) propulsion 
engineering access to engine performance data, engine 
modeling, and simulation capabilities. 
The purpose of this paper is to provide discussion on the 
sensor validation algorithms implemented for performance 
and vibration data collection, the real-time and post-test 
diagnostic capabilities for performance and vibration fault 
detection, as well as troubleshooting capabilities designated 
for the AJETS program. 
3. SENSOR VALIDATION 
Sensor malfunctions have traditionally played a major role 
in contributing to test cell problems and ineffectiveness. 
Hence, a significant goal of this program was to develop the 
capability to isolate and, in some cases, diagnose specific 
sensor failure modes. The approach that was developed 
utilized generic signal processing techniques such as digital 
filtering, cross correlation and coherence coupled with 
intelligent classifiers including a fuzzy logic rulebase and 
back propagation neural networks to diagnose 
malfunctioning sensors. 
The generic, signal-processing based, sensor validation 
schema employs unique approaches in an effort to detect 
incipient anomalies in the signals being acquired. Signal 
correlation and coherence algorithms are used to detect 
faults such as spikes, intermittent signal loss, cross talk, and 
clipping. Digital filtering is used to aid in the detection of 
spikes, noise, intermittent loss of the signal, and other 
anomalies, which manifest themselves by a rapid change in 
signal magnitude. The high degree of overlap between the 
two methods in detecting the most common signal faults 
provides a higher degree of confidence when an anomaly is 
flagged and will therefore minimize false alarms. 
The digital filter approach utilizes a fwst-order, high-pass 
Butterworth filter with a 3 Hz minimum cut-off fiequency. 
Healthy engine signals will contain very little high 
fiequency components based on the physical response of the 
engine. Figure 3 shows how the standard deviation of a 
filtered signal is used to detect an anomalous signal. The 
top left window in Figure 3 shows a noisy, time-domain 
thermocouple signal and the top right shows a ‘hormal” 
thermocouple signal. The filtered version of both these 
signals are shown below with the variance of the filtered 
signal used as the feature which will flag a signal anomaly. 
Although this technique is a simple one, its effectiveness 
and generic implementation capability makes it a practical 
choice for test cell instrumentation validation. 
Figure 3 - Digital Filter Detecting Thermocouple Noise 
The cross-correlation and coherence approaches attempt to 
find statistically significant shifts in the quantitative 
relationships between signals in both the time and fiequency 
domains. These techniques are implemented utilizing a 
moving time-domain window that continuously computes 
the correlation and coherence functions of each of the 
measured signal pairs. Therefore, any signal whose 
previous (t-n) window of time-domain data becomes 
consistently less correlated with the current (t) windows 
can be identified as a sensor related issue and not engine 
performance driven. The cross-correlation and coherence 
functions are as calculated as follows: 
Though only two signals are represented in Equations 1 and 
2, the correlation and coherence functions can be applied to 
any number of signals at once. The data samples utilized 
within these generic techniques are typically small and 
dependent upon the sampling fiequency and the amount of 
time over which data is gathered. This requires the use of 
the ‘Small Sampling Theory’. In this application, statistics 
obtained fiom the coherence and correlation functions are 
first determined and then the level of significance is 
6-2917 
determined by utilizing a t-test on the statistic of interest. In 
this case, the mean value of the samples are used to 
determine if a significant shift in the statistic has occurred. 
CT -+- GI f, v v  
X, the mean value of the first sample 
X, the mean value of the second sample 
N, the size of the first sample 
N, the size of the second sample 
s, the standarddeviation of the first sample 
s, the standarddeviation of the second sample 
v = NI + N, - 2 the degrees of freedom 
Figure 4 shows some selected results from two of the signal 
processing techniques that were used to detect sensor faults 
on data taken from the TF39 test cell at Travis AFB. Note 
that multiple sensor spikes, signal noise and a signal “drop 
out” are all present within this data set. As illustrated in 
Figure 4, the cross-correlation approach, shown on the 
bottom left, identifies an anomaly when its value drops to 
zero. The digital filter approach triggers an anomaly when 
the signal’s standard deviation is high (coherence results are 
not shown). Both approaches indicate that the anomaly 
occurred and then returned to normal. 
lF39 Englne Parameter Data 
............................... 
.............................. 
............................ 
............ i ............... 
Figure 4 - Results of Cross Correlation and Digital Filtering 
Finally, Figure 5 illustrates how the raw test cell data is 
processed in parallel by both the generic filtering and 
correlation techniques (top) and trained AI techniques 
(bottom). The individual algorithm outputs are then fused 
together in a post processing stage to provide a more 
confident fault isolation. A Dempster-Shafer fusion process 
was implemented which accounts for uncertainty in the 
conditional probabilities derived by the various techniques 
being processed. The Dempster-Shafer methodology hinges 
on the construction of a statistical set (a), called the frame 
of discernment, in which a set of size 2’ will contain every 
possible hypothesis. Every hypothesis (A) has a belief 
(lower bound) denoted by a mass probability (m(A)) and a 
plausibility (upper bound) denoted by l-m(A7. Beliefs and 
Plausibility’s are combined in the following manner. 
6-2918 
( 5 )  
__ 
AnB=O 
A full example of the Dempster-Shafer fusion technique is 
provided in Reference 4 (Kacprzynski and Roemer, 2000). 
Although not discussed in detail herein, the fuzzy logic 
routine for sensor validation utilizes membership bands 
around a speed dependent engine signature curve that relates 
gas path parameters to the core engine speed. When a signal 
drops out of its respective membership band while other 
related gas path signals remain within, an anomalous 
condition is detected based on the degree of “off-nominal’’ 
behavior. The neural network technique utilizes a 
supervised, back-propagation network that is trained from 
the “normal” engine signature behavior to recognize non- 
normal sensor conditions. A detailed description of the 
fuzzy logic and neural network sensor validation 
implementations are given in Reference [3], (Roemer and 
Atkinson, 1997). 
4. ENGINE VIBRATION DIAGNOSTICS 
Typical engine vibration monitoring utilizes two 
accelerometer-based transducers. One of these transducers is 
often located on the compressor rear frame. The other is on 
the turbine rear frame. Vibrations from various sources, such 
as engine core rotor, fan rotor, hydraulic pump, etc., are 
detected by the transducers and converted into electrical 
signals. The signals are then routed to the vibration Signal 
Conditioning Analyzer (SCA) where the signals are 
amplified and filtered. If the system is functioning properly, 
the signal from the SCA is a modulated signal having two 
components that are proportional to the fan and core 
unbalance. The conditioned signals are then routed by 
facility wiring to the selector switch in the control room. The 
selector switch will allow selection of either the signal from 
the turbine transducer or the signal from the compressor 
Faulty Sensor/s 
Calibration 
Noise 
Clipping 
Crosstalk 
Saturation 
Drift etc ... 
transducer. The vibration signals (accelerometer based) stay 
with the engine while other “slave” vibration transducers 
stay in the test cell. The slave vibration transducers are 
typically velocity probes based on position and are 
considered very reliable by test cell engineers. 
Real-time assessment of mechanical faults (i.e. bearing, 
rotordynamic, and structural) using vibration signatures at 
specified locations on the engine has been developed using 
feature-based diagnostic techniques. Domain knowledge 
associated with particular vibration fault hequencies, fixed 
frequency ranges, per-rev excitations, and structural 
resonances are extracted from the vibration spectrums 
acquired from the test cell. These spectrums are used to 
develop a knowledge base fkom which fuzzy logic 
membership functions and rulebases are developed. The 
fault matrix and feature extraction process is illustrated in 
Figure 6 for a typical waterfall vibration plot. 
6-2919 
F eatu r e s 
+Engine Orders 
+Subharmonics 
+Sidebands 
+Fixed Freqs. 
*Res on an ces 
+Jump Ups / Gck Downs 
I I 
Fixed Resonance 
Frequency E and 
Figure 6 - Feature Extraction from Vibration Analysis 
The functionality associated with an advanced vibration 
diagnostics capability in the engine test cell is primarily 
based on the development of two particular vibration-related 
plots. These two plots are the following: 1) Waterfall plot 
of vibration spectrums (0-1000 Hz, typically) over several 
different core engine speeds, and 2) Tracked-order plots of 
lXRev through 2XRev amplitudes for all engine rotors 
plotted as a function of core speed. Examples of these two 
plots are shown for the TF39 engine in Figures 7. In this 
figure, several spectrums were acquired using the velocity 
pickups as the TF39 engine was accelerating. 
6-2920 
Figure 7 - Waterfall and tracked-Order Plots for TF39 Engine 
It is normally desired that during slow engine acceleration 
(going from idle to maximum speed in approximately 2 
minutes) a spectrum be acquired at each whole percent 
increase of the maximum core speed. For example, if idle is 
approximately 55% maximum N2, then spectrums would be 
acquired ftom 55% through maximum speed at 1% intervals. 
The amplitude associated with the waterfall plot is typically 
in Mils (Pk-Pk), but can also be given in velocity units of 
(idsec Pk). Once these measurements are obtained, plots of 
the ramp-up vibration waterfall are stored and analyzed for 
rotordynamic health. Using the data set of vibration 
measurements from the TF39 correlation engine, a table of 
spectral features and corresponding "normal" amplitude 
bands was developed for detecting anomalous vibration 
signatures and associating them with particular diagnostics 
where applicable. In Figure 7, one can easily see vibration 
peaks are associated with the core engine and fan speeds. 
Possible shift in Structural 
Resonance al ters  form of 
Tracked Order 
5 .  ENGINE TRACKED-ORDER ANALYSIS 
kTETS has also investigated vibration analysis schemes 
utilizing a shape-based statistical analysis of the tracked 
orders to detect and diagnose mechanical faults. The 
combination of these techniques allows for a more robust 
and sensitive diagnostic capability. Figure 8 shows a 
particular shape of a High Pressure (HP) shaft tracked-order 
and +/- 2 standard deviations determined from testing of 
multiple engines. The bold line in Figure 8 shows a 
simulated tracked-order of an engine with a different 
structural resonance. In this example, which is for 
illustration purposes, an amplitude level band on the tracked 
order would not detect a problem, however a statistical 
analysis of the shape of the tracked-order would be able to 
detect a fault. 
Statistically Improbable 
Fault Detected 
W 
Figure 8 - Tracked-Order Analysis 
6-2921 
Due to the varying amount of data and diagnostic 
information that exists in regards to vibration anomalies that 
occur on particular military engines, the AETS program 
proposes to use a master data base to collect these vibration 
signature features associated with the waterfall plot and 
tracked order statistics. The engine specific vibration 
signatures will be used to develop a statistical description of 
engine shaft tracked-order amplitudes, broadband 
amplitudes and non-synchronous vibration amplitudes. The 
statistical description can then be utilized directly in the 
vibration anomaly detector algorithms using normal 
distribution membership functions within the fuzzy logic 
decision process. 
6. ENGINE PERFORMANCE DIAGNOSTICS 
The principle test cell parameters associated with the engine 
gas path and the corresponding test cell ambient conditions 
are required by performance diagnostic algorithms to detect 
and isolate performance faults. Pressure, temperature, and 
flow readings at different points within the gas path are 
required, as are any bleed flows, fuel flow, rotor speeds, and 
any other engine conditions that must be accounted for in 
performance calculations. Figure 9 shows the locations 
designations for jet engine pressure and temperature 
measurements. A specific engine gas path analysis is then 
run off-line under off-design conditions to develop a matrix 
of “error patterns” expected under ideal engine degraded 
conditions. Measurement and modeling uncertainties are 
developed based on the variances in the modeling and 
measurement acquisition processes. 
Fan 
LLow Pressure Turbine 1 LHigh Pressure Turbine 
Combustor 
High Pressure Compressor 
Low Pressure Compressor 
Figure 9 - Engine Gas Path Designations 
Using the gas path performance measurements obtained, 
statistical engine parameter signature curves are developed 
for a specific engine serial number as well as for a number 
of engines in the fleet. Hence, engine-to-engine and fleet- 
to-engine comparisons can be made at any point. 
Measurement uncertainties are based on this recorded data. 
The right side of Figure 10 shows the corrected performance 
curve of compressor discharge pressure as function of N2 
speed at pseudo-steady state conditions. The bands around 
the curve represent the l-sigma distribution (1 standard 
deviation) levels. The left side of Figure 10 shows a 3-D 
representation of how the percent deviation in CDPC 
changes with speed. Finally, the red dot at approx. 87% max 
N2 speed is a steady state condition in another TF-39 engine. 
Figure 10 - Statistical Engine Signature Curves 
Utilizing confidence intervals for the discovery of a 
statistically significant trend away from “normal” engine 
operation is a rigorous way to assess engine anomalous 
events. Utilizing a full set of engine signature curves 
described above is well suited for this type of analysis. The 
detection of an anomalous event will trigger the start of a 
more comprehensive diagnostic treatment of the detected 
error pattern. The key is to be capable of determining 
whether the mean measured parameter values have shifted 
with a high degree of confidence. The confidence interval 
approach, described previously, is a well-proven statistical 
method for performing this calculation. The T-test is 
another commonly used technique to determine if a 
parameter has shifted appreciably from its performance 
curve. 
In Figure 11, the distribution centered about 0% deviation is 
the compressor discharge pressure associated with the TF39 
Correlation Engine. The histogram, with a distribution 
centered about -3% deviation was acquired from the other 
TF-39 Engine. Clearly, this distribution is different with a 
high level of statistical significance, over 99% in fact. As a 
result, it can be confidently stated that, at this condition, the 
“new” engine has a lower CDP than the Correlation Engine. 
This type of analysis, combined with all of the other relevant 
parameters, is used to determine if the overall compressor 
efficiency of the “new” engine was lower that that of the 
Correlation Engine. 
6-2922 
F - C  p a  =2@(- 
where: 
Figure 11 - Confidence Interval Comparison 
The process described above gives insight into the engine- 
to-engine and engine-to-fleet statistical comparison 
capability. Furthermore, the statistical comparison process 
comprises a vital component of robust performance 
diagnoses capability. 
The test cell performance diagnostic approach relies on 
gauging the proximity of the current system deviations to 
known performance faults based on the GPA model. This 
multi-parameter, evolutionary technique has already been 
shown to be capable of identifying degraded performance in 
propulsion systems (Roemer and Ghiocel, 1998). This 
approach requires that sufficient sensor information be 
available to assess the current condition of the system in 
terms of shifted trends in parameters fiom a baseline 
condition. Modeling and measurement uncertainty is 
accounted for with this technique utilizing the distributions 
on the current parameter shifts and model-based fault 
conditions. While a physical model, such as a gas path 
analysis or control system simulation, is beneficial, it is not 
a requirement for this approach to work. An alternative to 
the physical model is built in “expert” knowledge of the 
fault condition. 
This generic, probabilistic, feature-based diagnostic process 
involves assigning non-normal or normal Probability 
Density Functions (PDF’s) to performance error patterns 
associated to known faults in N-dimensional space. 
Similarly, the current error exists as a PDF in the parameter 
space as well. The probability that the current condition (C, 
measured parameter shifts), may be attributed to a given 
fault (F, identified known fault conditions) is determined by 
the “overlap” (i.e. multi-dimensional integration) of their 
respective joint probability density functions. Figure 12 
shows how this is done in 2-dimensional parameter space. If 
C and F can be assumed to be normally distributed (not a 
necessary assumption however), the probability of 
association (Pa) with a given fault condition F can be found 
using: 
F,C = the mean of the distributions F 
D f , D ,  - the standard deviation of the F 
and C respectively 
and C distributions 
Track and Predict Path Statistlcal Feature 
Shifts over Time 
--. _ -  
I Feature Space 
Figure 12 - Multi-Parameter Diagnostic Technique 
The function a( ) is the standard normal cumulative 
distribution and the p is denoted as the reliability index. The 
p represents the Euclidean distance between the current 
conditional distribution (C) and a given fault distribution 
(F). Hence, this approach performs diagnostics by 
evaluating the likelihood of the current conditions to known 
fault conditions and prognostics by extrapolating a fault- 
weighted, evolutionary path. 
7. BAYESIAN BELIEF NETWORK FOR ENHANCED 
TROUBLESHOOTING 
Inherently, troubleshooting involves “honing” in on a 
maintenance action by evaluating the results of a logical path 
of observations. Traditionally, troubleshooting is initially 
performed with a manual then develops into an intuitive 
process as the maintenance person gains experience. By 
using a Bayesian Belief network for the Troubleshooting 
process, not only can experience be built in for the novice 
mechanic, but there is the ability to use information from the 
Health Monitoring System to optimize the Troubleshooting 
path. Finally, by moving Troubleshooting into a software 
environment, maintenance action and parts tracking are 
more likely to be properly logged into an engine database. 
The Bayesian Belief process helps draw conclusions on the 
likelihood of a condition or event occurring given related 
6-2923 
information. The equation below provides the basic 
Bayesian formulation. In a Bayesian Belief Network 
(BBN), many observations can contribute to a decision. 
Figure 13 shows a small portion of the BBN that was 
developed associated with the OEM’s Troubleshooting 
guide for the TF39. The key is to be capable of 
incorporating automated diagnostic information coming 
from the algorithms previously discussed with observations 
made by maintenance and test cell engineers in order to be 
able to isolate faults more efficiently. 
P(,flO,,)=The probability ofcondition(Ogivensomeinformaton(0) 
P(o,lf,)=The probabilitythatthe condition(0)is as?ociatedwiththeinformation(fJ 
P(f ; )  = The prohbilily ofthe condition (fJ occurring 
(7) 
An example of an observation that might be included with 
other automated diagnostic results might be; “Is the Specific 
Gravity adjustment on the fuel control set properly?” This 
node would yield a “yes” or “no” response. Other nodes 
may not have such discrete states. Over time, the 
conditional probability assignments at each node become 
increasingly robust so that the mechanic only pursues the 
most probable troubleshooting paths. Informational nodes 
are also captured in the BBN. These nodes simply provide 
systematic maintenance instructions to get to the next 
observational node. Finally, the BBN will have the ability to 
manipulate its optimum paths by using information from the 
Sensor, Performance and Vibration Health Modules. If, for 
example, the sensor validation module determined that the 
Compressor Discharge Pressure sensor was performing 
properly, the maintenance action required to check the 
sensor would not be part of the “most likely” 
troubleshooting path for a Compressor Stall event. 
t 
HM information 
Modifies Conditional 
Probabilities 
Figure 13 - Portion of the BBN for the TF39 
cells. Specifically, the techniques have been recently 
developed and implemented for the TF-39 engine associated 
with an AJETS hardware upgrade at both the Travis and 
Dover Air Force Bases. Initial results on implementing 
these technologies has been encouraging, with several 
S. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has introduced some new concepts for automated 
sensor, vibration and performance diagnostics in engine test 
6-2924 
sensor faults and one vibration related fault frequency being 
detected. The capabilities of the AJETS approach will 
satisfy system requirements of reduced support costs and 
improved engine testing and accountability. The initial 
findings are favorable in the quality of the signals, 
capabilities to store and network data, and implement 
diagnostics and intelligent troubleshooting. Additional data 
continues to be collected under the AJETS effort and 
determination of the cost and benefits of this program is 
underway. 
9. REFERENCES 
[l] Gladney, Ed. "NASA Launches an Automated Data 
Acquisition System", Sensors, September 1998. 
[2] Roemer, M. J., and Ghiocel, D. M., " A Probabilistic 
Approach to the Diagnosis of Gas Turbine Engine Faults", 
International Journal of COMADEM, Volume 2, Number 4 
ISSN 1363-7681, October 1999. 
[3] Roemer, M. J., and Atkinson, B., "Real-Time Engine 
Health Monitoring and Diagnostics for Gas Turbine 
Engines", Predictive/Preventive Maintenance Technology 
Magazine, Volume 11, Issue 5, October 1998. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge Norman E. 
Cannichael of Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, 
TX for directing the integration of these technologies into 
the AJETS program. 
Dr. Michael J .  Roemer is the 
Director of Engineering at Impact 
Technologies in Rochester, NY and 
Adjunct Professor of Mechanical 
Engineering at the Rochester 
Institute of Technology. He was 
formerly a Vice President of 
Engineering at STI Technologies 
prior to joining Impact 
Technologies. Mike has a Ph.D. in Mechanical 
Engineering, MS. in Systems Engineering and B.S. in 
Electrical Engineering, all from the State University of New 
York at Buffalo. He has over 14 years experience developing 
real-time, automated health management technologies for 
complex systems, including large steam and gas turbines, 
gas turbine engines, rotaryFmed-wing aircraft subsystems 
and naval propulsion systems. He has developed several 
diagnostic and prognostic capabilities for complex systems 
utilizing probabilistic methok that are directly linked to 
maintenance planning and system operation. He is the 
author or co-author of more than 50 technical papers in 
these subject areas. He is currenth the Chairman of the 
Machinery Failure Prevention Technology (MFPT) Society, 
a Division of the Vibration Institute, and Prognostics Lead 
for the SAE-E32 Engine Condition Monitoring Committee. 
Gregory J .  Kacprzymki 
is a Project Manager at Impact 
Technologies with 5-yr. experience in 
the development und testing of 
diagnostic&ognostic systems for 
compressors, pumps, transmissions, 
gas andsteam turbines. He has been 
involved in developing real-time, 
intelligent health monitoring systems 
for gas turbine engines for on-wing 
and test cell applicatiom as well as for other air vehicle 
subvstems. He has managed multiple SBI& dealing with next 
generation condition-based maintenance systems, aircrqf2 
prognostics, and health management design for the Nrny and 
USAF. Greg hm published papers and developed technologies 
in the area of maintenance optimization, FmCAs, L$e Cycle 
cost assessment, model-based prognostia and data @ion 
technologies. Greg has his MS' and BS in Mechanical 
Engineeringpom Rochester Institute of Technologv. 
6-2925 
This page intentionally left blank. 
6-2926 
