Mesoscale Cyclonic Eddies and Pelagic Fisheries in Hawaiian Waters 
Michael P. Sekil, .Robert R. Bidigarez, Rick Lumpkin', Jeffrey J. Polovinal, Donald R. Kobayashi', Pierre 
Flament*, and David G. Foley3 
'National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, Southwest Fisheries Science Center Honolulu Laboratory, 2570 Dole Street, 
Honolulu, HI 96822-2396 
'University of Hawaii, Department of Oceanography, School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, 1000 Pope Road, 
Honolulu, HI 96822 
3Joint Institute of Marine and Atmospheric Research, 1000 Pope Road, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 
Abstrucf-The combination of prevailing northeasterly 
tradewinds and island topography result in the formation of vig- 
orous, westward propagating cyclonic eddies in the lee of the Ha- 
waiian Islands on time scales of 50-70 days. These mesoscale (-102 
km) features are nowhere more conspicuous or spin up more fre- 
quently than in the Alenuihaha Channel between the islands of 
Maui and the Big Island of Hawaii. Like other open-ocean ed- 
dies, their biological impact can be significant, although Hawaii's 
open-ocean, wind driven features dynamically contrast the well- 
studied cold core current-generated eddies such as those that spin 
off the Gulf Stream or the Kuroshio. These latter features charac- 
teristically trap or isolate an adjacent water mass retaining its 
developed floristic composition. 
Cyclonic eddies in subtropical waters such as around Hawaii 
vertically displace the underlying nutricline into the overlying, 
nutrient-deplete euphotic zone creating localized biologically en- 
hanced patches. Recent direct high-resolution horizontal and ver- 
tical observations of these vortices made from satellite and ship- 
board platforms provide new perspectives on biological enhance- 
ment within open-ocean cyclonic eddies and are presented here. 
These localized regions of high productivity may lead to aggrega- 
tion and development of a forage base for higher trophic levels. 
How eddies may directly influence pelagic fish distribution are 
examined from recreational and commercial fish catch data coin- 
ciding with the presence of eddies. We highlight the 1995 Hawaii 
International Billfish Tournament in which a cyclonic eddy domi- 
nated the ocean conditions during the weeklong event and ap- 
peared to be the principle factor influencing fish availability. On 
the tournament grounds, well-mixed surface layers and strong 
current flows induced by the eddy's presence characterized the 
inshore waters where the highest catches of the prized Pacific blue 
marlin (Makuira mazara) occurred, suggesting direct (e.g., physi- 
ological limitations) and/or indirect (e.g., prey availability) bio- 
logical responses of blue marlin to the prevailing environment. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Regional oceanography has long been recognized to play a 
key role in the distribution, migration, availability, and 
catchability of pelagic fishes, particularly tunas and billfishes 
[l]. Oceanic fronts and eddies in particular have been shown 
eration of vigorous eddies on the leeward side of the archi- 
pelago [5 ,6 ] ,  creating the potential for very productive fishing 
areas. These physical features are nowhere more conspicuous 
and occur more frequently than in the Alenuihaha Channel, 
adjacent to the Kona coast of the Big Island of Hawaii, site of 
Hawaiian International Billfish Tournament (HIBT). 
These cyclonic, mesoscale features (-lo2 km) can be ob- 
served at all times during the year. They are typically generated 
in the lee of Hawaii on time scales of 50-70 days with diam- 
eters of 50 - 100 km and surface currents up to 100 cm sec-' [6] .  
Like other open-ocean eddies, their biological impact can be 
significant. Eddies have been postulated to play a key role in 
recruitment processes, mechanically both limiting and aiding 
dispersal of littoral and pelagic young through entrainment and 
transport of organisms [2,7]. From a trophic standpoint, local- 
ized regions of higher productivity created by eddies may lead 
to aggregation and development of a forage base; physical gra- 
dients in water properties may provide cues for predators to 
locate prey or, more directly, may aggregate or concentrate food 
items. As a result, these same cues are used by fishermen to 
locate fish. Recently, much interest has focused on the role of 
eddies in nutrient transport, as divergent surface flows result in 
uplifting of the thermal structure and localized upwelling of 
nutrients into the euphotic zone [8]. This eddy pumping is be- 
lieved to increase primary and new production and is thus a key 
mechanism for the development of plankton communities in 
oligotrophic seas, which otherwise are severely nutrient-lim- 
ited [9, IO]. The annual vertical nutrient flux resulting from 
eddy upwelling in the Sargasso Sea was found sufficient to rec- 
oncile the apparent discrepancy in the nutrient budget [l 13. 
Although regularly occurring features, obtaining detailed 
information on open-ocean eddies have proved difficult in the 
past principally due to the inability to identify and track them 
on time- and space-scales that adequately accommodate ship- 
board sampling. The recent development of sea surface tem- 
perature (SST) estimates using Geostationary Operational En- 
vironmental Satellites (GOES) radiance measurements facili- 
tates detection and sampling of dynamically active open-ocean 
to attract and sustain these large, rapidly swimming animals [2, ' eddies [ 121. GOES observations may be acquired up to 48 times 
a day as compared to the twice per day sampling provided by 
Advanced very High Resolution Radiometers (AVHRR) car- 
ried aboard polar orbiting satellites. In areas that are often in- 
3,41. 
In Hawaiian waters, the combination of prevailing north- 
easterly tradewinds and island topography encourages the gen- 
1590 MTS 0-933957-28-9 
fluenced by cloud cover, GOES significantly increases the pos- 
sibility of measuring SST [ 121. In waters around Hawaii, where 
cloud cover is abundant, hourly images enable frequent com- 
posites that are timely in guiding in situ sampling. 
In this paper we present observations from a number of cy- 
clonic eddies with recent sampling made possible by this new 
technology. High-resolution horizontal and vertical observations 
from ship and satellite platforms refine our characterization of 
these oceanographic features and provide new perspectives on 
the coupling of the physics and biology in association with open- 
ocean cyclonic eddies. 
11. METHODS 
Satellite SST data were obtained principally from the Na- 
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) geo- 
stationary west meteorological satellite GOES- 10. Hourly 
GOES-SST images were processed into 3-h composites, and 
distributed by the NOAA Coastwatch program. The three-hour 
images were then combined to yield three day composites. Ear- 
lier (i.e., 1995) SST information was acquired from the AVHRR 
aboard the NOAA- 12 polar orbiting satellite. Surface chloro- 
phyll responses were monitored with 8-day composites of ocean 
color from NASA’s Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-View Sensor 
(SeaWiFS). 
Shipboard measurements were made on the NOAA ship 
Townsend Cromwell (TC) over a survey area about 93 km (50 
nmi) longitude by 11 1 km (60 nmi) latitude off the southwest 
Kona coast of Hawaii during July-August 1995 and along two 
transects about 185 km (1 00 nmi) long and stations spaced about 
18.6 km (1 0 nmi) apart that traversed two eddies designated 
“Mikalele” and “Loretta” during November 1999 (Fig. 1). Hy- 
drographic data (pressure, temperature, salinity, in situ Chl fluo- 
rescence, and dissolved oxygen) and seawater samples were 
acquired with a SeaBird 9/11+ CTDhosette sampler system. 
Seawater samples were analyzed for chlorophyll and 
phaeopigments onboard ship [13], and frozen samples were 
collected for shore-based determinations of photosynthetic pig- 
ments by HPLC [14], and inorganic nutrients using standard 
autoanalyzer techniques [ 151. Local-scale, along track currents 
were measured underway with a 153 kHz hull-mounted RDI 
acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP). 
Daily catch records for the 1995 HIBT were provided by 
the Pacific Ocean Research Foundation (POW) to evaluate the 
relationship between the oceanography and fishing activity. 
111. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A .  Biologically Enhanced Hawaiian Eddies 
The high frequency of eddy formation in Hawaiian waters 
provides an ideal opportunity to study these mesoscale ecosys- 
tems. Although the physical dynamics associated with the evo- 
lution, maintenance, and decay of Hawaiian eddies have been 
well documented [5,6], quantifying the associated biological 
Longitude VW) 
~~ 
‘“7s 200 201 202 203 2-34 205 
Longitude (‘W) 
Fig. 1 .  False color, 2-day composite GOES SST (“C) image of cyclonic 
eddies “Loretta” and “Mika1ele”for (A) 16-18 November and (B) 22-24 
November 1999. Overlying the temperature expressions are CTD stations 
(red circles), control stations (red “Xs), and estimated ADCP current 
velocities (averaged over the upper 21-100 m) along the survey tracks. 
and geochemical processes has been hampered (until recently) 
by the inability to detect eddy presence and the logistical diffi- 
culties in sampling once eddies are detected. Much of our prior 
understanding of biogeochemical processes occurring within 
Hawaiian eddies was rooted in sampling conducted at a single 
eddy [lo, 16, 171 and inferred from works on eddies in other 
oligotrophic oceans [8,11,18]. The advent of satellite AVHRR 
SST data facilitated detection of these features, although the 
obstacle of matching the sampling scales between satellites and 
ships remained. Modest deviations in eddy position and inten- 
sity observed in SST composite images from shore to ship may 
be quite substantial when operating on local time- and space- 
scales such as those encountered during research surveys. The 
predictive capability offered by the near real-time GOES-SST 
product has significantly enhanced our abilities to optimize sam- 
pling strategy and target dynamic features such as eddies with 
greater precision than previously available. In the present study, 
eddy evolution was initially established, eddy positions and 
strength monitored, and the shipboard sampling track was dy- 
namically adjusted using the GOES-SST images. 
In November 1999, the GOES-SST guided transects navi- 
gated sampling through two well defined eddies, Loretta and 
1591 
Mikalele (Fig. 1). At the time of the survey, both eddies were 
-100 km in diameter. Mikalele was approximately one month 
old and centered near19’45’N 157’12’W; Loretta was six 
months old and centered near 20’25” 160”W. Upper ocean 
doming of isotherms were most intense in the upper 200 m and 
eddy influence was generally confined to the upper 300-400 m. 
Thermocline depth shoaled to within 40 m of the surface in 
both eddies, but the magnitude of vertical displacement and 
compression of isotherms were substantially more pronounced 
in Loretta where a vertical temperature change of 6°C over 20 
m was observed in the eddy core. Maximum ADCP current 
velocities exceeded 70 cm s-l (1.3 knots) and 85 cm s-’ (1.65 
knots) at Mikalele and Loretta, respectively. Surface thermal 
gradients measured both by satellite and in situ were stronger 
at the more recently formed (ca. one month) Mikalele, but maxi- 
mum current velocities were higher and subsurface vertical 
structure (doming) considerably more developed at the older 
(-6 months) Loretta. Historical GOES-10 thermal imagery re- 
vealed that Loretta began spinning up during mid-May 1999 
and maintained a presence in the lee of the Hawaiian Islands 
until January 2000. The strongest temperature gradients in 
Loretta occurred during late August-early September 1999 when 
core SSTs measured 23.5”C concurrent with a twofold increase 
in surface TChl. In comparison, Mikalele was short-lived, ex- 
isting from late October 1999 to mid-January 2000. 
The vertical distribution of chloropigments and macronu- 
trients (nitrate+nitrite (N+N), phosphate, and silicate) closely 
tracked the isotherms. The deep chlorophyll maximum layer 
was coincident with the nitracline depth (defined as the 1 uM 
N+N isopleth), and shallowed to about 80 m and 65 m for 
Mikalele and Loretta, respectively). Nitrate+nitrite concentra- 
tions at the base of the thermocline increased from 0.02 uM to 
1 uM for Mikalele and 6 uM for Loretta. Depth-integrated N+N 
levels measured near the centers of Mikalele and Loretta were 
3- to 15-fold higher than observed for control stations. Con- 
centrations of phosphate and silicate were also elevated within 
the eddies. Phytoplankton pigment biomass was 1.5 times higher 
in Loretta than in Mikalele or the control stations. See [ 191 for 
additional details and results. 
B. The 1995 HIBT An Oceanographic Perspective 
During the 1995 HIBT, ocean conditions off the Kona coast 
of Hawaii were dominated by the presence of a cyclonic eddy 
and provided insight into how these mesoscale features might 
influence higher trophic levels (Fig. 2). The eddy formed in 
early July and at the time of the survey (30 July-4 August), was 
asymmetrically centered about 20 nmi off Kailua-Kona and was 
pressed tightly against the island [6]. On the tournament grounds, 
well-mixed surface layers (to about 75 m )and strong current 
flows at the eddy periphery characterized inshore waters sur- 
veyed south of Keahole Point. Offshore, localized fronts formed 
at the interface of the eddy periphery and core. Regions with 
well-defined surface layers coincided with the areas of highest 
current velocities, which were strongest in the upper 75 m of 
the surface with measured speeds exceeding 60 c d s e c  (1.2 
knts) towards the periphery of the eddy field. These current 
speeds diminished rapidly (approaching zero horizontal veloc- 
ity) towards the eddy center. The water column of the eddy 
interior, in contrast, was well stratified with thermohaline pa- 
rameters changing gradually and continuously with depth and 
no evidence of mixing. Since mixed layers normally tend to be 
the product of wind-generated turbulence, the existence of the 
inshore surface mixed layers off Kona in the absence of much 
wind stress were ascribed directly to the eddy energy and the 
water mass present in the tournament region, composed largely 
of recirculated or well-mixed water advected in from offshore. 
Diurnal warming in Hawaii’s wind shadow created a thin layer 
of warm water overlying the upwelled cold water in the eddy 
and thus a warm core surface expression in both in situ mea- 
surements and AVHRR SST satellite imagery was observed. 
Fish catches were extracted directly from the HIBT daily 
catch record for the tournament week 3 1 July to 4 August 1995. 
A total of 89 fishes were caught: 80 Pacific blue marlin, Makaira 
mazara; 6 yellowfin, Thunnus albacares; and 3 striped marlin, 
Tetrapturus audax. For blue marlin specifically, the concentra- 
tion of catches occurred in statistical areal blocks “S” where 
20.0% were landed, “L’ with 18.75%, and ‘W’, “T’ and “U’ 
each with 13.75% of the total marlin catch (Fig. 2); a pattern 
shifted farther south than historically observed. Areas of high- 
est blue marlin catches coincided with (1) regions over which 
the strongest fronts and surface gradients of temperature, salin- 
ity, etc. were observed (“L’ and “K’) and (2) regions of strong 
coastwise current and deep surface mixed layers (“S”, “T’, and 
20 15” 
20 OO“ 
19 45” 
19 30” 
19 1SN 
19 M)“ 
18 45” 
15700W 15645’W 15630W 15615’W 15600’W 15545’W 
25.5 25.8 26.1 26.4 26.7 27.0 27.3 27.6 
Fig. 2. In situ sea surface temperature (SST) for 30 July - 4 August 1995. 
Catch, as proportion of total catch, of Pacific blue marlin by statistical 
fishing area at the 1995 HIBT is overlaid to help illustrate the relationship 
between fishing and eddy position. 
1592 
“U’) suggesting direct (e.g. physiological limitations) and/or 
indirect (e.g. prey availability) biological responses of blue 
marlin to the environment. 
IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
In conclusion, our results reveal substantially greater bio- 
logical enhancement associated with Hawaiian eddies than pre- 
viously observed. In stratified, oligotrophic waters such as those 
found around Hawaii, recycling of nutrients between the graz- 
ers and the phytoplankton typically maintains primary produc- 
tion at uniformly low levels. Transient episodes of upwelled 
nutrient-rich water by strong cyclonic eddies have been shown 
to induce “new” production, thus providing a mechanism to 
shorten the trophic pathway and facilitate energy transfer. Ac- 
companying the injection of nitrogeneous nutrient enrichment 
at these features are not only increases in the biomass of phy- 
toplankton but also the contribution of larger eukaryotic phy- 
toplankton, notably diatoms and dinoflagellates over recycled- 
nutrient based picophytoplankton (e.g., photosynthesizing 
cyanobacteria species) to the phytoplankton community struc- 
ture that normally typifies the system. 
Relationships between the physical environment and higher 
trophic levels are considerably more difficult to ascertain, pri- 
marily due to the difficulty in acquiring the necessary biologi- 
cal information for such an assessment. The presence of the 
eddy field during the 1995 HIBT offered a unique opportunity 
to examine potential relationships between fish and their envi- 
ronment. On the fishing grounds (i.e., the 20 nmi closest to 
shore) the eddy generally appeared as a strong north-northwest 
current running up the coast towards Keahole Point, where the 
flow turned west offshore essentially following the island to- 
pography. This resulted in well-mixed surface layers inshore 
south of Keahole Point and localized fronts at the interface of 
the eddy periphery and core. Areas of high tournament fish 
catches coincided with these ocean features, suggesting direct 
(e.g. physiological limitations) and/or indirect (e.g. prey avail- 
ability) biological responses of blue marlin to the environment. 
All considered, there was compelling evidence supporting the 
notion that the prevailing ocean conditions was the principle 
factor influencing fish availability during the 1995 HIBT. 
REFERENCES 
D. B. Olson, G. L. Hitchcock, A. J. Maniano, C. J. 
Ashjian, G. Peng, R. W. Nero, and G. P. Podestfi, “Life 
on the edge: marine life and fronts,” Oceanography, 
R. W. Owen, “Fronts and eddies in the sea: mecha- 
nisms, interactions and biological effects,” in A. R. 
Longhurst (editor), Analysis of marine ecosystems, 
Academic Press, London, 1981, pp. 197-233. 
R. M. Laurs, P. C .  Fiedler, and D. R. Montgomery. 
“Albacore tuna catch distributions relative to environ- 
~01.7, pp. 52-60, 1994. 
mental features observed from satellites,” Deep-sea 
Res., vol. 31, pp.1085-1099, 1984. 
P. C. Fiedler and H. J. Bernard. “Tuna aggregation and 
feeding near fronts observed in satellite imagery,” Cont. 
She& Res., vol. 7,pp. 871-881, 1987. 
W. C. Patzert, “Eddies in Hawaiian waters,” Hawaii In- 
stitute Geophysics Technical Report, no. 69-8, 1969. 
C. E Lumpkin, “Eddies and currents of the Hawaiian 
Islands,” Ph. D. dissertation, Univ. Hawaii, 281 p., 1998. 
P. S. Lobel, and A. R. Robinson, “Transport and entrap- 
ment of fish larvae by ocean mesoscale eddies and cur- 
rents in Hawaiian waters,” Deep-sea Res., vol. 3 l ,  pp. 
1085-1099, 1986. 
D. J. McGillicuddy and A. R. Robinson, “Eddy induced 
nutrient supply and new production in the Sargasso Sea,” 
Deep Sea Res., Part I, vol. 44, pp.1427-1449, 1997. 
M. V. Angel and M. J. R. Fasham, “Eddies and biologi- 
cal processes,” in A. R. Robinson (ed.), Eddies in Ma- 
rine Science, Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 492-524,1983. 
P. G. Falkowski, D. Ziemann, Z. Kolber and P. K. 
Bienfang, “Role of eddy pumping in enhancing primary 
productivity in the ocean,” Nature, vol. 352, pp. 55-58, 
1991. 
D. J. McGillicuddy, A. R. Robinson, D. A. Siegel, H. 
W. Jannasch, R. Johnson, T. D. Dickey, J. McNeil, A. F. 
Michaels and A. H. Knap, Nature, vol. 394, pp. 263- 
266, 1998. 
X. Wu, W. P. Menzel, and G. S .  Wade, “Estimation of 
sea surface temperatures using GOES-8/9 radiance mea- 
surements,” Bull. Am. Met. Soc., vol. 80, pp. 1127-1 138, 
1999. 
C. C. Trees, R. R. Bidigare, D. M. Karl and L. Van 
Heukelem, “Fluorometric chlorophyll a: sampling, labo- 
ratory methods, and data analysis protocols,” in J. 
Mueller and G. Fargion (eds.), Ocean Optics Protocols 
for Satellite Ocean Color Sensor Validation: Version 2.0, 
NASA Technical Memorandum, in press. 
B. B. Bidigare, R. R. and C. C. Trees, “HPLC phy- 
toplankton pigments: sampling, laboratory methods, and 
quality assurance procedures,” in J. Mueller and G. 
Fargion (eds.), Ocean Optics Protocols for Satellite 
Ocean Color Sensor Validation: Version 2.0, NASA Tech- 
nical Memorandum, in press. 
R. Lukas and D. M. Karl, “Hawaii Ocean Time-series 
(HOT). A decade of interdisciplinary oceanography,” 
SOEST Tech. Rep. 99-05, CD-ROM, 1999. 
M. D.Olaizola, M., D. A. Ziemann, P. K. Bienfang, W. 
A. Walsh and L. D. Conquest, “Eddy-induced oscilla- 
tions of the pycnocline affect the floristic composition 
and depth distribution of phytoplankton in the subtropi- 
cal Pacific,”Mar: Biol., vol. 116, pp. 533-542, 1993. 
C. B. Allen, C. B., J. Kanda and E. A. Laws, “New pro- 
duction and photosynthetic rates within and outside a 
cyclonic mesoscale eddy in the North Pacific subtropi- 
cal gyre,” Deep-sea Res. I ,  vol. 43, pp.917-936, 1996. 
J.  Aristegui, P. Tett, A. Hernfindez-Guerra, G. 
Basterretxea, M. F. Montero, K. Wild, P. SangrB, S .  
1593 
Hernbdez-Lebn, M. Cantbn, J. A. Garcia-Braun, M. 
Pacheco, and E. D. Barton, “The influence of island- 
generated eddies on chlorophyll distribution: a study of 
messcale variation around Gran Canaria,” Deep-sea 
Res., I ,  vol. 44, pp. 71-96, 1997. 
M. P. Seki, J. J. Polovina, R. E. Brainard, R. R. Bidigare, 
C. L. Leonard, and D. G. Foley, “Observations of bio- 
logical enhancement at cyclonic eddies tracked with 
GOES thermal imagery in Hawaiian waters,” Geophys. 
Res. Letters, vol. 28, pp.1583-1586, 2001. 
[20] P. S .  Davie, “HIBT catch and fishing effort since 1959. 
A statistical perspective,” Pacific Ocean Research Foun- 
dation, 16 pp., 1995 
[19] 
1594 
