Risk Evaluation in Broadband Telecommunications Planning 
under Services’ Imprecise Penetration - A Fuzzy Approach 
Marcos A. DeSousa’”, Joana Machado’, Raul V. Ribeiro’, Carlos M. F. Carlson3 
‘Systems Engineering Department, Electrical and Computer Engineering School 
State University of Campinas - UNICAMP 
Address: 400 Albert Einstein St., PO Box 6101, CEP 13083-970, Campinas - SP - Brazil 
2Engineering Department, Catholic University of Goiis - UCG 
3University Center of Rio Preto - UNIRP (detached to LAAS/CNRS, Toulouse, France, under Grant Fapesp 00/08814-7) 
Phone: +55-19-3788-3705 e-mail : masousaOdensis . fee . unicamp . br 
Abstract 
Telecommunications operating companies are asked to provide 
new services for the short- and medium-term. Therefore, their 
systems and infrastructure must evolve in order to support these 
services. Several technological options are already available and to 
choose the best among them is a big challenge for network 
planners. This work proposes a mixed-integer linear programming 
model devoted to help the planning of the so-called access 
network, which links the clients to the core of the 
telecommunications systems. The model is driven by max-revenue 
criterion and focuses on the network evolution under the 
assumption of imprecise estimates concerning services’ 
penetration rates. In order to perform some techno-economical 
risk analyses, fuzzy sets concepts are adopted. An application that 
uses actual data is reported. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The access network represents the “main door” of every 
telecommunication system client (which is called user or 
subscriber). Traditionally, wired copper pairs connect the 
subscriber’s premises to a concentration point, the access node. 
This network segment is named distribution network (or 
secondary network). From the access node, the subscribers are 
linked to the CO (Central Ofice) by more capable cables 
and/or are concentrated in order to share the same transmission 
medium. This segment is named feeder network (or primary 
network). The distribution and the feeder networks comprise 
the access network (Fig.l), also called outside plant. If two 
subscribers do not belong to the area covered by the same CO, 
the link between them will involve two or more COS, 
interconnected by a transport network. 
,xu* , . . . . . . . . . 
TABLE I 
TELECOMMLNICATIONS SERWCES CLGIFICATION 
Service Category Transmission Rate 
POTSa Narrowband 64 kbps“ 
ISDNb Narrowband 144 kbps 
ASB‘ Broadband 2 mps‘ 
SSBd Broadband 2 m p s  
a Plain Old Telephone Service (voice) 
Integrated Services Digital Network 
‘Asymmetric Switched Broadband 
Symmetric Switched Broadband 
kilobits per second 
’ Megabits per second 
Nowadays, telecommunications operating companies are 
asked to provide several services to their clients. Services’ main 
attributes are: transmission speed (or rate), penetration level in 
the CO’s area and unitary income (monthly or annual). Due to 
their innovative features and current lack of standardization, 
services are usually grouped in well-defined sets (Table I). 
Each group has distinct connection requirements. 
However, the copper network already deployed is often 
unable to carry many of these services, chiefly the “broadband” 
ones. Other technologies must be considered: xDSL (Digital 
Subscriber Line) [ l ]  allows the use of copper cables for high 
speed information transmission, under some constraints, thus 
extending the lifetime of the existent network; FITL (Fiber-in- 
the-loop) [2] ,  as an optical-based option, is suitable to be 
applied in situations requiring the transference of great volume 
of information and high network reliability; and FWA (Fixed 
Wireless Access) [3], which is a radio-based technology. The 
solution found by the planner can use one or more technologies. 
The best solution will depend on the operator objectives, as 
well as on the scenario in study. 
Therefore, a careful planning of the network evolution 
towards a broadband platform in order to support a multi- 
service environment, possibly by using a mix of technologies, 
is needed. Moreover, deregulation trends put old and new 
operating companies into competition. Such companies face a 
critical strategic challenge, both from technological and 
marketing point-of-view. Considering the scope of the planning 
task, it is convenient to use decision-support tools that are 
based on mathematical models. 
This work presents a mixed-integer linear programming 
model devoted to the optimal equipment allocation in the 
broadband, multi-service access network. The model takes into 
account the competition among technological options. Driven 
by the goal of obtaining maximum revenue from the provided 
services, planning is accomplished by considering network 
topologies, demands, capacities, candidate technologies costs 
and company’s investment conditions. 
0-7803-7293-X/01/$17.00 0 2001 lEEE 601 2001 IEEE International Fuzzy Systems Conference 
Telecommunications are continuously changing. Thus, 
decisions are always subject to risks. The achievement of 
flexible planning models, capable of anticipating solutions for 
different scenarios, is highly required. Ims et al. [4], for 
instance, applied probability theory in order to perform risk 
analysis. Carlson et al. [5] discussed models for network 
evolution in the presence of uncertain equipment costs. The 
same authors [6] dealt with imprecise demands in a mono- 
service, cost-minimization scenario. The present work extends 
such approach, also incorporating the max-revenue criterion 
[7]. The assumed lack of information concerns the services’ 
penetration levels. The concept of fuzzy numbers [8] is utilized 
in order to address impreciseness. 
The text is organized in the following way: in section 2, we 
present the formulation of an “exact” model. In section 3, we 
incorporate into the model the impreciseness regarding 
services’ penetration levels, and we choose a method to solve 
the mathematical problem with fuzzy numbers. In section 4, we 
report an application of this enhanced model to an actual 
network of a Brazilian city. Finally, section 5 is dedicated to 
concluding remarks about the modeling and the results. 
a. PLANNING MODEL 
The objective is the allocation and sizing of access network’s 
equipment in order to maximize the revenue, while dealing 
with several services and candidate technologies. We assume 
that each CO has its own, independent access network. Thus, 
only one CO may be taken at a time. The CO’s network is 
modeled through an oriented graph. The distribution network is 
not considered. Instead, subscribers are aggregated according to 
the type of service they require. Each service is represented by 
an artificial node, which is linked to all access nodes by 
artificial arcs. Capacities of these arcs indicate the service’s 
demand (number of subscribers) at each access node. Access 
nodes are connected to the CO node by several capacitated arcs, 
which represent the candidate technologies and equipment, as 
well as the existent copper network, if any. The flow must be 
carried from the artificial service nodes to the access nodes 
(allowing us to consider costs on the distribution network, as 
well as to compute the services’ income), and from the access 
nodes to the CO (by using existent or candidate infrastructure). 
From this graph, we can formulate a mixed-integer linear 
program. The binary decision variables concern the facilities 
(transmission equipment, optical and copper cables, infra- 
structure) allocation (or not) and sizing at each arc in order to 
meet the services’ demand. The real decision variables refer to 
the flow values in the arcs. 
The corresponding mathematical formulation is: 
~a R(Y)= Crsiysi (1) 
(+AB 
subiect to: 
Cyij-Cyii =o, V i €  1-1,  
*I1 $12 
Ccap?”Xijn2Yij , V (i, j) E AST 
ENSlij  
(3) 
CcapF.Mijp2Yij , V (i,j)E AM 
Ysi + Ysj 2 dminsij , V s E I, , V ij E IsT.M 
YG + Ysj I drnaxGj , V s E I, , V ij E I,,., 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
P C M  
In the formulation: 
Re) : total income (revenue) from the offered services; 
AE : set of artificial arcs connecting the artificial service 
nodes to the access nodes; 
YSi : real non-negative variable representing the flow 
through the arc (s,i) E AE; 
rsi : unitary income of the service s offered to the access 
node i ;  
: set of arcs that can receive the technological option X 
as candidate; 
: set of candidate technologies in the arc (ij] E AS*; 
: binary variable associated to the choice of technology 
x, type n, for the arc ( i j )  E AsT; 
: cost of technology x, type n, whenever deployed in 
the arc (ij) E &; 
N, 
X, 
qy 
AM : set of arcs that can receive copper cables; 
CM : set of candidate (new) copper cables; 
Mu, : binary variable associated to the choice of copper 
cable, type p ,  for the arc (ij) E AM; 
: cost of copper cable, type p, whenever deployed in 
the arc (id] E AM; 
: cost of distribution network for offering service s to 
the users of access node i ,  by using the arc (s,i) E &; 
qsi 
L : budgetlimit; 
I 
Is 
Im : set of access nodes via candidate technology; 
IM : set of access nodes via copper network; 
Yes% : real non-negative variable representing the unmet 
demand of service s (flow through an Escape Arc); 
& : total demand of service s, entering the network at the 
nodes E IS; 
J1 : set of nodes j directly connected to the node i by arcs 
emanating from i to j ;  
J2 : set of nodes j directly connected to the node i by arcs 
emanating from j to i; 
Yii : real non-negative variable representing the flow 
through the arc (ij); 
cap? : capacity of candidate technology x,  type n, in the arc 
(id E AST; 
cap2P : capacity of candidate (or existent) copper cable, type 
p ,  in the arc (ij) E AM; 
In-M : set of the access nodes ij, each of them being 
composed by an access node via technology x (i E 
IST) and an access node via copper network (j E IM); 
dmiwii : minimum demand for the service s at the access node 
dmaw” : maximum demand for the service s at the access node 
: set of all graph nodes, except the CO node; 
: set of artificial nodes corresponding to the services; 
ij E IST-M; 
ij E IST-M; 
602 
In the model: 
-Objective: (1) refers to the revenue from the meeting of 
services’ demands at the access nodes. 
-Budget Constraint: (2) assures that the total cost of 
allocating and sizing both equipment and cables does not 
exceed the settled budget. The first part refers to the cost of 
choosing candidate technologies X; the second part refers to the 
cost of expanding the copper network; and the last one refers to 
the cost of distribution network (cables and/or equipment 
emplacement at subscribers’ premises). 
- Demand Satisfaction Constraints: constraints (3) and (4) 
guarantee the flow balance in the graph nodes. The constraint 
on the budget means that part of the demand may not be met. 
Thus, “escape arcs” are required. Due to distinct services’ 
transmission rates, some conversion of coefficients in the 
incidence matrix may be needed. 
- Technical Capacity Constraints: (5 )  and (6) indicate that 
the total capacity of equipment and cables must be sufficient to 
carry the flow from each access node to the CO. 
-Additional Constraints: (7) and (S), for instance, manage 
the services’ meeting (minimum and maximum at a specific 
access node). Other constraints can also model equipment 
functionalities and privileges, network topologies and security 
aspects. 
The services’ demand, either at each access node (dmin,ij and 
dmuxN) or at the service nodes (dJ, is obtained from their 
forecasted penetration levels. Adopting POTS (voice) as the 
reference service (s = 1): 
drnaxsij = Psij . dt, , Q s # 1 , Q ij E IST-M 
dmaxsij = dt, - dmax,j , s = 1, V ij E IST.M 
d , =  z d m a x s i j  , Q s e I s  (11) 
drniqij = famsij .d m q ,  ‘d SE Is ‘d ijE IST.M 
(9) 
(10) 
k#S 
iis I-.,., 
(12) 
In the above equations: 
dtii : total amount of subscribers at the access node ij E 
IST-M; 
P, : forecasted penetration level of the service s at the 
access node i j  E IST.M; 
dmaxsii : maximum forecasted demand for the service s at the 
access node i j E IsT-M; 
fa%ii: : factor of minimum compulsory meeting of the 
service s at the access node i j  E IST-M; 
dminsii : minimum forecasted demand for the service s at the 
access node i j  E IST-M; 
In. IMPRECISE SERVICES’ PENETRATION LEVELS 
A. Representation 
The POTS penetration is generally well known. As a matter 
of fact, planning of POTS networks is often made with a good 
degree of maturity. However, in a multi-service environment, 
forecasts of penetration levels are frequently imprecise and 
sometimes unavailable. Thus, the above model must be 
modified in order to allow some kind of risk evaluation, which 
is a requirement while planning under uncertainty. 
Figure 2. Representation of imprecise penetration level. 
PFsij@sij)l 
Figure 3. Adamo’s equivalent for a triangular fuzzy number. 
In a typical situation, the planner has a good idea about the 
service penetration level. He/she is capable of defining, for a 
CO area, a percentage range of subscribers that will demand 
each of the services, including a “most confident” value and 
opinions about “possibility of occurrence” of some or all of the 
values. The concept of fuzzy number may then be adopted to 
represent impreciseness of services’ penetration levels. 
Let us associate to each penetration level a fuzzy set Fsij, 
defined as “the set of possible values to the penetration of the 
service s at the access node ij E IST-M7’. Let us also admit a 
triangular membership function. Fig. 2 presents the resulting 
fuzzy number from this definition, which can be denoted as 
Eij = (e,, Psij7isij) . 
In the model, constraints (3), (7) and (8) must be rewritten as 
follows: 
Cysi +Yesc, = 4, Q S E  I, (13) 
(14) 
(15) 
ie(InuIM ) - 
YSi + Ysj 2 dmiqij , V s E Is , ‘d ij E IST.M 
YSi + Ysj 5 dma%ij , VSE Is , V ijcz I, 
- 
B. Mathematical Problem Resolution 
Among the existing resolution methods for problems 
involving fuzzy numbers, we consider herein the substitution of 
the fuzzy number by a parameterized function [9]. The problem 
603 
TABLE 11 
Low Penetration 
can be handled while taking impreciseness into account. We 
adopt Adamo’s parametric function: 
fa<Fsij> = m ~ ( p s i j l ~ t @ s i j >  2 a}  
fa(Psij> = pSij + (jGj - pSij). (1 - a) 
(16) 
with a = [0,1]. 
For triangular fuzzy numbers, we have: - 
(17) 
The fuzzy number is replaced by an interval from which we 
take the upper limit as work value. The parameter a indicates 
the confidence level on the forecasted values. Fig. 3 shows the 
operation of the Adamo’s equivalent for a triangular fuzzy 
number. 
By applying Adamo’s function to the constraints (13), (14) 
and (15), we can analyze the variation of planning results 
(service meetings, equipment allocation and sizing, costs, 
revenues, network topology) according to distinct settings for 
the services’ penetration levels. 
w.APPLICATION 
High Penetration 
We present as example an application to a network based on 
actual data, corresponding to a CO area of residential profile in 
a Brazilian metropolis. Commercial modelers and solvers 
software packages were utilized in the computational 
experiments. 
A. General Data 
Fig. 4 shows the analyzed network: 17 access nodes, length 
of arcs, amount of available (already deployed) copper pairs, as 
well as the total number of subscribers at each access node. 
We consider two adhesion scenarios to the new services: 
-Low Penetration (scenario Low-P): this marketing feature 
may drive the short-term network planning; 
-High Penetration (scenario High-P): affects the medium- 
and long-term network planning. 
Triangular fuzzy numbers indicate the (imprecise) 
penetration level (Table 11). The triangles are all symmetric, 
though this is not mandatory. We assume that the penetration of 
each service is the same at all access nodes. Table II also lists 
the minimum meeting factor and the (annual) income to the 
four considered services. The candidate technologies are xDSL 
and APON-FTTC (ATM-based Passive Optical Network - 
Fiber-to-the-Curb, an FITL technology [ 101): 
Figure 4. Considered network. 
ISDN 2.5 3.5 4.5 6 11 16 55 344 
ASB 0.5 1 1.5 2 5 8 50 800 
SSB 2 3.5 5 8 13 18 65 1,800 
= only POTS 
B. Analysis of the Results 
For both the scenarios Low-P and High-P, we adopt the same 
starting strategy: to find the minimum-cost network 
configuration while assuming that the demand must be fully 
met. The key values of the fuzzy numbers are inspected. First, 
if the penetration value is the lowest ( ..) for all services, a 
setting that is not included in Adamo’s equivalent, the resulting 
solution corresponds to the “minimum” network configuration. 
Second, by using Psij (a=l),  we get the best network 
configuration to the most confident penetration value. Finally, 
if we utilize the upper penetration value (p,, or a=O), we are 
able to obtain the minimum-cost network configuration that fits 
the most optimistic situation from the revenue point-of-view. 
From these results the planner knows both the extent of his 
budget and the revenue range. 
Table I11 indicates the results for the above settings as well 
for those wherein we accept a 25%-cut in the budget (100% 
would suffice to the full demand meeting). It lists the number 
of subscribers for each service, the budgets and the revenues, 
and the amount of access nodes affected by each candidate 
technology. We shall remark that the revenue decrease is lesser 
than the cut on budget for all settings (the more the copper 
cables are deployed, the less the revenue decreases). 
Regarding to the variation of penetration values, we can 
observe that the migration from xDSL to APON-FTTC systems 
depends on the increase in the broadband services’ demand. 
However, modularity of APON-FTTC equipment leads to high 
investment values. Results for scenario High-P, for instance, 
point out that the planner must duplicate the investment (from 
kUS$ 1,611.76 to kUS$ 3,177.00) in order to support an 80%- 
raise in the revenue (from kUS$ 2,808.09 to kUS$5,055.08). 
-=I 
- - Result 
Investments (kUS$) - minimum cost (100%) 
~ , i j  psij P G ~  I ~ s l j  Psii ~ s i j  
1318,80 1,546.98 1,769.30 2,149.01 3,328.37 4,236.06 
Revenue &US$) - minimum cost (100%) 
1,938.10 2,308.60 2,672.10 3,349.14 4,724.78 6,100.42 
Investments (kUS$) - 25% - cut in the budget 
989.10 1,160.20 1,327.00 1,611.76 2,496.30 3,177.00 
Revenue (kUS$) - 25% - cut in the budget 
1,761.80 1,938.79 2,231.40 2,808.09 3,905.04 5,055.08 
Deployments - 25% - cut in the budget 
O o t i d  0 17 17 17 17 17 
CbpptX 16 7 5 3 1 0 
Subscribers - 25% - cut in the budst 
POTS 11,179 8,926 8 3 7  7,198 6,151 5,418 
ISDN 173 238 301 401 731 1,055 
ASB 36 63 96 119 301 476 
SSB 184 408 595 950 1,486 2,034 
604 
Figure 5. Network for .. (scenarioHigh-P). 
Fig. 5 shows the network to be deployed at the most 
optimistic setting ( imi, scenario High-P). Existing copper 
cables are not indicated, but are fully utilized. 
Intermediary penetration settings can be analyzed through 
the Adamo’s equivalent. The resulting network configuration 
will depend on the chosen value for a, starting from a=1 
(expected value) to a=O (maximum penetration). The same a 
value is adopted for all services. Fig. 6 indicates the variations 
upon the revenue in scenario High-P. The revenue due to each 
service is also shown. 
The services’ meeting is obviously penalized when the 
budget is reduced, but there are differences depending on the 
services. The SSB service presents the highest met/foreseen 
rate: in all analyzed situations its demand is almost totally met, 
and the service appears to be the most “profitable” one. The 
POTS meeting is kept about 75%. Its unitary revenue is the 
lowest, but it is very attractive, because of its high demand. On 
the other hand, both ISDN and ASB maintain their meeting 
level near the minimum (55% and 50%, respectively). They are 
clearly the less interesting services from the income point-of- 
view. Vendors may be compelled to improve their equipment’s 
functionalities in order to drop costs of meeting these services. 
Equipment configuration changes as long as a decreases. 
Scenarios Low-P and High-P show that, at the most confident 
penetration values, copper-based xDSL is a good choice in 
some nodes. Such a technology can then be considered as 
taking part of the access network evolution towards an all- 
optical broadband environment. 
V. CONCLUSION 
We presented a flexible model to the broadband access 
network planning under imprecise data regarding the 
penetration level of new telecommunications services. Main 
decisions searched were the equipment’s allocation and sizing 
under revenue-maximization criterion. An exact mixed-integer 
linear programming model was extended to deal with the lack 
of information by using the concept of fuzzy numbers. In such 
a way, the planner is not asked anymore to esteem precise 
values for the services’ penetration levels. The mathematical 
problem was solved through a parametric-equivalent approach. 
We reported the application of the model to a Brazilian 
network. We evaluated the investment risks to offer 
simultaneously services of narrowband profile (POTS, ISDN) 
E 
J 
d 
(U 
2 3000 
2000 
1000 
0 
*---e-.. 
Q---e,.. 
-A- .POTS (Investment -25%) 
-. I. - ISDN (Investment -25%) 
ASB (Investment -25%) 
Figure 6. Annual revenue (scenario High-P). 
as well as of broadband profile (ASB, SSB). Two expansion 
technologies were evaluated. The first one uses copper cables 
(xDSL), while the other one is based on optical fiber (APON- 
F’ITC). The analyzed scenarios allowed verifying the techno- 
economic viability as a function of the service penetration. 
According to the data structure we utilized, the xDSL 
technology proved to be suitable to scenarios with low services’ 
penetration. To the high penetration scenarios, APON-lTTC 
was the most attractive technology. From the economic point- 
of-view, the SSB service pointed out as the most interesting 
one. POTS’ high demand made it also very attractive, chiefly 
whenever the expansion was based on copper deployments. 
The proposed model supports the access network planning in 
a very realistic and flexible way. The ability to deal with a 
multi-service environment, under maximum-revenue approach, 
while taking into account data impreciseness, helps the planner 
to comprehend the network evolution under competitive 
situations and shall be incorporated to computational tools used 
by operating companies and equipment vendors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Humphrey, M. and J. Freeman, “How xDSL Supports Broadband Services 
to the Home”, IEEENehvork, vol. 11, pp. 14-23, JanuaryFebruary 1997. 
[2] Cook, A. and J. Stem, “Optical Fiber Access - Perspectives Towards the 
21‘ Century”, IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 32, pp. 78-86, February 1994. 
[3] Linna, P. et al., “Opportunities for Broadband Radio Technologies in the 
Access Network”, EURESCOM Project P614 - Deliverable 4 ,  1998. 
[4] Ims, LA., K. Stordahl and B.T. Olsen, “Risk Analysis of Residential 
Broadband Upgrade in a Competitive and Changing Market”, IEEE 
Comm. Mug., vol. 35, pp. 96-103, June 1997. 
[SI Carlson, C M E ,  J.R.F. Formigoni and H.M.F. Tavares, “Dealing with 
Fuzzy Costs in Telecommunications Networks Design”, Procs. of fhe 
FUZZ-IEEEE 1998 (Anchorage), vol. 1, pp. 634439, May 1998. 
[6] Carlson, C.M.F., H.M.F. Tavares and J.R.F. Formigoni, “Parametric Mixed 
Linear Programming with Fuzzy Numbers and an Application to 
Telecommunications Networks Planning”, Procs. of the SBTIIEEE 
International Telecommunications Symposium (Si0 Paulo), vol 1, pp. 
[7] DeSousa, M.A. et al., “Maximal Revenue-Oriented Access Network 
Planning” (in Portuguese), Proc. of XVII Brazilian Symposium on 
Telecommunications (Vit6ria), pp. 389-394, September 1999. 
[8] Pedrycz, W. and F. Gomide, An Introduction to Fuzzy Sets:Analysis and 
Design, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998. 
[9] Campos, L and J.L. Verdegay, “Linear Programming Problems and 
Ranking of Fuzzy Numbers”, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 32, pp. 1-11, 
1989. 
[IOIITU, “High Speed Optical Access Systems Basead on Passive Optical 
Network (PON) Techniques”, 177JDruflRecommendation G.983,1998. 
323-328, August 1998. 
605 
