An e-Store Developing Model for minimizing the impact of Procedural and 
Cultural Change within an Enterprise 
Irene S.Y. Kwan 
Department of Information Systems 
Lingnan University 
Tuen Mun, Hong Kong 
e-mail : iikwan@ms18.hinet.net 
Abstract 
Internet, Value Added Network (VAN) and Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) had revolutionized global trade and 
services. We have emerged to a new experience of global virtual market where trading could be carried out in 
cyberspace. As electronic markets are possible for  small and large enterprises competing as equal players, Business- 
to-business (B2B) and Business-to-Consumers (B2C) via electronic Commerce (e-Conznierce) systems operating on 
Internet are producing profound changes in enterprise culture on a global basis. Financial institutions arid retail 
business in Asia are believed to be falling far behind the US and Europe when it comes to using the Internet for  
business. Despite the cultural and environmental differences in marketing between west and east, this reality has 
provided a vision for the second generation of e-Commerce application developers to learn the issues that had been 
experienced by these pioneer companies whom had participated in e-Commerce for a while. 
Indeed, over the heat of e-Commerce, companies are now thinking big and acting small in developing their e- 
Commerce applications. They are willing to tactfully slow down their pace in transforming business to electronic- 
Business (e-Business) via BPR (Business Process Reengineering). Investing extra time and cost in securing their 
business, instead of getting into pre-mature commitment in e-business applications development which is not going to 
last long or with huge difficulties in maintenance. This paper provide an outline of our investigation on the issues in 
developing e-stores and identified the crucial constitution in developing a successful e-Commerce system while 
proposing a model for  traditional industv to establish its electronic or virtual stores. We analyze the development 
process between traditional and electronic stores to help business to plan on new process. The contribution of this 
research is a novel approach embedded in a unique model for establishing e-stores (electronic Stores). This model is 
intended to allow enterprises to establish and manage their e-stores as if they are managing their conventional stores. 
As such the impact of cultural and logistic changes within an enterprise is minimized. With the length of this paper, the 
outline of this framework model is presented. 
Keywords: Internet, EDI, digital economy, e-Business, e-Commerce, web-based information systems, IDEF, BPR, e- 
stores. 
1529-4188/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
79 
1. Introduction 
We are getting real about Virtual Commerce. There is 
already a paradigm shift from traditional business 
information systems to B2C and B2B web-based 
applications for e-Commerce since early 90s. By 
1999, there were more than 43 million Web domains, 
according to Network Wizards. Due to the Personal 
Computers (PCs) boom and the rise of Internet, the 
Information Technology (IT) industries not only had 
created astounding growth in its stock prices (despite 
of the April2000 minor adjustment in the IT global 
stock market) but also becoming a driving force in the 
world economy. The last decade of 20th Century has no 
doubt brought about momentous shifts in the way we 
work, play and communicate. We owe most of these 
changes, for better or for worse, to computer 
technology ! 
Global market plays a central role in the world 
economy, facilitating the exchange of information, 
goods, services and payments. This accelerates an 
enormous increase in the role of IT in global markets. 
The emergence of electronic marketplaces in the past 
few years has revealed that there are different 
matching mechanisms that are appropriate in different 
situations. There is no single solution for various 
negotiation situations to reach a deal. In result, 
economists, business sales experts and IT professionals 
have started to take a direct role and designed a variety 
of markets for selling products/services. To name a 
few examples are job hunting (JobsDB.com), gifts 
trading (Hallmark.com), ticket booking 
(Asiarniles.com) and book selling (Amazon.com). The 
unique aspect of electronic market is that a designer 
has too many possibilities to design a matching 
mechanism in an associated negotiation protocol.. 
Today enterprism could not afford to fall behind in 
taking the advantage of establishing their electronic 
stores to face the global complicated environment, 
upgrade their service quality and strengthen their 
selves IT, in pace with their customers, competitors 
and business partners. Many software vendors claim 
to provide the state-of-the-art global e-business 
enterprise solutions for internet commerce that extend 
from front office customer relationship management to 
back office ERP applications to platform 
infrastructure. The e-Commerce systems and/or web- 
based application development is believed to have 
more managerial issues to resolve than technical 
issues. It is obvious that here is a big difference 
between management styles, marketing environment 
on electronic stores and conventional stores. When 
traditional enterprises want to manage electronic 
stores, they proceed with business process 
reengineering. This required advanced planning to 
avoid conflict between two kinds of management 
styles on current operation of physical stores and 
future operation of electronic stores. 
In this paper, we compare the difference on the cash- 
flow, logistic control and information by starting at the 
management model between traditional stores and e- 
stores, taking the advantage of BPR method to ensure 
enterprises understand what necessary transformation 
would take place, when establishing electronic stores 
to ensure smooth establishment. Our model is expected 
to be a generic methodology to assist enterprises to 
proceed BPR, and on how to establish a successful 
electronic store a6 well as maintaining a traditional 
store at the same time. This paper has also 
consolidated both the authors' knowledge and 
experiences in e-stores development focused on B2C 
e-market, to formulate a non-exhausted list of 
important factors for e-stores development. 
2. From e-Commerce to e-Business 
The pervasive connectivity of the inter-net and the 
powerful architecture of worldwide web (www) have 
induced to the emergence of a digital economy. To 
begin with e-Commerce, establishing a web identity is 
the first step. It is necessary to get web-mail account in 
starting any e-Commerce/Business. A web-based email 
service allows the owner to access hidher e-mail from 
any computer, using any web browser and provide 
web-based access from any location. Next step is to 
build a virtual show room. Software like web building 
studio could helps beginners to design and built a web 
site that could satisfy the needs of potential users. The 
purpose is to attract visitors to enjoy web-based access 
from any location to your web site. Then the company 
might track these visitors' needs and interests. Driving 
the traffic to your web site by register with more 
search engines and directories. This information could 
help to tune up and improve the speed and look of the 
company's web site. As such, interested users may 
register as customers by providing the necessary 
personal particulars, such as their e-mail accounts, 
credit cards details and so fore. Company should then 
aim to obtain highly targeted names that could be used 
to create mailing lists for promoting the company's 
site. At this point, the company might consider starting 
of e-Business by selling on-line! This involves a 
revision of the web site from an e-show room (static 
web site) into a virtual e-store (interactive web site) 
for not only showing case products but also accepting 
random customer order and credit card payment over 
the Internet. The acquiring of new customers and more 
80 
information continue as long as the virtual store is 
running its business and generating revenue from on- 
line sales. Figure 1 below depicts the various major 
phases in creating e-Commerce and e-Business. 
+ 
(1) Get E-mail 
e.g.Irene@Co.name. 
Web Site based 
on the tacking 
(2) Build a Web Site 
e.g. virtual show room 
 
( 3 )  Attract Visitors to 
the web Site 
I (4) Tracks your Visitors I 
e.g. virtual e- 
store  
(6) Finding more r - l  new customers 
Figure 1 The 7 phases to build virtual showroom 
(e-Commerce) and e-store (e-Business) 
As depicted in above Figure 1 ,  i t  is technically easy 
and financially economical in creating your own web 
site for e-Commerce activities. However, participating 
in e-Business dealing is not only a technical concern. 
We define here “e-Commerce I‘ as a one-way 
communication which involve introducing the 
company business (similar to non-interactive TV 
commercial) . Its web site has limited pre-defined and 
interactive features, such as hyper-links to more 
detailed information enquiry and subscribing certain 
service (normally free of charge to attract more 
potential customers in exchange of the user’s e-mail 
address and/or certain personal particulars). Doing 
real business transaction is ”e-Business”. It is a two- 
ways communication involving the customer order, 
negotiation, payment and the company delivery of 
goods as in any normal business deal. The major 
difference here is that the latter concerns a financial 
transaction from the consumer’s bank to company’s 
bank. However, as e-market is getting more matures, 
the distinction between e-Commerce and e-Business 
become insignificant and the two terms are used 
interchangeably, as eventually all e-commerce systems 
should also accept customers’ orders and payments in 
different forms. 
3. The e-Commerce System 
Development Model 
One of the most popular Internet myths is that building 
an online store is fast and easy. All it involves is only 
point, click and buy from customers. It might be true 
for certain e-Commerce applications in the first 
generation of e-business. However, many of these e- 
stores are small start-ups that are not around for long. 
In reality, real successful e-commerce is novel and 
complex! Your web store needs an advance strategic 
plan to survive and be adaptive, maintaining 
profitability and avoiding much redevelopment cost. 
Recent e-commerce applications development is 
reshaping further by strategy-driven rather than by 
experimentation. The battle for competitive advantages 
will be rested at extensiveness, affiliation and richness. 
Developing e-Commerce application is not 
constraining business possibilities and opportunities 
under the limitation of computing technologies, but 
rather it is putting business sense into IT. To be able to 
do this, the development of e-Business applications 
would be business and customers centered. In addition, 
go for a quick fix may get business into e-market faster 
at lower cost, but it might cost much more in long run 
due to the extra redevelopment cost required. 
As e-Commerce project is more a business process re- 
organization project than a technical system 
development project. The Software Re-engineer (so- 
called e-Commerce specialist) should always have 
these notions as hidher primary consideration in their 
development strategy that everything that they design 
should be scalable and even reversible. Developing a 
web-based B2C e-Business application is differ from 
developing a traditional Management Information 
System (MIS) within an enterprise, it is totally an open 
system with no boundaries. Below Figure 2 depicts a 
highest level of our e-Commerce application 
development model, which we have applied to 
establish our B2B e-store development framework: - 
81 
(1)Transform Core business processes to web site 
procedure 
-use of BPR technique and conceptual approach 
Customers and 
potential customers 
3 
(3) Run a scalable, available, safe environment 
- use of a pilotktepwise -refinement 
approach 
(4) Leverage of 
business knowledge 
and Information 
(2) Procured new 
e-business 
application (datal 
- Management Policy / procedure/ logistic 
procedure update, use control) 
of feedback analysis - useofan 
advance plan 
=>( buybuild/ 
Solution ) 
- both?e- 
Figure 2 : The e-Commerce System 
DeveloDment Model 
In above Figure 2: The initial first phase in the e- 
Commerce cycle involves the Business Process 
Reengineering (BPR), the transformation of core 
business processes into e-business processes. The 
objective here is to minimize the business procedural 
changes between e-business and traditional business 
processes. This is a lengthy process that involves both 
the technical team and the management team close 
collaboration, for the conversion of necessary core 
business processes into e-business application. This 
critical task involves detail requirement analysis that 
result a corporate requirement document regarding the 
e-business set up. Only with this as a yardstick could a 
company be able to start comparing whether the pre- 
packed e-Commerce solution available in market could 
meet the company partial need or in-house developing 
a complete front store with integration to the 
company's existing ERP or SAP system is more 
appropriate. To be able to determine on this, a 
corporate requirement paper regarding the e-business 
set up need to be developed carefully. As this 
document would form the framework of the 
establishment of an advanced plan to accomplish the 
corporation's global e-business application. 
The 2"d phase might be the only technical part, the 
implementation of the e-Business web-based 
application. Yet, many logistic and managerial issues 
need to be consider here, such as the domestic and 
global consideration in web-sites design, legal issue, 
custom policies differences, the business partners' web 
sites compatibility and so fore. 
The 3'd phase involves the collection of feedback while 
the e-business system is in operation. We suggest a 
pilot web-site with a complete e-business process cycle 
or application in a selected region is to be built first, 
with limited access open to major partners. It is then 
used as a pilot testing or simulation with feedback 
captured for overall global B2B e-business refinement 
purpose. 
The dh phase leverages the business knowledge and 
information by use of the feedback analysis. We 
suggest data mining could be performed on the 
collected feedback data for discovering useful patterns 
in e-Business design. These would lead to further 
business process redefine and system enhancement in a 
cyclic fashion. 
4. Conclusion and future development 
The e-Commerce speedily exercising in virtual market 
means that all kind of transactions or business 
activities are sooner or later, running on Inter- 
networks. B2B e-Commerce would be naturally 
phased into the virtual market after the step of B2C e- 
Commerce. Developing a B2B e-Business application 
is differ from developing a B2C e-Business 
application. In virtual market, companies developing 
B2B web-based e-Commerce systems face a 
completely different business environment. 
This paper describes a model framework for successful 
e-store development to provide e-service and/or e- 
products in a B2B environment. It is this model we 
have used as a framework, to develop our novel 
82 
methodology for developing successful B2B e-stores. 
Our novel methodology is consisted of five stages : ( 1 )  
Introducing e-management style, (2) Choosing e- 
solution (3) e-Process analysis, development and 
simulation (4) e-System establishmenthntegration and 
(5) e-System refinement. Each of these five stages of 
our methodology consists of different techniques and 
activities being used and exercised for accomplishing 
in various tasks. We proposed here only an outline of 
our methodology of how to establish e-stores to enable 
higher success with minimum changing impacts in 
terms of business logistic and culture within an 
enterprise. However, upon the completion of the 
development of our methodology , we believe that the 
key requirements or successful factors on B2B e-store 
development are: 
Precise objective(s) and scope defined for 
business conversion (from traditional physical 
store to web-based e-store), it is specific to 
individual local company with the defined 
business partners within the industry as a whole, 
Pilot project for secure procurement of e-Business 
development, 
Customer centred (both e-customers and e- 
suppliers) design approach for customer-effective 
e-store or personalised web-site design and 
Global security and fair trade, local legal and 
custom policy issues and control, that is the 
assurance of confidentiality, integrity and 
authenticity of transmitted and stored data against 
threads or bias trade. 
The development of B2B electronic stores are still in 
its infant stage, uncertainties such as the e-consumer’s 
behavior, Internet safety and security issue, band-width 
problems, are all in developing and investigation stage. 
High density of e-stores where proprietors should take 
into account their strength and weakness when 
plunging into the virtual market Our study focused on 
the analysis in e-management phase-in, cash flow, 
logistic control and information flow between 
traditional stores and e-stores. 
References 
[I] Jodie Dalgleish “Create Customer-Effective E- 
Services” e-Business Advisor, December, 2000 pp. 26 
-32. 
benefit from an online marketing approach?’, Decision 
Support Systems and Electronic Commerce, Elsevier, 
Volume 27, pp. 383-393. 
[3] Kalakota and Whinston (1996), “Frontiers of 
Electronic Commerce”, Addison Wesley, pp. 215 - 
292. 
[4] Malone T., Yates J. & Benjamin R., “The logic of 
electronic market” Harvard Business Review, 1989 
pp 166- 17 1 May-June. 
[SI SM Huang, Irene Kwan, SH Li & M.Yu 
“Enterprise Resources Planning System 
Implementation : A Re-engineering Approach” (POM- 
2001) 1 Yh International Conference of Production and 
Operation Management. 2001. 
[6] Irene S.Y. Kwan, Ray J. Paul and SM Huang “The 
Constitution of A Successful e-Service - Developing A 
Model for Establishing Electronic Stores” submitted 
to Journal of DSS 
[2] Melody Y. Kiang, TS Raghu and Kevin HM 
Shang (2000), “‘Marketing on the Internet - who can 
83 
