Softening the Object-Oriented Database Model: 
Imprecision, Uncertainty, and Fuzzy Types * 
1.J. Blanco, N. Marin, 0. Pons, M.A. Vila 
Department of Computer Science and A.I., University of Granada 
Granada, Andalucia, Spain 
{ iblanco,nicm,opc,vila} @ decsai .ugr.es 
Abstract 
Object-oriented databases have proved to be a good al- 
ternative to the relational ones of Codd when dealing 
with applications characterized by their complexity and 
dynamism. In the last few years, a big part of the effort 
of researchers in the field of object-oriented databases 
(OODB) has been focused on the study of the addition 
of vagueness to this database model. There are differ- 
ent levels where vagueness can arise: uncertain and im- 
precise attribute values, fuzzy extents in classes, vague 
relationships between classes (including inheritance), 
and soft type definitions. In this paper, we summarize 
our proposal in this area, showing how these different 
soiirces of vagueness can be managed over a traditional 
OODB system. We explain the new structures to be con- 
sidered in order to incorporate vagueness and we use the 
Unified Modeling Language (UML) to make the con- 
ceptual representation of this structures clear because 
of' its direct translation to an object-oriented model. 
1 Introduction 
Since the relational database model was proposed by 
Codd, there have been lots of applications where this 
database model has been used in order to obtain good 
solutions for managing data. Nevertheless, for some 
time now, the new necessities of the information sys- 
tems have claimed for a more complete model capa- 
ble of facing the complexity and dynamism of the cur- 
rent real world problems. The object oriented database 
model 12, 81 has proved to be a suitable tool for dealing 
with this kind of requirements. One of the evidences 
of  the success of this database model is the increasing 
interest put on the development of a standard that al- 
lows designers and programmers work with a reference 
guide [ I ] .  
~ 
'This work was partially supported by Spanish R&D project 
TlC90-0558 "lmplantaci6n de I&\ Tecnicas de la Coinputaci6n Flex- 
ihle en Aplicocioneh de Gesribn Empresarial. Aplicacibn a la Real- 
izacidn de tin Mdtlulo de Gestidn de Ofena Inmobiliaria". 
Frequently, the information existing in the rcal world is 
affected by imperfection of very different types. The 
problem of vague information in databases has been 
widely studied throughout the last decades. Fuzzy 
Logic and Fuzzy Sets Theory 1201 have proved to he 
very useful to face the diverse kinds of lack of precision 
and certainty that may appear in real world data. 
At the moment, object-oriented databases are being ex- 
tended to include fuzzy capabilities in the same way as 
other database models were. The addition of vague- 
ness at different levels has led to fuzzy object-oriented 
database (FOODB) models. 
Many relevant works can be found in this research 
area. G .  Bordogna et al. [4, 51 have proposed a com- 
plete graph-based object-oriented model considering a 
wide survey of the situations where data imperfection 
can arise. N. Van Gyseghem et al. 19, IO] have de- 
veloped UFO, a fuzzy object-oriented database model 
capable of dealing with imprecision and uncertainty in 
data, managing this imperfection even in the data life- 
time, taking into account the effect of vagueness over 
the methods execution. A. Yazici et al. 16, 1 1, 19, 1 S] 
are currently extending their FOOD (Fuzzy Object Ori- 
ented Database model) with certain capabilities for flex- 
ible querying. The concept of typicality is exposed 
in the hierarchical model of fuzzy classes proposed by 
J. P. Rossazaet al. [14]. 
In this paper we present a complete proposal in this area, 
considering different strategies to manage the diverse 
kinds of vagueness that may appear in data in an OODB 
system. The basis of our proposal is to consider that the 
traditional object oriented database model is wide and 
general enough to be the base for developing a FOODB 
Model. Thus, we face the representation on this model 
of the different kinds of imperfections that may arise 
when a database is being designed in an object oriented 
paradigm, according to the level where these imperfec- 
tions may occur. 
Section 2 describe the management of vagueness at the 
attribute level. Section 3 deals with fuzzy extents in 
classes. Section 4 is devoted to study specialization and 
Page: 2323 
gixmxlization processes in inheritance hierarchies. Un- 
certain definitions in objects and classes are explained 
in section 5. Finally, the use of precision levels in type 
dctinition is explained in section 6. Somc concluding 
remarks end the paper. 
2 Attribute Level 
Taking into account the description exposed by Rus- 
pini [ I 51, tlirec differcnt types of imperfect information 
may appear in an attribute value: the value may be ill- 
dcfinccl, i t  may bc atleckd by uncertainty, or both things 
may happcn at thc same time. 
2.1 Imprecise Attribute Domains 
The reason why an attribute value can be ill-defined may 
be assorted, from an actual ill-knowledge of the datum, 
t i l l  an imprecision in nature affecting the domain of the 
attribute. For instance, let us consider the following ex- 
amples: 
1 .  Mikc’s prospects are good. 
2. The mark of Mike is good. 
3. Mike is in his.final academic years. 
In the two last examples, there exists an underlying do- 
main for the attribute, which is perfectly defined. How- 
ever, the other case is different, because it  is not easy to 
tind an underlying domain where the label good could 
be represented in a natural way. So then, at this point, 
we can distinguish two types of imprecise values, that 
is, with and without semantic representation. 
In this last situation, the most appropriate solution is not 
to represent the labels as fuzzy sets, but to consider that 
a resemblance relation is defined over the set of labels 
that conform the attribute domain. In case that an at- 
tribute has inore than one value, we propose not to con- 
sider them in a disjunctive sense, but to include them as 
a new label in the domain, modifying the resemblance 
relation in a suitable manner [ 171. 
In the other two examples, the underlying domain al- 
lows us to detine labels by means of possibility distri- 
butions. However, we must take care about the mean- 
ing given to these possibility distributions since it may 
happen that the real attribute value can take only one of 
the values included in the distribution (e.g. the mark of 
Mike) or its real value is a combination of such values 
(e.g. his academic year): 
, 
If the possibility distribution has a disjunctive in- 
terpretation, the situation is very similar to the one 
0 
2.2 
of the exainplc 1 ,  from the domain structure point 
of view. We have an attribute with an atomic do- 
main, but now is the union of the basic domain and 
a suitable set of labels. We can face this problem 
also considering a fuzzy resemblance relation, but 
now defined as an extension of the natural equality 
which exists in any numerical set [ 171. 
Otherwise, we arc dcaling with an attribute whose 
value is a fuzzy subset of a specific basic domain. 
There is an implicit conjunctive meaning under thc 
label used to express the value. In these siluations. 
we h a w  to deal with a suitable representation for 
the fuzzy set. 
Uncertainty in Attributes Values 
Data, besides being imprecise, may be uncertain. Think 
about those situations where data may be perfectly cle- 
fined, but we are not sure whether they are true or not 
(e.g. it is very possible that Mike lives in Granada). For 
these values, a level of truth must be considered. 
Different measure scales for the uncertainty may be 
considered: it is possible to use probability (w.r.1. pos- 
sibility) measures defined within the [0, I ]-interval or to 
use linguistic probabilities (w.r.t. possibilities) whose 
labels may, in turn, have a semantic representation as a 
disjunctive fuzzy set. 
To consider that some kind of uncertainty is associated 
to some attribute implies to assume that the attribute do- 
main is an aggregation of the actual attribute domain 
and the scale where this uncertainty is measured. No- 
tice that, in case either the actual domain or the scale 
(or both) are fuzzy, the corresponding classes must be 
previously defined and the uncertainty feature must he 
taken into account when calculating similarities[3, 71. 
Figure 1 shows a complete example where vagueness is 
managed when appearing at the attribute level. Classes 
ProspectLabe1 and ExtendedMark are very similar, Iiav- 
ing as main difference the method used to create new in- 
stances: ExtendedMark has an underlying domain (e.g. 
[0- lo]) and new labels can be obtained giving their rep- 
resentation over such domain. We have used a set of 
possibilistic labels in order to express the value of 14171- 
City (short for uncertainty measurement of city). The 
academic year of each student is represented by means 
of a label whose type FuzzyYear is made up of fuzzy 
sets defined over the basic year domain. 
2.3 Uncertain Objects Relationships 
Semantic data models usually offer two ways for con- 
necting objects: The concept of attribute, which in- 
volves a functional approach and i t  is used to relate a 
Page: U24 
Create( ... ) 
1 Imperiecyear ,city , jmembershtp : Float01 i 'year .Year 1 Uncertaincity ! name : Strin 
1 i, omctiv 
label : Siring 
a : Float01 
b : Float01 
c : Float01 
CompuleSimi(op1 ' PossibiliSticLabel) : FloalOl 
Figwe  1. Mike's examplc 
class with the domains of its attributes and the aggre- 
gation construct, which is used to model those relation- 
ships not included in the form of attributes. 
In the previous section, we have explained how to deal 
with the vagueness affecting to the functional connec- 
tion among objects. However, if the relationship must 
be represented by means of an aggregation construct 
some appreciations have to be taken into account: 
3 
The 
If we have partial knowledge about whether two 
objects are related, we can include in the class a 
new attribute standing for the truth level in the cor- 
responding aggregation, using the different truth 
scales we have commented previously. 
On the other hand, instead of a truth level, we can 
consider that the existing connection admits de- 
grees of importance. This situation arises when 
not all the relationship instances have the same 
strength. In these situations, we can use numeri- 
cal or linguistic levels to express this strength. Re- 
garding linguistic scales, it should be noted that the 
labels should have a different meaning from that 
used to express uncertainty. For example, we can 
consider the set {"high", "medium", "low"}, with 
each label represented as a disjunctive fuzzy set in 
[0,11. 
Instance Relationship Level 
presence of vagueness in the attribute values that - 
characterize any object, could lead to some kind of un- 
certainty associated to the membership of each object 
with respect to a given class. This fact is translated into 
a membership degree valued within interval [O, I ] ?  in- 
stead of the traditional crisp one. The class does not 
have a clear extent of objects, but a fuzzy onc. 
The representation of this feature in our object oriented 
model is vcry simple: we only have to add an cxtra at- 
tribute to the class wc want to extend in a fuzzy way. 
Normally this attributc should be [O,  I]-valued, hut to 
consider the use of a set of labels may result interesting 
too. Constructor methods can be defined implementing 
the policy used to calculate the membership dcgrec. 
4 Inheritance Relationship Level 
At this point we must considcr both specialization and 
generalization processes that may appear in the hierar- 
chy of classes of a given problcm. 
4.1 Fuzzy Subclasses 
Specialization processes create subclasses from an ex- 
isting class by constraining the description of-a property 
(e.g. an attribute domain) or hy specifying an additional 
set of properties. Both kinds of mechanisms could lead 
to imprecise structures by considering flexible ways for  
characterizing the corresponding subclasses. This Rex- 
ihility results in a fuzzyfication of the membership de- 
gree of each possible object to the subclass, which can 
be represented taking into account the guidelines stated 
in section 3. 
In the first situation, when the subclass is expressed by 
constraining the description of a property, what we actu- 
ally have is an intensive class in the sense of [ 161, since 
it is defined by means o f a  fuzzy predicate. Therefore, it 
will not be necessary to represent it as a separate struc- 
ture and a suitable procedural management will suffice 
in most cases. 
If the subclass is not defined using any explicit impre- 
cise restriction, but specifying an extra set of proper- 
ties, i t  must be represented separately as an independent 
structure. A less than one membership degree for some 
object will usually come from some of its attributes to 
be null or undefined. 
For example, we may consider a subclass Goodstudent 
from the class Student. To accomplish the creation of 
such a class we only need to compute some heuris- 
tic rule over his marks and then determine the degree 
of goodness of the student. An extra attribute good- 
nessLevel will suffice. On the other hand, let LIS con- 
sider the creation of a subclass Employee from an ex- 
isting class Person. Extra properties would characterize 
the new class, but at the same time the kind of joh may 
result in a fuzzyfication of the extent of the class. Figure 
2 shows both cases. 
0-7803-7078-3/0l/$10.00 (C)U)ol IEEE. Page: 2325 
m mark : Mark 
A 1.: 
! record 
name ' String 
age : Age 
acdYear : FuzzyYear 
1 goodnessLevel : Float01 
Person 
age : Age 
salary : Salary 
md : FloatOl 
I I 
If jabType=' housewfe" c 
lhen salary-null and md-0 8 
Figure %. Siibclass cwation 
4.2 Fuzzy Categories 
In ii generalization process we usually construct a super- 
class by means of the union of different classes existing 
in the schema. Any object of the subclasses must belong 
to the created superclass. 
Additionally, some semantic data models use the cute- 
g o r ~  concept, i.e. a class defined as a subset of a su- 
perclass. The process of defining a new category can be 
smoothed by considering classes as fuzzy subsets of the 
union of the involved classes. 
The representation of a fuzzy category in an object ori- 
ented data model context is similar to the one described 
above, that is, an additional attribute is included to- 
gether with some integrity constraints conceming the 
inclusion of the fuzzy category in the union ofthe initial 
classes. 
Think for example in two classes Student and Teacher. 
We can create the fuzzy category Researcher from this 
two classes: any student or teacher could be considered 
a researcher with a certain degree. This degree is con- 
strained by the membership degree of every object to 
the classes Student and Teacher: 
/ln,,.sr.or.c/rrr, (0) L ~ ~ t u d e n t  (0) V ~ ~ e n c h e r ( 0 ) .  
5 Uncertain Definitions 
Now, let us have a look to those situations where vague- 
ness affects either the definition of the object or the def- 
inition of the class itself (or both of them). 
5.1 Uncertain Object Definition 
We can distinguish two different situations with respect 
to uncertainty affecting the definition of a given object: 
Those situations where we are not sure about the 
value of some attributes: this situation corresponds 
to the attribute level, and does not actually involve 
any change in the detinition of the object. 
Those situations where we arc not sure ahoiil 
whether and object has or not a certain attributc. 
This fact does concern the definition of the object 
and has to be managed in a suitable manner. 
The direct way to manage the uncertainty about thc ap- 
plication of an attribute (or in general a method) to a 
given object is to consider an extra property that in- 
forms us about the applicability level associated to this 
attribute. Thc scale of applicability may be, as usual, of 
several types (possibilistic, probabilistic, etc.). 
It results quite hard to distinguish the semantics of this 
uncertainty: in some situations it could be very difficult 
to make a distinction between the lack of certainty about 
whethcr an attribute characterizes an object or not, or 
the lack of certainty about the reliability of the source 
that provides us the value for the attribute. 
Thinking deeply, an important part of the situations 
where the use of uncertainty in the applicability of a 
property seems to be necessary, may be due to a inap- 
propriate definition of the class. 
5.2 Uncertain Class Definition 
The presence of uncertainty at this level involves some 
considerations that have to be taken into account: 
0 If we create an object of a class defined with un- 
certainty, this uncertainty must be propagated to 
the object definition, and, even, to the object mem- 
bership to this class. That facts make much more 
complex data manipulation. 
0 With the time, this uncertainty may change, and 
this may affect not only the schema but the objects 
in the database. 
The presence of uncertainty in the definition of our 
structures must be avoided. Precisely, one of the most 
important aims of a designer is to eliminate uncertainty 
in the schema, trying to find the best hierarchy of classes 
that represents the problem that is being solved. 
Conversely, a good knowledge of the problem could 
lead us to manage different levels of precision in our 
structures. Next subsection is devoted to study this idea. 
0-7803-7078-3/0U$10.00 (C)2001 IEEE. Page: 2326 
6 Fuzzy Types 
The kist subject that remains untrcatcd from the targets 
exposed in the introduction of this paper is the presence 
of diffcrcnt levels of precision in the definition of the 
classes. 
We can consider the possibility of defining the structure 
and the behavior of a class (i.e., its type), in a soft or 
fuzzy way, in order t o  improve the modeling of complex 
real world problems. 
FUZZY Types are a new kind of types that allows us to 
define the class type hy means of different levels of pre- 
cision. Each property hclongs to the type with a certain 
membership degree at interval [O-I]. That is, a Fuzzy 
Type is a fuzzy sct of properties. Actually, it is a pair 
of fuzzy sets: a fuzzy set of attributes that characterize 
the structure of the type and a fuzzy set of methods that 
determine the behavior associated to this structure. 
The set of properties that can be used to characterize 
the type at any inoinent is the support sct of the fuzzy 
set associated to the type. The kernel-set contains the 
basic attributes characterizing the type. Finally, each 
one of thc a-cuts defines a precision degree with which 
the type can be considered. 
According to the precision required by every object, the 
programmer choose the right a-cut of the class type in 
order to represent it. A inethod new(a) is used to carry 
out this task, using as receptor the involved class and as 
argument the level of the desired a-cut. 
To appropriately deal with Fuzzy Types, the inheritance 
inechanism must enable part of the class structure and 
behavior to be inherited by its subclasses. A threshold 
is added to indicate what part of the properties we want 
to be inherited. Two different forms of inheritance can 
be considered: 
0 Incorporating inherited attributes and methods to 
the kernel set of the structural and behavior com- 
ponents of the subclass, respectively. In this way, 
the vagueness of the inherited properties will be 
eliminated. This type of inheritance is called in- 
heriraricr without vagueness propagation Hcrisp. 
Keeping the vagueness, by inheriting both prop- 
erties and methods affected by the correspond- 
ing membership degree. This type of inheritance 
is called inheritance with vagueness propagation 
Hftc;?,. 
Let see an example. We can describe the concept of im- 
age by means of the following three levels of precision: 
Minimum features: theme, file, format, and ver- 
sion. 
Figtire 3. Rizzy Type Image 
0 First level of precision: horizontal resolution, ver- 
tical resolution, and palette. 
0 Second level of precision: histogram, frontiers, 
bands .and convolution. 
This structure can be expressed using the following 
S = Utheine + Ilfle + I/fonnat + 
+ 1 /version + 0.9/horres + 0.9/verres + 
+0.9/palette + 0.8/bands + 0.Whistogram + 
+0.8/convolution + 0.8/frontiers 
fuzzy sct: 
So, we have the following relevant a-cuts: 
SI ={theme, file, format, version} 
SO.~=S~U { horres, ver-res, palette} 
So.e=So,,U {bands, histogram, convolution, frontiers) 
To represent a FUZZY Type in an classical object- 
oriented database, we can use a 1 -ramified hierarchy of 
classes. This kind of hierarchy is defined as a series of 
classes CI, ..., C,--l, Ci, Cz+I, ..., C,, verifying the 101- 
lowing properties: 
0 Subci = {Ci+l},z = l..n - 1 (Subci stands for 
the set of subclasses of Ci). 
0 SupcZ = {Ci-,},i = 2..n ( S ’ u p ~ i  stands for the 
set of superclasses of Ci). 
0-7803-7078-3/0V$10.00 (C)U#)l IEEE Page: 2327 
A finite sequence of values {cy,) exists, associated 
to thc hierarchy. such that ai = 1. a,, > 0 and 
0 ,  > C I , + I .  
Using this kind of hierarchies we can model easily 
the instatintion mcchanism (we only have to chose the 
right class ol’ the hierarchy and apply the normal new 
mcthod). Thc implementation of the two kinds of in- 
heritance i s  a hit inore complicated. Figure 3 shows the 
hierarchy associated to the example type image. More 
about the problems where fuzzy types can be useful, and 
ii detailed presentation of the conccpt, can be found in 
II3. 121. 
7 Conclusions and Further Work 
This paper summarizes a coinplete proposal for rep- 
resenting vagueness in an object oriented database 
inodel. Vagueness inay appear at differcnt levels in 
our database: we have to distinguish between uncer- 
tainty (i. e. vagueness affecting to thc source that pro- 
vides data) and imprecision (i.e. vagueness affecting the 
data themselves). Moreover, these two situations may 
happen at the same time. In this paper we have stud- 
ied several suitable strategies to face the representation 
of the different kinds of imperfections that may arise 
when a database is being dcsigncd in an object oriented 
paradigm, according to the level where these imperfee- 
tions inay occur. We consider that the traditional ob- 
ject oriented database model is wide and general enough 
to be the base for developing a Fuzzy Object Oriented 
Database Model. 
One of the topics that remain untreated in this paper is 
the modeling of the behavior of the objects when vague- 
ness affects the values of their properties. Though some 
approaches have been proposed in the literature[9] [lo], 
we think that this matter still needs deeper study. Fu- 
ture works may go towards the development of a general 
Fuzzy Object Oriented Database System built on the ba- 
sis of an existing object oriented database system, and 
capahle of managing vagueness from different sources 
in data. At this moment, our research effort is aimed 
to the study of the development of such a System. To 
accomplish this goal, a prototype is being implemented. 
References 
[ I 1  M.  Berler, J .  Eastman, D. Jordan, C. Russell, 
0. Schodow, T. Stanienda, and F. Velez. The object data 
sttrndnrd: ODMG 3.0. R.G.G. Cattell and Douglas K. 
Barry, Morgan Kaufmann. 2000. 
[2] E. Bertino and L. Martino. Object-Oriented Database 
Systcn~s. Concepts orid Architectures. International 
Computer Science Series. Addison-Wesley, 1993. 
[3] G. Bordogna and G. Pasi. Management of linguistic 
qualification of uncertainty in fuzzy databases. In Pro- 
reedings of Irlforrnotion Proresing wid Manogerneiii qf 
Uncertuinty in Knowledge Bmrd Systenis, 199% 
Typicality hased on soll 
aggregations in  fuzzy object orientcd datahases. I n  
Proreedings of EUSFLAT. pagcs 480-492, Mnllorca, 
Esparia, 1999. 
[SI G. Bordogna, G. Pasi, and D. Lucarella. A fuzzy objecl 
oricntcd data model for managing vague and uncertain 
information. l/itetnniioiiol ./ortriicil of’ lnt t~l l i ,yc~ni  .Sx.s- 
tt’nls, 1909. 
[6J R. Gcorgc, B. Bucklcs, and F. Petry. Modelling clnss hi- 
erarchies in the fuzzy objcct-oriented data model. Firzz! 
Sets and Systems, 60:259-272. 1993. 
[7] A. Gonzalez, 0. Pons, and M.  Vila. Dealing with uncer- 
tainty and imprecision by means of fiizzy numhers. I i r -  
rernarionnl Jorrrnol oj I r r r r l l i , ~ r n r  .Sj~stcni.s, 2 I :23?-256. 
1999. 
[8] P. Grey. K .  Kulkarni, and N. Paton. 06ject-0,-icrir(~l 
Datn6ases. A Senlairtic Darn Model Approrrch. Inmma- 
tional Series in Computer Sciencc. Prcntice Hall, 1992. 
Fuzzy ohject- 
oriented databases: Somc hchaviaral issues. In Prowed- 
bigs of EUFIT, pages 361-364, 1994. 
[ I O ]  N. V. Gyseghem and R. D. Caluwe. Imprecision and 
uncertainty in  the ufo database model. Joirrnol of the 
Aniericon Society for Infor~riotion Science. 49:236-252, 
1998. 
[ I  I ]  M. Koyuncu, A. Yazici, and R. George. Flexible query- 
ing in an intelligent object-oriented database environ- 
ment. In  Proceeding ofFQAS, 2000. 
[I21 K. Marin, M. Vila, 1. Blanco, and 0. Pons. Fuzzy types 
as a new layer on an object oriented database system. In 
Proceedings of IPMU, Madrid, Espafia, 2000. 
[ 131 N. Marin, M. Vila, and 0. Pons. Fuzzy types: Softening 
structures. In Proceedings of’ FUZZ-IEEE, San Ant o n  i o, 
Usa, 2000. 
[ 141 J.-P. Rossazza, D. Dubois, and H. Prade. Frrzzy c t n d  U I I -  
certain Object-Oriented Databases. Concepts ond Mod- 
els., volume 13, chapter A hierarchical model of fuzzy 
classes, pages 21-61, Advances in Fuzzy Systems- Ap- 
plications and Theory, 1998. 
Fuzzy Logic trnd Knowledgr Engir~rer-  
ing,  chapter Imprecision and Uncertainty in the Entity- 
RelationshipMOdel, pages 18-28. H. Prade and C.V. 
Negiota eds. Verlag TUV Reheiland, 1986. 
[I61 M. Vila, J. Cubero, J .  Medina, and 0. Pons. F I I Z ~  Sets 
and Possibility Theoty in Dotobosc Mnn~rgcinerr/ .S\:s- 
reins. chapter Logic and fuzzy relational databases: A 
new language and a new delinition, pages I14-lX P. 
Bosc and J. Kacprzyk, 1995. 
[I71 M. Vila, J.  Cubero, J .  Medina, and 0. Pons. A concep- 
tual approach for dealing with imprecision and uncer- 
tainty in object-based data models. Infematiorml ./ow- 
nal of Intelligenr Sysrenis, I 1:791-806, 1996. 
[I81 A. Yazici, R. George, and D. Aksoy. Design and im- 
plementation issues in the fuzzy object-oriented datu 
model. Journal of fnformnrion Sciences, I08:24 1-260. 
1998. 
1191 A. Yazici and M. Koyuncu. Fuzzy object-oriented 
database modeling coupled with fuzzy logic. Frczzy Scts 
ond Systems. 89: 1-26, 1997. 
[20] L. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Infor-nrotiort mid C.’onim/, 8:338- 
353. 1965. 
141 G. Bordogna and G .  Pasi. 
191 N. V. Gyseghem and R.  D. Caluwe. 
[ 151 E. Ruspini. 
0-7803-7078-3/0U$l0~00 (C)U#)l IEEE Page: 2328 
