1 
. Balloon Precursor Mission for Venus Surface 
Sample Return 
Viktor V. Kerzhanovich 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91 109 
(8 18) 354-9075 Viktor V. Kexzha~7ovichi~i111.nasa,~ov 
Jeffery L. Hall, 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109 
(818) 354-153 1 Jefferv.I,.Halli'cl;ipl.nasa.eov 
Andre Yavrouian, 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91 109 
(818) 354-7544 A n d r e . A . Y a v r c t u l . i ~ a s a . ~ ~ ) ~ ~  
Abstract - This paper proposes a Precursor mission to the 
Venus Surface Sample return Mission (VSSR). The 
present scenario of the VSSR [l] includes delivery by a 
balloon of the Venus Ascent Vehicle (VAV) from the 
surface to an altitude of approximately 60 km, where it 
can be launched without huge penalty for atmospheric 
losses. The mission includes a number of critical 
technologies that can be validated in this proposed 
precursor mission. The other objective of the proposed 
mission is to collect the more accurate data on Venus 
atmosphere that is essential for the VSSR mission design. 
The precursor mission would consist of an entry vehicle 
carrying two probes. The enhy vehicle would be inserted 
in the Venus atmosphere from an approach trajectory. 
One probe would include a zero-pressure balloon that will 
deploy and inflate at an altitude 55 km and rise to 80 km. 
During this ascent it would collect data on vertical 
structure, wind and turbulence that are essential for the 
VAV guidance and control. These data would also 
provide the first high-resolution data collected for this 
region of the atmosphere. The data will be transmitted 
directly to the DSN station. 
The second probe would be a sub-scale prototype of the 
VSSR lander and will include the VAV simulator, the 
high-temperature balloon, inflation and thermal control 
systems. During the descent it would provide high- 
accuracy temperature and pressure measurements of the 
atmosphere (there is no accurate data on the vertical 
structure of the lowest 12 km where the Pioneer Venus 
sensors ceased to operate and the VEGA 2 lander pressure 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 O 2001 IEEE 
sensor did not have adequate accuracy). The balloon would be 
inflated and released to ascend to the nominal VAV launch' 
altitude of 60 km. Atmospheric and balloon performance data 
will be transmitted directly to Earth. This probe would 
validate the technologies that are most critical for the VSSR. 
As a descope option, the high-temperature balloon could be 
deployed and inflated at 50-55 km and then allowed to 
descend to the surface. In this case only balloon technology 
would be validated. 
The paper will discuss the basic mission and system elements 
for the proposed precursor mission. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. VENUS ATMOSPHEREENVIRONMENT 
3. 
4. VSSR PRECURSOR MISSION CONCEPT 
6. PROBE-2: LANDER AND LIFT BALLOON 
7. CANDIDATE MATERIALS FOR THE LIFT BALLOON 
8. MEASUREMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS 
VENUS SURFACE S M L E  RETURN MISSION (VSSR) 
5. PROBE-1: MESOSPHERIC BALLOON 
9. SUMMARY 
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
11. REFERENCES 
12. BIOGRAPHIES 
1-163 
1. INTRODUCTION 2. VENUS ATMOSPHERE NVIRONMENT 
In recent years interest in Venus exploration was 
overshadowed by spectacular discoveries in the outer 
planets and an intensive Mars exploration program. 
At the same time Venus, being the closest planet to E;“h 
and similar in many respects (mass, size, gravity, dense 
atmosphere), differs dramatically in others - the most 
pronounced are high surface temperatures and pressures, 
super-rotation of the atmosphere, absence of water, and 
sulfuric acid clouds. The study of Venus can yield useful 
insight into the Earth’s behavior, particularly in the area 
of greenhouse gases and global warming. 
Nineteen vehicles have studied Venus atmosphere in situ: 
eleven Venera probes (Veneras 4-14), two VEGA landers, 
two VEGA balloons and four Pioneer Venus probes. 
Twelve orbiterdfly-bys gathered remote data: three 
Mariners (Mariner 2, 5, lo), Pioneer Venus orbiter, 
Magellan, Galileo, four Venera orbiters (Venera 
9,10,15,16), and two VEGA vehicles. These data reveal 
many features of the atmosphere. Veneras 9-12 returned 
first in situ images of the surface of Venus. Orbital radar 
imaging from Venera-15, 16 and especially from the 
Magellan orbiter revealed practically the whole surface of 
the planet. Veneras 13 and 14 made first in situ analysis 
of the surface soil. 
In spite of this extensive past exploration of Venus, many 
fundamental scientific questions remain. The Venus 
Surface Sample Return (VSSR) mission is designed to 
address many of these questions by returning a rock 
sample to the Earth for detailed analysis. However, the 
VSSR mission requires a number of new technologies 
that entail significant risk in the absence of prior flight 
validation. Therefore, we propose a lower-cost precursor 
mission that will provide validation of the key 
technologies and return useful science data on those: parts 
of the atmosphere poorly covered by the past missions. 
More accurate knowledge of the atmosphere is needed 
from the surface to 60-65 km, which is the environment 
where VSSR mission will operate. There is no accurate 
data on the vertical structure of the lowest 12 km of the 
atmosphere. The stratosphere, with exception of the 
probes’ accelerometer data, has been essentially 
unexplored with in situ measurements. It is also unknown 
whether any significant changes in the structure and 
circulation of the atmosphere have occurred since the last 
Vega missions in 1985. The suggested precursor nlission 
would address these and other fundamental questions on 
physics of the atmosphere, including the nature, pattem 
and evolution of the atmospheric circulation in the 
troposphere and stratosphere, the nature and distribution 
of the W-absorber, and the structure and composition of 
the stratospheric clouds. 
The vertical structure of the atmosphere of Venus, as 
measured by entry probes and orbiters [2], is shown in Fig.1. 
The middle atmosphere - from 12 to 55 km is covered with 
the most accurate data. The structure of the lower atmosphere 
(0 to 12 km) is base on Venera’s and Vega 2 lander 
measurements (sensors of Pioneer Venus probes ceased to 
function bdow 12 km). The fine details are still unknown due 
to insufficient accuracy of the measurements. 
There is :significant lack of high-resolution data on the 
atmospheric structure above 55-58 km, since the descent 
probes passed rapidly through this region. Most of the data 
were obtained from remote measurements (radio-occultation, 
IR-radiometers and IR-spectrometers) and from 
accelerometers on descent probes. 
H, km Temperature, K 
0 200 400 600 800 
40 
30 
20 
10 
Pressure, bar Density, kg/m3 Windspeed, mls 
Figure 1. Vertical structure of atmosphere of Venus 
One of the most enigmatic features of Venus is the 
atmospheric circulation. Prompted by Earth-based W 
observations of high-altitude cloud structure and 
unambigualusly discovered by Venera 8 measurements, the 
super-rotation phenomena remains unexplained. Vertical 
structure of winds above 55 to 58 km is poorly known because 
of the above-mentioned lack of resolution of probe data. 
Altitude of winds derived from UV-clouds motions is also 
unknown. 
Clouds cover the entire surface of Venus, extending tens of 
kilometers above an approximate base of 47-48 km [3]. Of the 
three major cloud layers - low, middle and upper - the upper 
was less c:overed with direct measurements. There are still 
1-164 
uncertainties in cloud composition and in the nature of 
the absorber(s) responsible for the appearance of Venus 
in the ultra-violet. 
No direct measurements were conducted in polar areas, 
where the Pioneer Venus IR-radiometer observed a very 
different thermal pattern. 
3. VENUS SAMPLE RETURN MISSION (VSSR) 
The 3000 kg VSSR spacecraft would be launched on a 
Delta N medium vehicle. After about a four month flight 
to Venus, the Spacecraft performs an aerocapture 
maneuver with an inflatable decelerator, also known as a 
ballute. Plane change maneuvers and aerobraking bring 
the spacecraft to a 300-km circular equatorial orbit. At the 
proper time a small pulse deorbits the entry vehicle with 
the lander, while the orbiter continues its active life. The 
lander enters using another ballute and descends to the 
surface in approximately 1-1.5 hours. Terminal velocity 
in the dense lower atmosphere is less than 10 m / s ,  and no 
parachute may need to effect a safe landing. 
Shortly after landing the ultra-sonic drill takes a sample 
and a sample transfer mechanism loads the sample into 
the return canister located on top of the 470-kg solid- 
motor rocket called Venus Ascent Vehicle (VAV). Due 
to huge atmospheric drag losses it is impractical to launch 
the VAV from the surface of Venus. Instead, the VAV is 
lifted by a balloon to an altitude of 60 km or more 
(equivalent to altitude -9 km on the Earth), where the 
VAV is launched for rendezvous with the orbiter. After 
the rendezvous and canister transfer to the orbiter, the 
orbiter propulsively escapes from Venusian orbit and 
returns to Earth. Collection of the sample canister would 
follow the scheme developed for the Mars Sample Return 
mission. 
VSSR has a number of new technologies that are critical 
for the mission: 
Ballute - inflatable aerodynamic decelerator to be 
used for aerocapture of the spacecraft and for 
deceleration of the lander. Though the first studies 
were made 30-40 years ago the frrst test of entry 
decelerator has been performed in early 2000 by the 
Russians [4] . The detailed analysis of experiments 
has not yet published; 'however, it seems likely that 
the Russian concept will require significant 
modification for use in aerocapture applications. 
Thermal protection of the VAV - the solid fuel in 
the VAV should be kept cool during the mission. 
Approximately 5 hours will be spent in atmospheric 
temperatures above 20OoC. The proposed VSSR 
concept of thermal insulation needs to be tested for 
this purpose. 
High-temperature balloon - balloon material and 
seaming technology should be developed and tested 
that would tolerate the environment after balloon inflation 
and during ascent. The temperature range from 460°C to 
-20°C with presence of concentrated sulfuric acid 
droplets. 
Thermal protection of inflation tanks - the balloon will 
require 70 kg of helium to be stored in tanks and 
delivered to the surface of Venus. Initial tank pressure is 
1000 bars and the tanks should be kept below 80°C up to 
start of the balloon inflation. 
Balloon inflation and launch fiom the surface - currently 
only small latex balloons are launched automatically. 
Remote deployment, inflation and launch of the 
considerable size balloons (1000 m3) needs validation 
also. 
4. VSSR PRECURSOR MISSION CONCEPT 
The entry vehicle of the precursor mission will be delivered to 
Venus by a spacecraft launched by a Delta 7325 class launch 
vehicle. One to two months prior to arrival the entry vehicle 
will be targeted to the desired location at Venus and the cruise 
stage will perform an avoidance maneuver to fly-by the planet. 
The fly-by will be used to provide a reference source for 
Differential Very Long Base Interferometry (DVLBI) 
measurements for velocity of the,balloons [5 ] .  
The entry vehicle will house two probes: Probe-1 with the 
stratospheric zero-pressure balloon with deployment and 
inflation system, and the instrumented gondola; Probe-2 with 
the lander, gondola, lifting balloon and gas tanks. 
The mission sequence is shown in Fig. 2 a, b. A small ballute 
will be deployed and inflated prior to insertion into the 
atmosphere. The ballute will be used as auxiliary decelerator 
in addition to the aeroshell. The recorded deceleration during 
the entry will help to validate the ballute performance. 
At an altitude of 58 to 56 km, the back shell will be ejected 
and two probes will be separated: a parachute will decelerate 
Probe-1, whereas Probe-2 will continue a fiee descent. When 
Probe- 1 reaches terminal velocity, the balloon container opens 
and the balloon deploys with the inflation system suspended 
from the bottom fitting. The inflation process lasts 30 to 60 s. 
Ten seconds prior to completing inflation, the parachute 
separates from the balloon with inflation system and gondola 
still suspended. Five to ten seconds after completion of 
inflation, an adequate distance between the parachute and the 
balloon will be achieved and the inflation system will be 
dropped. The balloon then starts to ascend, with the gondola 
hanging below the bottom fitting. With an expected rate of 
ascent of 3 to 5 m / s  the balloon will reach its ceiling of 80 to 
82 km in 1.5-3 hours. 
During the ascent data will be transmitted directly to the DSN 
via one-way X-band link and low-gain antenna. The antenna 
pattern can be matched to the expected geometry and can take 
advantage of an almost ideal vertical orientation of the flight 
system during ascent. 
1-165 
Probe-2 will land on the surface in 1.5 hrs; even without a 
parachute landing velocity would be less than 5 m / s  and a 
Figure 2a. Entry and Probe-1 flight profile 
Figure 2b. Probe-2 flight profile 
simple crushable flatbed or torus could be used to absorb 
the energy of landing (this type of landing device was 
used successfully by six Venera and two Vega landers). 
Selecting the landing site at the Venus plains will reduce 
landing risk. After 1.5 hrs of stay on the surface, the 
lifting balloon container will be opened and the balloon 
will start to inflate through an inflation pipe attached to 
the top fitting. In 1-2 min inflation will be completed and 
the balloon with the gondola will be released from the 
lander. In 4 hrs the system will ascend to 60 km and will 
stay there until it will loose its free lift due to updraft and 
downdraft atmospheric motions. During all phases data will be 
transmitted to the DSN over S-band direct-to-Earth (DTE) 
link. 
5. PROBE- 1: MESOSPHERIC BALLOON 
The concept for Probe-1 was described in [6]. 'The balloon 
has a traditional zero-pressure natural shape design with 
modifications for aerial deployment and inflation. Due to the 
relatively benign temperatures (20 to 30 C) at altitude of 
deployment, the balloon can be ,made of polyethylene. 
Resistance to sulfuric acid breakdown and low density makes 
polyethyleine a preferable choice for the Venus cloud 
environment. Fig.3 shows balloon diameter and mass for 6.25 
p polyethylene balloon as a function of payload mass. 
" T  I I I I I I I 
Figure 3. Balloon diameter and mass as functions of 
ceiling altitude and mass of payload 
To sustain loads during aerial deployment, some of the 
balloon seims could be reinforced with Spectra fibers. The 
ripstitch shock absorbers are key elements of the deployment 
system to effectively limit deployment loads. Other elements 
of the deployment system are pyro cable-cutters, the balloon 
container and a system of tethers that connect all parts. 
6. I'ROBE-2: LANDER AND LIFT BALLOON 
Lander. The lander component of this mission is intended to 
collect atmospheric data below 12 km and to test two critical 
VSSR technologies: thermal insulation and balloon 
deployment and inflation from the ground. Preliminary design 
suggests that these objectives can be met with a relatively 
small, 45 kg landed vehicle. Table 1 shows a mass breakdown 
by component. There are four main subsystems: lander 
structure, ascent balloon, helium gas supply and instrumented 
gondola. ELach will now be described in more detail. 
The Venusian atmosphere is sufficiently dense (64 kg/m3 at 
the surface) that impact velocities of less than 5 m / s  are 
1-166 
possible without the use of parachutes on such a small 
lander. Therefore, we propose here to use a simple pallet- 
type lander with a crushable base to absorb the energy of 
impact. 
Balloon 
Balloon container, insulation, PCM 
He gas 
This approach should be suitable for landing in the large, 
flat plains on Venus that contain minimal slopes or rock 
hazards. This scenario was used on eight previous 
Russian Venus landers. 
3.0 
6.0 
1.5 
Table 1: Lander Mass List 
IMass (kg) 
I 
He gas tank and plumbing 
He tank insulation, PCM 
I 
Lander structure I 10.0 
4.0 
5.0 
Gondola payload and pressure vessel I 8.5 
Gondola extemal insulation and PCM 7.0 
I Total1 45.01 
The balloon, gondola and helium gas supply 
subsystems all require thermal insulation to limit the peak 
temperature experienced during the mission. We have 
estimated heating loads using a similar altitude vs time 
profile as was derived for the VSSR mission: 1.5 hour 
descent after ejection ffom the aeroshell, 1.5 hours on the 
surface, and 4 hours ascent to 60+ km. 
The same 4-part thermal insulation strategy is 
proposed for all three subsystems. This is schematically 
illustrated in Fig. 4 using the helium storage tank as an 
example. Part 1 is a 5 cm thick porous insulation blanket 
wrapped around the component. High temperature 
Microthem blankets [7] would appear to be suitable for 
this purpose, providing an effective thermal conductivity 
in air of only 0.03 W/m-K at 400 "C. Note that without a 
heavy pressure vessel to protect it, this insulation will fill 
up with COz gas during the descent to the surface. Part 2 
of the thermal protection system is a heat sink comprised 
of a high heat of fusion phase change material (PCM) like 
water (0 "C, 333 kJkg) or lithium nitrate trihydrate (30 
"C, 296 kJkg). This heat sink will be used to absorb heat 
coming through the insulation and to cool the COz gas 
filling up the pores of the insulation. The inlet tube and 
COz gas - PCM heat exchanger comprise Part 3 of the 
thermal protection system. Finally, Part 4 is a Teflon 
membrane that provides a gas impermeable skin for the 
insulation blanket and forces COz to enter the insulation 
void by going through the PCM heat exchanger. 
Structural Porous 
insulation 
Figure 4. Insulation Schematic For Helium Tank 
The gondola consists of a 30-cm diameter Ti-6A1-4V pressure 
vessel that contains the flight electronics, transmitter, 
batteries, temperature and pressure sensors. These are the 
only landed components that need to be protected from the 90 
atmosphere surface pressure at Venus. An external blanket 
plus 3 kg of PCM will keep the inside gondola temperature 
roughly constant during the descent and surface stay. 
However, since this protection is discarded at the moment of 
ascent, additional insulation and phase change material must 
be provided inside the gondola to protect it during the 4-hour 
ascent. Since the pressure vessel keeps out the CO2, we can 
use Xenon gas in the gondola to provide superior insulation 
performance [SI. As seen in Table 1, the gondola masses 8.5 
kg, not including the external insulation and PCM. 
A 4-m diameter natural shaue zero-uressure balloon is 
required to lift the 8.5 kg gondola to 60 km at Venus. This 
balloon will mass 2.1 kg based on the 60 g/m2 Teflon coated 
PBO cloth material described elsewhere in the next section. 
The balloon must be filled with 1.5 kg of helium gas to 
provide 20% free lift, enough to get the gondola to 60 km in 
approximately 4 hours. Note that the balloon will be stored in 
a container prior to surface deployment where the balloon 
temperature should not exceed 300 "C as per the material 
specification. This container will therefore be protected by the 
standard insulation blanket and PCM arrangement described 
above to achieve this temperature requirement. 
The 1.5 kg of helium gas will be stored in a carbon fiber 
wound composite pressure vessel with a nominal pressure of 
1000 atm. Another 5-cm thick insulation blanket along with 2 
kg of PCM will serve to keep the helium tank below 80°C. A 
simple orifice will be used to set the flow rate of helium gas 
into the balloon such that inflation is complete in 
approximately 1 minute. 
Deployment. inflation and launch of the lifl balloon. The lift 
balloon will be packed in a storage container on top of the 
lander. If deployed, the 4-m diameter balloon will have a 
length of 6.5 m. To minimize launch equipment and reduce 
risk the balloon will be inflated through a 1.5 m pipe attached 
to the top of the balloon. Due to ambient pressure and density 
1-167 
difference, on the surface the balloon volume with all 1.5 
kg helium inside will be about 100 times smaller than at 
60 km altitude and diameter of the inflated part would be 
less than 1 m. According to Venera 9, 10 data, winds the 
surface do not exceed 1-1.5 m / s  and the small size of 
balloon makes it manageable during the launch. This 
inflated part of the balloon (bubble) will be attached to 
the lander until the launch. At the launch the gondola will 
be disconnected fkom the lander’s structure and the 
balloon will be released. A ripstitch shock absorber will 
be used to mitigate the shock load when the gondola will 
be lifted from the lander. The balloon with the gondola 
will reach 60 km in roughly 4 hours. 
exceeding weight limitations. A non-load bearing 
fluoropolymer coating could then be applied to the scrim to 
complete the balloon composite material. 
100 :- I 
w +  I 
t 
0 -  1 
0 1w 200 300 4w 500 600 703 
TEMPERATURE. 5: 
7. CANDIDATE MATERIALS FOR THE LIFT 
BALLOON 
The precursor mission will provide an opportunity to 
develop and validate the balloon material for the VSSR 
mission. The concept of the material was developed in the 
VSSR study. 
In order to meet the harsh environment of Venusian 
atmosphere and surface, several candidate materials have 
been considered [9, lo]: polybenzoxazole (PBO), 
polyimidobenzoxazole (PIBO), polyfluoroalkoxy (PFA) 
and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) films, PBO and 
carbon fibers, metal foils such as nickel and titanium, and 
various composites thereof. 
The selection of the current balloon envelope material 
concept is based on the assumption that while on the 
surface (during Venus surface sample acquisition) the 
balloon envelope will be kept at a temperature less than 
300OC. Subsequent balloon deployment, inflation, and 
ascent to lower than 400°C altitude (40 km) will take less 
than 60 minutes. 
The use of PBO as the primary balloon material is 
attractive due to its good thermomechanical properties 
[9,10]. As seen in Figure 5 ,  tensile testing of PBO film at 
elevated temperatures shows a retention of up to 14% of 
its room temperature strength at 600°C and over 37% at 
450°C. 
Tensile testing of PBO fiber at 600°C indicates a similar 
temperature dependence as that of the film. This data 
agrees with PBO fiber data obtained by the manufr. cicturer 
of Zylon@ fiber, Toyobo Corp., Japan. On the other hand, 
due to PBO’s incompatibility with the sulfuric: acid 
environment, coating materials would be needed Sor the 
protection of this high temperature polymer. 
Since no single film has all necessary properties, several 
composite materials have been considered. For instance, 
the use of PBO or carbon fiber in a scrim network would 
greatly enhance the strength of the balloon without 
Figure 5. Retained tensile strength of PBO film at 
high temneratures 
The stability of fluoropolymers toward sulfuric acid has been 
evaluated [ 101 and several fluoropolymer composites have 
been proposed. The thermal stability of some of the 
commercially available fluoropolynier films is shown in 
Figure 6. l?reliminary tests indicate that thin Teflon (PTFE) 
film is practically inert and impermeable to concentrated 
sulfuric acid. 
In summaiy, the proposed candidate material, both for the 
precursor :and VSSR missions, will be composed of PBO 
fabric, coated with PTFE resin on one (outside) or both sides. 
In addition, the PTFE layer will be metallized or coated with 
MoS2 or graphite powder to eliminate the surface tackiness of 
110; - 1
t 
Figure 6. Isothermal Weight Loss of Fluoropolymers 
the resin at these temperatures. Increasing strength and better 
tear resistance would result from such a composite design. 
Furthermore, such composites would decrease the 
technological development necessary for balloon fabrication, 
1-168 
as both PBO and carbon scrim fibers are commercially 
available. The use of fabric scrim would also 
significantly simplify the seaming technology which 
otherwise will require the development of high 
temperature adhesives. However, as a preliminary 
concept design, no data exists on such a composite. 
Hence, extensive characterization studies would 
undoubtedly be required. 
8. MEASUREMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS 
Instruments. On Probe-1 the basic instruments may 
include pressure and temperature sensors (for 
measurements of thermal structure) and nephelometer (to 
study the vertical structure of clouds). No special 
requirements are imposed on the sensors (especially on 
the night-side), since the balloon ascends relatively 
slowly. The temperature sensor should be protected from 
possible deposition of sulfuric acid. Other instruments 
may include radiometer to measure thermal fluxes, and 
one-axis accelerometer to record the turbulence. Attempts 
to measure atmospheric composition, and especially the 
nature of the UV-absorber, seem the most challenging and 
it is unclear if it is feasible to do within the spirit of a 
low-cost precursor mission. 
On Probe-2 science measurements will be concentrated 
on getting accurate data on vertical structure of the lower 
atmosphere of Venus, and may include pressure and 
temperature sensors only. A set of engineering 
temperature sensors will be put at locations that will 
characterize thermal protection performance and thereby 
validate the design. The control points will include inner 
and outer walls of the gondola, inside the thermal 
insulation, walls of helium tank and balloon envelope. 
Probe-1 will use an X-band transmitter with 5 W RF 
power output. With an omni-directional antenna 
(gain-OdB), the system can achieve data rates of 10 to 20- 
bits/sec at distances of 100 to 150 million kilometers 
(which are typical for Venus missions). This data rate is 
compatible with the low ascent rate of the balloon, 
approximately 5-m/s, so that a 5 sec sampling period will 
provide data every 25 m, which is essentially a continuous 
coverage. 
The slowly-ascending balloon is a good tracer of wind, 
since the horizontal velocity of balloon is equal to local 
wind velocity. The DVLBI tracking is the most accurate 
and adequate method to measure drift of the balloon and 
correspondingly vertical profile of wind. DVLBI 
effectively measures angular motion of the balloon 
relative to a reference source which position is known. 
This method was used successfully to determine winds 
with Pioneer Venus probes and VEGA balloons. Using 
the cruise stage during fly-by as the reference source; the 
expected accuracy of wind measurements will be better 
than 0.3 d s .  
A similar transmitter operating at S-band will be used with 
Probe-2. S-band is needed because carbon dioxide at high 
pressures in the lower atmosphere of Venus absorbs strongly' 
X-band radiation. Lithium batteries will be the primary power 
source for this short-duration mission. Continuous 
transmission with a total DC power consumption of 20 W over 
3 hours for Probe-1 and 6 hours for Probe-2 would require 300 
g and 600 g of batteries respectively. An ultra-stable oscillator 
will make it possible to measure winds with high vertical 
resolution using tracking of both balloons with Differential 
Very-Long Base Interferometry method. 
9. SUMMARY 
The proposed concept of a VSSR precursor is a relatively 
low-cost mission with both high scientific and technological 
return providing accurate measurements of the Venus 
atmosphere from the surface to 80-82 km and validating key 
technologies that will be need for much more expensive and 
much more visible Venus Surface Sample Return Mission. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research described in this paper was carried out at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
6. 
11. REFERENCES 
R. Gershman, E. Nilsen, T. Sweester. Venus Sample Re- 
turn Mission. Paper presented to IEEE 2000 Aerospace 
conference, Big Sky, MT, March 18-25,2000 
A. Seiff? J.T. Scoffield, A.J. Kliore, F.W. Taylor, S.S. Li- 
maye, H.E. Revercomb, L.A. Sromovsky, V.V. Kerzha- 
novich, V.I. Moroz and M.Ya. Marov (1985). Models of 
the Structure of the Atmosphere of Venus from the Sur- 
face to 100 km Altitude, AdvSpace Res., 5 ,  #11,3-58. 
B.Ragent, L.W.Esposito, M.G.Tomasko, M.Ya.Marov, 
V.P.Shari and V.N.Lebedev (1985). Particular matter in 
the Venus Atmosphere, Adv. Space Res., 5, #11,85-116 
Space News, February 2000 
R.Z.Sagdeev, V.M.Linkin, J.E.Blamont, R.A.Preston 
(1986). The VEGA Venus Balloon Experiment, Science, 
231,1407. 
V.V. Kerzhanovich, D. Crisp, R. A. Preston, L.W. Espo- 
sito, A.P. Ingersoll, R.E. Young, J.E. Blamont, V.M. Lin- 
kin. Venus Mesosphere Sounder: First In Situ Measure- 
ments in Upper Cloud Region. Paper presented to IV 
IAA International Conference on Low-Cost Planetary 
Missions. John Hopkins University, Laurel, MD, May 2- 
5,2000 
1-169 
7. http : //wvw. microtlierm.uk. coldindex. html 
8. J.L Hall, P.D. MacNeal, M.A. Salama, J.A. Jones 
and M.K.Heun. “Thermal and Structural Test Results 
For A Venus Deep Atmosphere Instrument 
Enclosure”, AIAA Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, 
Vol. 37, NO. 1, pp. 142-144, 2000. 
9. A. Yavrouian, S.P.S. Yen, G. Plett. N. Weissinan. 
“High Temperature Materials for Venus Balloon 
Envelopes,” 1 1 th AIAA Lighter-Than-Air Systems 
Technology Conference, May 16-1 8, 1995, 
Cleanvater, Florida. 
10. A.Yavrouian, S.P.S.Yen, G. Plett, J.A.Cutts, D.Baek. 
“Evaluation of Materials for Venus Aerobot 
Applications”, 13 th AIAA Lighter-Than-Air Systems 
Technology Conference, June 28-July 1, 1999, 
Norfolk, Virginia. 
12. BIOGRAPHIES 
Viktor V. Kerzhanovich . 
received his B.S. in I 
physics from Moscow 
State University, 
Candidate of Science 
degree and Doctor of 
Science in physics from 
the Space Research 
Institute of the Soviet 
Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow. He took part 
in atmospheric experiments, tracking and data acquisition 
on all Soviet deep space probes to Venus and Mars, 
including Venera 4-16, the VEGA, and Phobos. In 1997 
he joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/ Cal(fornia 
Institute of Technology as a Senior Member of Technical 
Stafs Since then, his efsorts have been concentrated on 
development of aerobot technology for planetary 
applications. His technical interests include scientijk 
ballooning, communication, tracking and navigation. 
Dr. Kerzhanovich has published over 100 papers on 
technology applications, mission concepts and planetary 
studies. He is a member of AIAA Technical Committee on 
Balloon Technology. 
Jefery L. Hall received his B. A. 
Sc. (Hons.) degree in 
Engineering Science from the 
University of Toronto in 1984, 
and M S. and Ph. D. degrees in 
Aeronautics from the California 
Institute of Technology in 1985 
and 1991 respectively. He 
joined the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratoiy in 1997 where he 
has worked on a variety of technology development and 
mission design projects including planetary balloons, Venus 
atmosphere probes and landers, aerocapture vehicles and 
cryogenic refrigeration. Dr. Hall is a Senior Member of the 
A M .  
Andre H. Yavrouian received his 
MS .  in Organic Chemistry and 
Polymers from Sofia State 
University, Sofia, Bulgaria. In 
1977 he joined JPL and since 1990 
has been Group Supervisor of the 
Analytical Chemistry & Material 
Development Group. His recent 
involvement includes evaluation, 
characteriz ation, qualijkation and 
testing of materials for planetary 
balloons, ballutes and injlatable 
planetary rovers and development of sterilization concepts for 
Mars Sample Return. Flight project involvement includes 
area of pr(opel1ants chemistiy, materials selection, materials 
compatibility and testing for Cassini, Wide Field Planetary 
Camera, Mars Observer, Galileo and other spacecrafts. 
Past years involvement includes synthesis and development of 
carbons fbr sorption cooling, polyurethanes for electronic 
part encapsulation, artiiJicia1 blood substitutes, fuel additives 
to suppress post-crash aircraft pres, polymerizable UV 
absorbers .for solar cell encapsulation and others. List of 
publicatio fir includes over 80 papers, scientiiJic reports and 
patents. 
1-170 
