A High Frame Rate CCD Camera with Region-of-Interest 
Capability 
Steve P. Monacos, Angel A. Portillo, William Liu, James W. Alexander, Gerard0 G. Ortiz 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91109-8099, MS 300-123 
Steve.P.Monacos@pl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-91 61 
Abstract-This paper presents the design and preliminary 
results of a custom high-speed CCD camera utilizing a 
Texas Instruments TC237 CCD imager chip with sub-frame 
window read out. The camera interfaces to a C40 digital 
signal processor (DSP), which is used to issue commands 
and read images from the camera. The camera design 
consists of a two-card set including the CCD imager card 
and the focal plane array (FPA) interface card. The CCD 
imager card contains the level translator and buffer circuitry 
for the CCD strobe lines, the TC237 CCD imager chip and a 
pair of analog signal processor chips, each with a 10-bit 
analog-ta-digital converter. The analog signal processor is a 
TLV987 with correlated double sampling (CDS) and serial 
programming capability to set amplifier gain, pixel bias 
level and background level illumination to name a few. The 
second card contains a pair of field programmable gate 
mays (FPGA) used to interface the CCD imager card to the 
C40. The goal of this camera development is to provide a 
high-quality, high-speed camera as part of the tracking 
apparatus for a free-space optical communications terminal. 
Preliminary data suggests fiame rates of 6KHz for 8x8 sub- 
windows in the current testbed with 7-bit pixel resolution. 
Refinements in camera and testbed operation target 
performance goals of 17MZ for 8x8 sub-windows with 10- 
bit pixel resolution. 
Table of Contents - 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. TES~EDSETW 
3. TC237 CAMEM DESIGN 
3.1 TC237 CCD Card 
3.2 FPA Interface Card 
4.1 C40 DSP Software Commands 
4. SOFTWARE CONTROL 
5. TIMING DETAILS AND IMAGNG FOR SUB-WLNDOW 
READOUT 
5.1 Timing Parameters 
5.2 Calculated Readout Timing for Two Sub- 
5.3 Preliminary Results for a Single Sub-window 
Windows 
6 .  CONCLUSIONS 
I 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 Q 2001 IEEE 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Implementation of a free-space optical communications link 
requires a tracking apparatus to acquire and track an 
incoming laser beacon for reliable link operation. The 
pointing accuracy of the tracking apparatus is determined by 
link parameters including the required link bit rate and bit 
error rate (BER), link geometry, transmission media and 
beacon characteristics to name a few [l]. To achieve the 
necessary pointing accuracy requires a camera capable of 
region-of-interest (i.e. sub-window) read out rates up to 
several Kilo Hertz with greater than eight bits of resolution 
per pixel [ 13. 
Commercially available cameras are well suited to 
applications requiring full-frame, large form factor video 
streams or sub-window readout for still-frame image 
capture. Commercial cameras are not designed for the 
combination of single fiame and high-speed streaming video 
with sub-window image capture and greater than eight bits 
of resolution per pixel. Development of a custom camera 
fills this void. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
2 describes the testbed used to debug camera operation and 
collect data for preliminary analysis. Section 3 describes 
detailed camera design and operation. Section 4 details the 
software control for the camera. Section 5 discusses sub- 
window timing details and preliminary results of images 
taken by the camera. Section 6 provides concluding remarks 
and a road map of additional activities to enhance camera 
performance. 
2. TESTBED SETUP 
The testbed used to evaluate camera operation and 
performance is shown in Fig 1. This configuration includes 
two processors and the custom electronics consisting of the 
global bus interface logic and the TC237 CCD camera. The 
global bus interface contains the logic for the address 
decoder, handshake mechanism and data path buffers to 
access the camera via the global bus port of the C40 
processor. The CCD camera receives and acknowledges 
3-1513 
commands from the C40 and returns pixel data when so 
requested. 
The PC host runs a graphical user interface used to send 
commands and receive telemetry from the C40. This 
communication is via the ISA bus of the host PC. The PC 
host is not directly involved in the real-time command and 
control of the CCD camera. 
This testbed is part of a legacy system used for 
demonstrating acquisition and tracking of a laser be.acon for 
a he-space optical communications terminal. The camera 
design was functionally split into an interface card and CCD 
card, This configuration allows for rapid evaluation of the 
CCD card in the legacy system by designing the CCD 
interface card to adhere to the existing camera interface. 
Insertion of the CCD camera into a next-generation 
acquisition and tracking platform will allow for increased 
throughput by leveraging the CCD card with an enhanced 
design of the current FPA interface card. 
connections for the card. The CCD card includes regulator 
circuitry, level translators and buffers, a TC237 imager and 
two TLV987 signal processors to provide TTL 
compatibility for all input and output signals on the card. 
The TC237 CCD sensor and TLV987 signal processors are 
the primary components of the CCD cad. 
The TC;!37 is a CCD imager with an image area of 680 
pixels per line and 500 lines [3]. The active image area of 
the CCD is 658 pixels per line and 496 lines and contains all 
exposed pixels during scene capture [3]. There are 
additionally 22 pixels per line and four additional lines of 
dark pixels, which make up the remainder of the image area 
and are used for background level calibration [31. 
Operation of the imager requires trimferring the charge 
from the image area to the storage area of the device [3], 
[4]. Readout of the pixel data is accomplished by a parallel 
load of a line of pixel data into one of the shift registers and 
serially clocking the pixels out [3], [4]. Two lines of pixels 
ISA Bus I 
Figure 1 - TC237 testbed. 
3. TC237 CAMERA DESIGN 
The CCD camera consists of the FPA interface card and 
TC237 CCD card as shown in Fig. 1 above. This 
organization allows for optimizing the CCD card while 
maintaining a flexible architecture for communicating with 
the camera. 
The current design of the camera is release 1.0 and is 
defined in [2]. This version of the camera outputs one serial 
pixel stream of width eight bits per pixel. Release 2.0 of the 
camera is the next major release. It will output two 
simultaneous pixel streams of 10 bits width per pixel to 
double the achievable pixel output rate and increase the 
dynamic range per pixel while maintaining the same system 
clock rate for the TC237. This paper focuses on the details 
of release 1.0. 
3.1 TC237 CCD Card - Figure 2 is a detailed block 
diagram of the TC237 CCD card and shows the interface 
can be read out simultaneously by performing two shifr: 
register load operations before beginning serial read out [3]., 
~41. 
The TLV987 is a user programmable signal processor 
specifically designed for accepting and processing analog 
CCD pixel data and generating a IO-bit binary 
representation of the filtered data [5].  The internal registers 
of the device come up in a default configuration after power 
up or a reset operation [SI. The device operation can be 
customized by over writing the default values in thesle 
registers via a three-wire serial interface as described in [5]. 
The CCD card has a total of eight power planes. The TC237 
and associated driver circuitry requires one analog and four 
digital power planes. The TLV987 requires one analog 
plane and two digital planes. These: planes are powered by 
+7 vollt and +25 volt supplies. The CCD card has the option 
to use one each of these supplies or lhvo +7 volt and two +25 
3-1514 
Figure 2 - TC237 CCD Board 
volt supplies to power the analog and digital power planes 
from separate supplies. The card is currently powered by 
single +7 volt and +25 volt supplies. 
The CCD card requires two ground planes for the digital 
and analog grounds of the TLV987. The TC237 substrate is 
connected to the analog ground plane. Interconnection of the 
digital and analog ground planes is via a low resistance, 
22OuH inductor. A design option was also put into place for 
direct connection of these ground planes should the default 
configuration result in noisy pixel data. 
Operation of the CCD card requires supplying the various 
strobe signals to the TC237 imager as described in [3], [4]. 
There are four basic operations which can be performed: 
refresh; image area clear; parallel load from the storage area 
to a shift register; and serial shift out of the data. The first 
two operations are combined into a single operation in 
release 1.0, where the refiesh operation is immediately 
followed by the image area clear. The last two operations 
can be used in combination to scroll through lines of the 
image and read out lines of interest. This functionality 
allows for viewing regions of interest while minimizing the 
time needed to reach the region of interest. 
The TLV987 is an analog signal processor with a 10-bit 
analog-to-digital converter (ADC) at the output. It has a 
total of nine registers for customizing device operation [5].  
With the exception of the gain block, the TLV987 is used in 
the default mode as described in [ 5 ] .  Preliminary test results 
presented in section 5 used a gain of approximately 6 dB for 
the gain block. 
3.2 FPA Intei$ace Card -This section describes the interface 
between the TC237 camera and the global bus interface 
logic. This functionality is implemented in the FPA 
interface card. Figure 3 shows a block diagram of this card 
and its associated control and data lines. 
In release 1.0, the FPA interface card consists of two Lattice 
1048E FPGAs, which are used to provide timing and control 
signals to the TC237 and TLV987s and read back digitized 
pixel data from one of the TLV987s. The two FPGAs are 
organized as an outbound controller for TC237 timing. and 
control and TLV987 programming, and an inbound 
controller for TLV987 timing and pixel read back. 
Operation of the camera is accomplished by two different 
mechanisms. The fvst is a memory write operation by the 
C40 DSP and is used to download commands to the camera. 
Commands can be used to perform an immediate action or 
to initialize registers in the CCD camera. The second 
mechanism is a request-acknowledge handshake used to 
perform an immediate action with the camera. The action is 
initiated by a request strobe from the C40 followed by an 
acknowledge strobe from the FPA interface card. The 
subsequent action is defined by the state of the interface 
card from a “power on reset” or from a command(s) sent to 
the card after power up. 
The outbound controller logic includes a command 
interpreter, line and column counters and CCD control 
logic. The command interpreter is a finite state machine 
used to field commands fiom the C40 DSP. The command 
interpreter is architecturally defined to allow for two, four 
and six byte commands. Two-byte commands perform 
immediate actions. Four-byte commands are used to 
initialize registers in the FPA interface card. Six-byte 
commands are used to load registers in the TLV987s on the 
CCD card. Only two-byte commands are used in release 1.0. 
Four and six-byte commands will be implemented in release 
2.0. 
3-1515 
In release 1.0, the only command allowed is to assert or 
negate a refresh flag used to implement a'refresh operation 
in the CCD. A refresh is defined as transferring all 500 lines 
of pixel data from the image area in the TC237 to the 
storage area of the CCD [4]. Upon completion of this 
transfer, a clear pulse is automatically applied to the image 
area of the CCD to remove any residual charge. This 
operation requires sending a command to assert the refresh 
flag followed by issuing a request to the camera. 
Line dump and pixel readout operations require sending a 
command to negate the refresh flag followed by a request to 
the camera. A line dump operation is distinguished from a 
pixel readout operation by the timing of the next request 
pulse after acknowledgement for the current request. If the 
next request occurs within one micro-second after 
acknowledgement, then the current line will be dumped. If 
the next request occurs beyond one micro-second, then 
some OB all of the current line will be sent out serially. A 
line readout in progress can be terminated before the end of 
the line by asserting the request line if no additional pixel 
data is required. 
When SL line of pixels is being read out from the CCD, the 
inbound controller is used to provide timing signals for 
operation of the TLV987 signal processor. The inbound 
controller operates the strobe lines for the correlated double 
sampler (CDS) in the TLV987. The inbound controller 
additioi~ally provides timing signals for background level 
sampling, the blanking period of a line and the clock for the 
TLV987 internal 10-bit ADC. 
This controller has a 10-bit data path for the ADC output of 
each ofthe TLV987s. Release 1.0 of this controller discards 
the digitized pixel data fiom one of the TLV987s. The two 
least si&icant bits of the digitized pixel data from the 
second TLV987 are also discarded. The eight most 
significant bits of the pixel data, a line valid signal and a 
pixel clock are supplied to the global bus interface logic in 
Fig. 1. The global bus interface logic stores the pixel data in 
a first-in-first-out (FIFO) buffer, which is subsequently read 
by the C40 DSP. 
4. SOFTWARE CONTROL 
Operator control of the CCD camera is via two s o h a r e  
processes running on two processors. These processors are 
shown in Fig. 4 as the host PC and C!40 DSP. The host PC 
runs the graphical user interface (GUI) and allows the user 
to cormnand the C40 to access and operate the TC237 CCD 
card and FPA interface card. The DSP software contains the 
CCD driver code used to perform refresh, line dump and 
line readout operations as described in section 3.2. 
User C o m m a n d s  
C 4 0  D S P  
C C D  D R I V E R  
A c k n o w l e d g e /  
P ixe l  Data 
Cam era Control  fl, I,F ~ I [ P e l  Data 
Figure 4 - TC237  CCD Camera Software 
Architecture 
Commands to the TC237 CCD camera are via the global 
bus of the C40 DSP. The CCD camera responds by sending 
pixel (data back to the DSP software. The GUI software then 
T C 2 3 7  C C D  
3-1516 
collects all image data in a predefined file format for off- 
line processing. 
The GUI and C40 software perform three basic operations 
in sequence to readout sub-windowed images from TC237 
Camera. These operations consist of refresh, sub-window 
pixel readout, and image storage. A refresh operation moves 
the exposed pixels in the CCD image area to the storage 
area of the CCD for pixel readout. The sub-window readout 
operation reads out the individual windows from the camera 
by scrolling and dumping unwanted lines, and indexing over 
unwanted pixels within lines of interest one line at a time. 
The image storage operation stores the sub-window pixels 
of interest into memory on the DSP card. 
4.1 C40 DSP Software Commands - Release 1.0 of the 
software supports frame rate control, image-logging 
capabilities, and selection of window size and location for 
up to two sub-windows. Frame rate control is implemented 
by a single programmable timer interrupt to initiate the 
sequence of operations discussed below. The image logging 
and window parameter control functions are implemented as 
interrupt driven processes. The interrupt is generated by the 
CCD camera after a refresh operation and is fielded by the 
C40 DSP driver. 
There are several low-level commands in the repertoire of 
the C40 driver used to implement the above functions: 
refresh, line dump, line scroll and column index. These 
operations are facilitated with a memory-mapped register in 
the global bus interface logic in Fig. 1 called the CCD read- 
Mite register. A C40 write to this register generates a 
request to the camera. A C40 read from this register reads 
out a pixel fiom a first-in-first-out (FIFO) buffer, which 
stores CCD pixel data until the C40 can retrieve it. 
The refresh command sets the FPA interface to a non- 
readout mode by setting the refresh flag in the FPA 
interface. The C40 initiates a transfer of the exposed pixels 
to the CCD storage area by writing to the CCD read-write 
register in the global bus interface logic. No pixel data is 
read back by the C40 for this command. 
The line dump command transfers a line of pixels from the 
CCD storage area to the serial shift register of the CCD. 
This command clears the current shift register contents and 
places a new line of pixel data into the CCD shift register. 
The timing of the next write command to the CCD read- 
write register, as detailed in section 3.2, determines whether 
a line dump command has been requested. 
The scroll command is a higher level function used to scroll 
through unwanted lines of pixels. One or more line dump 
commands are issued to the FPA interface until the line of 
interest is reached. This command stops one line prior to the 
first line in the sub-window. 
The column index command performs pixel indexing so that 
only the pixels within the sub-window are passed, on a per 
line basis, from the CCD serial shift register to the FIFO and 
C40. The pixels indexed are read out of the CCD shift 
register but are not stored in the FIFO. For this command 
the CCD read-write register is set to the integer number of 
pixels that will be indexed or dumped by the C40 Software. 
The integer value is then used by the global bus interface 
logic for pixel indexing. 
Window readout is another higher level command and is 
performed by using the scroll and column index commands 
to reach the sub-window, then transfer the desired pixels 
fiom the storage area in the CCD to C40 memory. The 
global bus interface transfers full lines of pixels, one line at 
a time, to the FIFO in the global bus interface. The C40 
software reads out the sub-window pixels on a per line basis 
for each window. 
Pixel readout from the CCD storage area is performed for 
the two-window case as follows. First scroll to the line 
location of the top of the first window. Command the 
camera to load a new line of pixels into the global bus 
interface data buffer. Index over to the first pixel of the first 
window using the column index command. Readout the first 
line of pixels for the first window from the data buffer and 
store it to C40 memory. Repeat these steps until all pixels 
for the first window have been stored. Scroll to the top of 
second window and repeat these steps until all pixels for the 
second window have been stored. The overlapping of 
window coordinates are not allowed in release 1.0 of the 
software. 
Exposure Control defines the amount of time the CCD 
image area spends collecting charge for a particular image. 
The existing setup begins exposing the next fiame when the 
refresh command has completed. The Camera continually 
exposes the image area of the CCD at the frame update rate 
and transfers the exposed pixels to the storage area. This 
was done to prevent excess charge build up on the exposed 
pixel area on the CCD Sensor. 
The refresh command is performed once every fiame update 
time and results in an exposure time which is approximately 
equivalent to the frame update time. Better exposure control 
is not possible with the current testbed. Release 2.0 will 
allow exposure lengths independent of fiame rate. This 
version of the software will have additional support for the 
TC237 CCD such as reading and writing to the FPA 
interface card registers to name a few. 
. 
The CCD driver software implements two important 
functions for characterization of the camera known as take 
image and frame transfer. The take image function allows 
the user to take continuous still images by performing 
multiple frame transfers, pixel readout, and storage 
commands. The images are then displayed on the host PC 
screen as 8-bit gray-level bit map images. The take image 
feature allows diagnostic capability during scene setups. 
The frame transfer function allows real-time gathering of 
CCD pixel data at programmable fiame rates. Data output is 
3-1517 
stored in an ASCII text file. First Window Scroll Time - time required to scroll to the 
storage airea of the first line of the first window 
5. TIMING DETAILS AND IMAGING FOR SUB- 
WINDOW READOUT 
Read out of a sub-window consists of three fundamental 
operations. They include a refresh operation, CjCrolling 
through the image until the sub-window is reached and 
reading the pixels which are in the sub-window. The time 
required to read out a sub-window is defined as the sum of 
the refresh time, the scroll time and the window read time. 
The request and acknowledge signals, discussed in section 
3.2, are used to initiate the three operations for frame read 
out as shown in Fig. 5. The signal, ABSP, is a flag 
generated by the FPA interface card to perform <a refiesh 
operation. It denotes the duration of the refresh olperation. 
The scroll time is dependent on the request-acknowledge 
cycle time and the number of lines to be scrollled. The 
window read time is additionally dependent on the 
horizontal location and size of the sub-window within the 
field of view (FOV) [2]. 
Inter-Window Scroll Time - time required to scroll to the 
storage area of the first line of the second window 
Row Resid Time First Window - time required to read one 
line of pixel data for the first window 
Window Read Time Second Window - time required to 
read N lEnes of pixel data for the second window 
Row Read Time Second Window - time required to read 
one line of pixel data for the second window 
Window Read Time Second Window - time required to 
read N lines of pixel data for the second window 
5.2 Calculated Readout Timing for Two Sub-windows - 
This section presents calculated frame rates for two sub- 
windows. Table 1 displays calculated window frame rates 
for two sub-windows within the selected regions of the 
C40 Request 
Camera 
Acknowledge -1
Camera 
Line Valid 
2 --- 
Refresh Time Time Window Read Time 
Figure 5 - Sub-window Read Out Timing 
Image integration time is accounted as follows. Image 
integration begins with the image area clear pulse and ends 
with the onset of the refresh operation. The integration time 
is the reciprocal of the frame rate minus the refresh time. By 
setting the integration time equal to the sum of the scroll 
plus window read times, we define the maximum frame rate 
for given scroll and window read times. 
5.1 Timing Parameters - The time required to read two NxN 
sub-windows out of the CCD is defined by the time needed 
to scroll through unwanted lines and pixels and reiad pixels 
in the sub-window. N represents the number of pixels on a 
side of the sub-window. The parameters of interest are listed 
below. 
Refresh Time - time to transfer the image area to the storage 
area in the TC237 
TC237 FOV. The FOV is defined to include both imaging 
pixels aind covered pixels, used for black level calibration, 
and is 6130 pixels per line by 500 lines per frame [3]. 
The TC237 is assumed to operate at rates of 10 MHZ or 20 
M H z  for both serial pixel output rate and line transfer rate 
during si refresh operation. The pixel readout rate fiom the 
FIFO bxlffer to the C40 is approximately 4 MHz for the 
legacy testbed. 
The operating scenario is to extract ‘two 8x8 sub-windows 
within a. 128x128 region of the CCD FOV (columns 2 & 4) 
and twa, 8x8 sub-windows within a 256x256 region of the 
CCD PDV (columns 3 & 5). The 128x128 and 256x256 
regions include the first line and column of pixels of the 
CCD FOV. Pixel read out begins with the first line and first 
column of the TC237 FOV. 
3-1518 
Readout Operation 128x1 28 
1 OMHz 
Dixel rate 
256x256 128x1 28 256x256 
1 OMHz 20 MHz 20 MHz 
Dixel rate oixel rate oixel rate 
Refresh Time (pS) 
First Window Scroll Time (e) 
Inter-Window Scroll Time (pS) 
Row Read Time First Window (pS) 
Window Read time First Window (pS) 
Row Read Time Second Window (@) 
In this table, the refiesh time is the time needed to transfer 
all 500 lines from the image area to the storage area. The 
scroll time is the time required to shift out unwanted lines 
from the CCD storage area until the first line of the first 
sub-window is reached. The inter-window scroll time is the 
time needed to scroll through lines between the last line of 
the first sub-window and the first line of the second sub- 
window. The row and window read times are the times 
required to read out a single row and all rows of a sub- 
window respectively. The fiame rate is the reciprocal of the 
sum of the fiame, scroll and window read times. 
50 50 25 25 
52 116 26 58 
2.5 2.5 1.3 1.3 
13.8 26.6 7.9 14.3 
110.4 212.8 63.2 114.4 
13.8 26.6 7.9 14.3 
The sub-windows are vertically aligned and separated by 
five lines of pixels. For all cases, the sub-windows are 
constrained to be no closer than two pixels from the edge of 
the 128x128 or 256x256 regions. Within this constraint, the 
windows are located such that the maximum number line 
scroll and pixel dump operations are needed to reach the 
two sub-windows. 
Window Read Time Second Window 
Frame time (pS) 
Frames per Second 
(*) 
The total frame time is found by summing the refresh time, 
scroll times, and the time to read the two sub-windows. As 
can be seen fiom the last row in table 1, frame rates up to 
3075 and 1683 frames per second are achievable using 10 
MHz pixel and line transfer rates for 128x128 and 256x256 
regions respectively. The 20 MHz pixel and line transfer 
rates produce frame rates of 5596 and 3194. The integration 
time for each case is found by subtracting the refresh time 
kom the frame time. 
110.4 212.8 63.2 114.4 
325.3 594.1 178.7 313.1 
3075 1683 5596 3194 
5.3 Preliminaiy Results for a Single Sub-Window - 
Preliminary results indicate that the camera can read 8x8 
sub-windows at a maximum fiame rate of 6 KHz. This rate 
is for 10 MNZ pixel and line transfer rates. The 8x8 sub- 
window is positioned in the second line and column of the 
CCD FOV. 
Table 2 illustrates three scenarios for camera operation and 
the achievable frame rates for these cases. The integration 
time is as defined above. All three cases assume only one 
sub-window within the CCD FOV. The beginning of the 
sub-window is located at the second line and second column 
in the frame and is eight pixels across by eight pixels high. 
The imager system clock, which defines both the parallel 
line transfer rate and the serial pixel rate of the CCD, is 10 
M H z  or 15 MHz. 
The first scenario defines the maximum theoretical frame 
rate for the camera with a 10 M H Z  imager system clock. 
These numbers are based on simulations of the FPA 
interface card logic and exhibit a frame rate of 17KHz. 
There is no overhead for the legacy testbed, shown in Fig. 1, 
for this case. 
The second scenario is based on measured performance of 
the camera in the testbed. A 10 MHz imager system clock is 
also used for this case. As can be seen in table 2, an 
additional 300usec delay is incurred with respect to the 
theoretical case for a line request. The measured row read 
time is 14.5usec, which includes lusec f0r.a line request, 
lusec for read out of pixels from the CCD and an additional 
12.5usec to transfer the pixels across the global bus 
interface logic into C40 memory. The maximum achievable 
frame rate is 6KHz for this case. 
The third scenario is targeted for release 2.0 of the camera 
and assumes a 15MHz imager system clock with 
simultaneous serial pixel data from both outputs of the 
TC237 CCD. The line request, scroll, row read and window 
read times include the over head for the legacy testbed as 
measured in the second scenario. These times are smaller 
compared to the second scenario because of the higher clock 
speed and dual pixel readout for this case. As table 2 shows, 
this scenario can achieve greater than 11 KHz frame rates 
for a 50% increase in the system clock. 
The minimum fiame rate for an 8x8 sub-window within a 
256x256 region of the CCD FOV occurs if the sub-window 
is moved to the diagonally opposite comer of the region. 
This scenario requires 246 additional line scroll operations 
to reach the first line of the sub-window. For all lines 
contained in the sub-window, 246 additional pixels per l i e  
are read out in order to reach the first column of the sub- 
window. The calculated ftame rates for these three scenarios 
are shown in table 3. 
3-1519 
Readout Operation 
Refresh Time (pS) 
First Window Scroll Time (pS) 
Window Read time First Window (pS) 
Row Read Time First Window (e) 
Frame Uime (pS) 
Frames per Second 
Theoretical Release 1.0 Release 2.0 
10 NlHz 10 MH:z 15 MHz 
50 50 33.3 
0.7 1 0.8 
1.0 14.5 13.9 
8 116 55.7 
58.7 167 89.8 
17035 5988 11 135 
As can be seen in this table, fiame rates of approlximately 
1.6 KHz are achievable for release 1.0. The theoretical case 
at 10 MHz is approximately 2.3KHz. Release 2.0 should be 
able to achieve fiame rates approaching 3 KHz far similar 
timing in transferring pixel data to the C40. 
Readout Operation Theoretical Release 1 .O 
10 MHz 10 MHz 
Refresh Time (pS) 50 50 
First Window Scroll Time (pS) 171.5 245 
Row Read Time First Window (e) 25.4 38.9 
Window Read time First Window (@) 203.2 311.2 
Frame time (pS) 424.7 606.2 
Frames Der Second 2354 1649 
This methodology for collecting a sub-window was used to 
capture the image shown in Fig. 6. This figure shows a 
128x128 image taken with the CCD camera and the 
histogram for this image. The horizontal axis of the 
histogram represents pixel intensity with an 8-bit dynamic 
range and the vertical axis is the number of pixels with a 
particular intensity value. This image was taken with an 
approximate gain of two for in the TLV987 and a 10 msec 
integration time. The integration time was defined by setting 
the fiame rate to 100 Hz. 
Release 2.0 
15 MHz 
33.3 
187.8 
30.2 
120.8 
342 
2923 
operation. As can be seen fiom this image, the pixel 
intensities are distributed over half 'of the 8-bit dynamic 
range. From this image, we see that the ADC dynamic range 
is too large for the given image intensity and gain setting in 
the TLV987. A better match to the ADC dynamic range is 
achievable by increasing the gain setting in the TLV987. 
More work is needed to configure the TLV987 before 
quantitative characterization of camera images can be done. 
Figure 7 shows a rough signal versus time plot for a 
TLV98'7 gain of two, leading to the estimate of about 400 
signal electrons per digital number (EN), basecl on detector 
full well capacity. The TLV987 gain was set too low for this 
plot; near-term modifications will be made to allow 
changing the gain, and then characterizing the detector noise 
and linearity, along with the spatial uniformity and residual 
image amlysis. 
This image was taken to get a basic assessment of camera 
Figure 6 - 128x128 Image fiom CCD Camera 
3-1520 
DN versus exposure 1 DN(40elDN) 
Est Exp. hration (MO) 
Figure 7 - Exposure time versus pixel DN 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents a camera design based on the Texas 
Instruments TC237 CCD imager chip. The motivation in 
designing a custom camera is to achieve sub-window 
imaging capability for frame rates of several kilohertz with 
10-bits of resolution per pixel as part of the tracking 
apparatus for a free-space optical communications link. 
Preliminary results for the camera exhibit frame rates up to 
6KHz for a single 8x8 sub-window within the FOV of the 
CCD imager chip with 7-bits of resolution per pixel. These 
results are for release 1.0 of the camera, which was designed 
to interface with a legacy testbed for evaluation purposes of 
the camera. 
Future work involves characterization of the optical 
qualities of the camera. The TLV987 parameters, including 
bias calibration and black-level control to name a few, are 
currently set to the device defaults with the gain of the 
device being hardwired to a single setting. In order to 
characterize the optical qualities of the camera, additional 
logic is needed to program the TLV987 registers. This work 
will be done in the coming weeks to define the optical 
properties and required improvements to meet the needs for 
a fiee-space optical communications terminal. 
Release 2.0 of the camera will aim to increase the pixel rate 
fiom the camera to 30 mega-pixels per second and increase 
the pixel dynamic range to 10 bits. The increase in pixel rate 
will be achieved by increasing the camera system clock to 
15 h4Hz and utilizing both pixel output ports of the TC237 
CCD. Improvements in the pixel dynamic range require 
additional adjustments to the CCD control signals fiom the 
FPA interface card. Such adjustments may include 
modifications to both the sequence and timing of the TC237 
control signals to improve clearing and transfer of charge 
within the CCD. 
This camera development provides a necessary component 
for an optical communications terminal. The outcome of this 
work will determine the limitations of this camera design, 
the suitability of the TC237 imager chip for optical tracking 
applications and define how best to operate the camera for 
different scenarios. It will provide a road map to address any 
deficiencies found with this implementation and suggest 
possible avenues for future implementations. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors of this work wish to thank Ichiro Fujii of Texas 
Instruments for his helpful comments and insights 
concerning the operation of the TC237 imager. 
The research described in this paper was carried out at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. 
REFERENCES 
[l] C. Chen, J. W. Alexander, et. al., “System Requirements 
for a Deep Space Optical Transceiver,” in Free-Space Laser 
Communication Technologies XI, G. Stephen Mecherle, 
Editor, Proceedings of the SPIE Vol. 3615, pp. 142-152 
(1999). 
[2] A. Portillo, S. Monacos, “TC237 CCD Sensor Camera 
Design Specification for the Optical Communications 
Demonstrator Acquisition, Tracking , and Pointing 
Subsystem”, JPL internal document, October 19,2000. 
[3] Texas Instruments, “680x500 Pixel CCD Image Sensor 
TC237”, June 1996. 
[4] Texas Instruments, “TC237 Timing of Frame Transfer 
CCD Image Sensor”, June 1996. 
[5] Texas Instruments, “3-V 10-Bit 27 MSPS Area CCD 
Sensor Signal Processor TLV987”, September 1999. 
Arts Degree from Pasadena City College (valedictorian), the 
Bachelors (Magna Cum Lauda) and Masters degrees ffom 
3-1521 
the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Engineers 
and Doctor of Philosophy degrees from the University of 
Southern Califomia, all in electrical engineering. He joined 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 1982 after receiving the 
bachelors degree and continued with graduate school 
while working at JPL. His experience includes work in the 
areas of' high-speed optical communication networks, 
guided and free-space optical communication links, optical 
tracking systems, embedded control systems, FPGAIASIC 
design, communication systems and board-level hardware 
design, analysis and implementation. He has authoredlco- 
authored 12 publications in these areas and holds two 
patents with a third patent pending in the area of optical 
communication schemes. His research interests include 
optical networking schemes and real-time embedded control 
systems. 
University of Texas at El Paso in 1995 with i i  B.S. in 
Computer Engineering. He received an M.S. degree in 
Computer Engineering from The University of Texas at El 
Paso in 1997, while assisting in research activities in the 
area of Image Processing. He is currently a member of the 
technical staff of the Digital Signal Processing Research 
Group of the Communications Systems and Research 
Section at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, 
California. His research interests include, computer vision, 
real-time systems, and computer architecture. 
Mellon University with a B.S. 6 Computer Science. l%s 
primary course work involved Operating Systems, 
Networks, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. He 
is currently involved in Acquisition, Tracking and Pointing 
for deep space optical communications and the Amopsheric 
Visibility Monitoring program at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 
James .dlexander received an A. B. fiom U.C. Berkeley and 
an M. A. and C. Phil fiom UCLA. Since 1983 he has been 
heavily involved at JPL in star tracker and scanner testing, 
analysis, requirements, scene simulation, calibration, 
algorithm design and implementation for missions such as 
the high precision Astro-1 shuttle experiment, Mars 
Pathfinder, Cassini and Europa spacecraft. Additionally, for 
several years he has been involved in pointing acquisition 
and tracking subsystems for deep space optical 
communications systems. He has authored or co-authored 
over 15 publications in star tracker testing, performance and 
analysis, as well as several in optical communication 
acquisition and tracking. 
('86) degree from UCLA and the M.S. ('93) and Ph. D. ('97) 
degrees in Opto-electronics from the University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM. After UCLA, he worked at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory developing millimeter-wave 
cryogenically-cooled Low Noise Receivers for JPL's Deep 
Space Network. In 1991, he was awarded a NASA Doctoral 
Fellowslhip to pursue graduate work at the University of 
New Mexico. While at UNM he falcused on developing 
high-speed optical communications. His thesis work was the 
successlul development of a Twavelenglh division 
multiplexed (WDM) vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser 
(VCSEL) array monolithically integrated with wavelength 
matched WDM resonant-cavity enhanced photo-detectors. 
This yielded an opto-electronic conununication fabric to 
enable over 20 channels of high-speed computer backbone 
inter-connects from a simple fabrication technique. In 1997 
he joined the Free-Space Optical Communication Group at 
JPL. He is currently active in many aspects of the fkee-space 
optical link: system engineering, acquisition, tracking and 
pointing technology, efficient space lasers, and ultra- 
sensitive receiver development. He has just completed 
design of an ultra-sensitive large-area opto-electronic 
receivm for Mars missions and is currently Task Lead for 
researclh and development of the Acquisition, 'Tracking and 
Pointing Sub-system for free-space optical communication 
terminals. He has authored over 20 refereed papers, articles 
and conference presentations. 
3-1522 
