Future Applications and the Aeronautical 
Telecommunication Network 
Figure 1 - Aeronautical Telecommunication Network 
Roy T. Oishi 
m c ,  Inc. 
255 1 Riva Road 
Annapolis, MD 21401 
rto@arinc.com 
+1-4 10-266-2982 
Abstract-The Aeronautical Telecommunication Network 
(ATN) is designed to carry air traffic control (ATC) 
communications. The ATN is based on the Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) architecture which affords flexibility for 
data communications between end systems. The ATN was 
created by the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) and, when implemented, will provide basic point-to- 
point communications with performance appropriate for 
ATC applications. Applications which provide digital 
equivalents of current voice services are the initial 
application targets of the ATN. 
It is becoming clear, however, that future air traffic 
management applications will not only rely increasingly on 
data communications but will require new or modified ATN 
capabilities. This paper will review the basic architecture of 
the ATN, examine the communications requirements of 
some current and future air traffic management applications, 
and suggest areas for expansion of ATN capabilities. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. IN'RODUCTION 
2. CURRENT ATN APPLICATIONS 
3. FUTURE ATN APPLICATIONS 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
5. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
STRUCTURE OF THE Ai" 
The Aeronautical Telecommunication Network (ATN) is 
based on the seven-layer stack of the Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) architecture. This architecture permits, 
in principle, different implementations of layers within the 
stack as long as the interfaces are honored between layers 
and with peer layers to which communication is directed. 
Figure 1 illustrates communications over the ATN between 
an aircraft and ground facilities using the ATN stack. It 
should be noted that only the two end systems implement the 
upper layers (i.e. Layer 4 Transport and above). All of the 
intermediate systems need only implement layers 1 through 
3 (i.e., up to the Network Layer). 
For airlground communications, the most important 
consequence of using the OS1 architecture is the availability 
of diverse mobile subnetworks to carry information to and 
from the aircraft in flight. In the realm of terrestrial 
telecommunications, much has been made of the 'last mile' 
problem, i.e., connecting the home or business with the 
telephone/fax/Internet infrastructure. When that 'last mile' 
3-1339 
is of necessity both vertical and multiple (e.g., to the many 
aircraft flying at cruise altitude) there are few options other 
than to use a radio link. Figure 2 shows the aidground 
subnetworks so far defined for the ATN. Each is available 
to equip an aircraft as economic and operational 
requirements dictate. Each has unique characteristics with 
respect to coverage, data rates, availability, integrity, etc, 
which must be assessed to determine the best subnetwork for 
a given aircraft which is intended to fly a particular mix of 
routes. 
INITIAL APPLICTIONS 
The major ATN applications, currently defined ixl the ICAO 
Manual of Data Link Applications, include the following: 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS), . 
. 
ADS Broadcast (ADS-B). 
Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC), 
ATS Interfacility Data Communications (AIDC), 
Data Link Flight Information Service (DFIS), 
Another principle of the ATN is that each aircraft will have 
a unique 24-bit ICAO identifier which forms a part of the 
ADS pe~rmits aircraft to automatically report position and 
other information to the air traffic controller 
Network Services Access Point ( N S A P )  address. All 
communication to or from the aircraft is uniquely identified 
by this address. All of the data link applications defined in 
CPDLC permits data link to carry the: clearances, requests 
and instructions currently communicated by voice 
the ICAO Manual of Data Link Apphcations are message 
oriented, i.e., communication consists of one or more 
uniquely addressed messages which are delivered over the 
ATN. 
AIDC mirrors exchanges currently performed between 
intematimal ATC centers either by telephone or via the 
Aeronautical Fixed Telecommunication Network (AFTN) 
which was originally defined as a teletjpe network 
Delivery of information across the ATN is accomplished by 
carrying Network Protocol Data Units (NPDUs or packets) 
using the Connectionless Network Protocol (CLNP). A 
given message originated from an end system (ES) and 
addressed to another ES may be divided into NPDUs, as 
necessary, and sent individually to the NSAP address of the 
recipient. At the receiving ES, the NPDUs are passed up the 
stack, reassembled as needed, and the message is popped off 
of the stack to the receiving application. 
All of the intermediate systems (IS) which handle: NPDUs 
implement only through the Network Layer (Layer 3) of the 
ATN stack. All that is necessary for routing of an IWDU to 
the receiving end system is that the NSAP address of the 
recipient be made available. CLNP, along with the various 
routing protocols, will effect delivery of the packet. Figure 
3 shows a set of ESs, which have full 7-layer stacks, 
interconnected via ISs, which are shown as only 
implementing 3 layers. 
E8 
Ea 
_- 
DFIS provides to the aircraft via data information currently 
broadcast as audio on dedicated radio c:hannels 
ADS-B permits aircraft to broatdcast position and 
identificiation information to other interested parties (i.e., 
aircraft or ground-based) 
Initial implementations (i.e., pre-ATN implementations) of 
the fvst three of these applications will fit quite nicely over 
the A n i  as described above. The latter two fit less well 
with thalt architecture for reasons to be explored in this 
paper. 
2. INITIAL ATN APPLICATIONS 
GOOD FIT 
The CPDLC and ADC applications use data in place of 
voice tal accomplish the same fimcticons, the exchange of 
requests, instructions, or information between two people. In 
areas where voice communications have been difficult, for 
example in remote or oceanic areas where high frequency 
(HF) radio is the only medium generally available, initial 
non-ATN data link has been successful. 
The ATN will provide these functions with protocols which 
have been intemationally accepted for this purpose. 
Addressed messages carried across the ATN with high 
availability and integrity will facilitate this form of people- 
to-peoplie communications in all regions. 
BAD FIT 
Initial work on both DFIS and ADS43 have used broadcast 
protocols which do not conform to the ATN architecture as 
Figure 2 ATN View showing end systems and 
intermediate systems 
described above. Each of these applications has the nature 
of a sender wishing to communicate information to multiple, 
unknown recipients. In the case of DFIS, the information is 
3-1  340  
typically area-specific, e.g., Automatic Terminal 
Information Service (ATIS), weather, etc. Other exmaples 
of flight information can be general, e.g., some Notices to 
Airmen (NOTAMs). DFIS is collected and broadcast fiom 
the ground. Given the area-specific nature of the 
information, it is reasonable to assume a single transmitter 
and its associated radio channel, would be used in a given 
area. All users in that area could tune to the specified 
fiequency and receive all information. This is quite 
analogous to the current voice broadcast environment where 
specific fiequencies broadcast similar information for a 
specific area. Given the availability of sufficient ATN 
capacity on its airlground subnetworks, the dedication of 
radio channels for this kind of broadcast information seems 
inefficient. Conversely, addressing the same information to 
multiple addresses using a one-address, one-message 
paradigm is also inefficient. Some form of interactive 
contract could provide the aircraft with route-specific 
information at the appropriate time or location. However, 
the latter problem would have to be solved by new multiple- 
address message protocols. 
In the case of ADS-B, the information includes 
identification and position information about the aircraft 
transmitted for receipt by other aircraft (and possibly ground 
receivers) in the immediate area. ADS-B requires multiple 
senders as well as multiple receivers. Therefore, some form 
of transmission conflict resolution must be provided for. 
Current implementations use either a time division multiple 
access (TDMA) or low-occupancy time random protocol to 
assure that the messages do not conflict. This form of 
dependent surveillance, in which the aircraft is responsible 
for determining its own position and then informing other 
airspace users and ATC, can provide significant benefits. It 
has the potential to replace secondary radars, it can enhance 
cockpit situational awareness, it could provide longer term 
conflict identification, it can provide the basis for more 
interactive applications for improved air traffic management. 
3. FUTURE APPLICATIONS 
Each of the applications mentioned above fully or partially 
replaces an existing air traffk control mechanism. Each also 
has the nature of providing information for one or more of 
the people participating in ATC, typically the pilot or 
controller. While ADS is generally generated by automation 
software on board the aircraft, its current function is to 
update the controller's situation display. 
While there may be many more targets of opportunity for the 
ATN to provide information exchange applications currently 
implemented using either voice or recorded audio, these may 
be easily implemented by imaginative use of the initial 
protocol set provided by the ATN. It is the possibility of 
providing information exchanges in new ways that provide 
more food for thought. 
MULTICAST MESSAGES 
In order to communicate the same information to multiple 
addressees, the current ATN requires multiple messages as 
each message may only have one recipient address. There 
are a number of thorny issues involved with allowing end 
system applications to generate messages with multiple 
recipients. At some point it would be necessary to duplicate 
the message as there is no guarantee that all of the recipients 
could receive their copy by having a single entity transiting 
the ATN. The determination of the best point at which to 
duplicate a message in order to keep network traftk to a 
mini" will be a difficult task. The advantages of solving 
such a problem with ATN standards as opposed to having 
each application developer devise their own solution are 
obvious. 
STREAMING DATA 
There may be situations in which a more or less continuous 
stream of data may be directed from one user to another. On 
a single packet basis, this may be implemented by NSAP 
addressing as currently defined in the ATN. It is the 
frequency or interval between packets which distinguishes 
streaming data. One might consider ADS to be a streaming 
application with a very low data transfer rate. Intermediate 
applications might be the update of a graphical weather 
display with five or ten-minute updates. There are 
applications, such as the continuous downlink of aircraft 
performance data envisioned in the AeroSAPIENT project. 
Each aircraft would regularly report information which 
would be stored in a common database accessible to all 
participants. These are applications which could easily be 
implemented by the ATN. 
When the data exchange rate requires a nearly continuous 
stream of packets, the application becomes truly streaming. 
Figure 4 illustrates this situation. The transfer of audio and 
then video are the classic examples of streaming data. Each 
of these media used to require a dedicated communication 
channel but are now carried, with higher or lower fidelity 
depending upon one's point of view, via general-purpose 
channels (i.e., the Internet). It is foreseeable that the ATN 
might be called upon to carry streaming data, perhaps under 
limited circumstances. 
3-1341 
I I ATCFacility -
Figure 3 - Data Stream from One User to Another 
It has been suggested, for example, that during an 
emergency a stream of data could simultaneously be 
recorded in the flight data recorder and transmitted fiom the 
aircraft. Also, the same situation might be an appropriate 
time for voice-over-ATN to be used to communicate 
arbitrary exchanges which are not amenable to 
predetermination and agreement on a message set (:as is the 
case for CPDLC). 
Another example of streaming data might be the transfer and 
display of rapidly changing weather images for phenomena 
such as thunderstorms or windshear at the airport. The 
requirement will depend upon the update rate required and 
the volume of data needed to support the display. 
The advance of in-flight entertainment systems might 
require the rapid upload of video files during ground 
servicing between flight segments. The provision of a high- 
bandwidth link to the aircraft while it is on the ground is 
something the industry is working on today. 
BROADCAST DATA 
Sending information to unknown recipients is difficult 
within the ATN. It would be easy to define an NSAP 
address which was recognized by all users and accepted into 
the end system. That is the point at which the problem arises 
since the Network Layer would accept the packet and pass it 
to the Transport Layer which would have to recognize the 
packet, possibly combine it with other packets into a 
message, and pass that message up +the stack. At some point 
a software application must have the message directed to it 
and claim the packet and interpret the message. Figure 5 
illustrates two possible broadcast situations. Aircraft might 
broadcast information about itself for other users. The 
ground station might broadcast area specific information for 
all aircraft within the reach of its signal. 
1 
Figure 4. - Single or Multiple Broadcasters 
If the tr:msmitting system followed all of the rules of the 
ATN upper layers to direct its messages to the receiving 
application, in principle a broadcast application could be 
implemented with just the 'universal' NSAP address. 
However, there are some significant pitfalls to this approach. 
The reaction to this 'universal' NSAP address would have to 
be limited to a specific routing domain, othenvise a cascade 
of instances of the same packet might occur. Every ATN 
user would have to be able to recognize and process all such 
broadcast packets adding considerable complexity to an 
already complicated stack. It would be incumbent upon the 
various "transmitters' to control the rate at which broadcast 
messages were sent, otherwise congestion on the aidground 
iinks could be severe limiting usable bmdwidth. 
If such a mechanism could be implemented, it would 
provide the means to disseminate common information to a 
wide range of users without the necessity of a dedicated 
channel. Generally speaking, this id only be possible 
when the general purpose data channel to each user, the 
aircraft being the critical user in this case, has sufficient 
capacity. It is doubthl that the currently defied line-of- 
sight data links, which will operate at up to 31.5 KBPS, will 
have sul3icient bandwidth to carry sulch broadcast packets. 
However, as technology increases that bandwidth toward 
LAN data rates, this tool could provide a wide range of 
useful applications. 
3-1342 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
The ATN has been defined for the replacement of 
current voice or audio communication applications with data 
equivalents. While this will support the initial applications 
with the initial set of aidground subnetworks, there are a 
wide range of alternative communication mechanisms that 
may be needed to support applications of the future. 
New applications which require a constant stream 
of data or data broadcast from one or more sources in order 
to support ATM will require new ATN protocols. 
5 .  REFERENCES 
[I] Manual of Air Traffk Services Data Link Applications 
(Doc 9694, 1st Edition), ICAO, 20September1996. 
[2] Manual of Technical Provisions for the Aeronautical 
Telecommunication Network (ATN), First Edition, ICAO 
1998. 
Roy T. Oishi is a Technical Director in the 
Aviation and Air TraAcic Services Division 
of ARINC, Inc. Currently Mr. Oishi is the 
system engineer for a number of aidground 
data link applications for both Aeronautical 
Operational Control and Air Traffic 
Control applications. h4r. Oishi is a Senior 
Member of IEEE and a Senior Member of AIAA. He has 
been a member of the Standards Board of the IEEE and has 
chaired various international standards committees. He may 
be reached at Phone +1-410-266-2982, Fax +1-410-573- 
3106 or Internet: rto@arinc.com. 
3-1343 
