Case Study: Visualization of Particle Track Data
Xiaoming Wei, Arie E. Kaufman and Timothy J. Hallman†
Center for Visual Computing (CVC) and Department of Computer Science
State University of New York at Stony Brook
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider Project (RHIC), Physics Department
Brookhaven National Lab
Abstract
The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) experiment at the
Brookhaven National Lab is designed to study how the universe
came into being. It is believed that after the Big Bang, the uni-
verse expanded and cooled, consisting of a soup of quarks, glu-
ons, electrons and neutrinos. As the temperature lowered, electrons
combined with protons and formed neutral atoms. Later, clouds of
atoms contracted into stars. In this paper, we describe how tech-
niques of volume rendering and information visualization are used
to visualize the large particle track data set generated from this high
energy physics experiment. The system, called TrackVis, is based
on our earlier work of VolVis - Volume Visualization software. Ex-
ample images of real particle collision data are shown, which are
helpful to physicists in investigating the behavior of strongly inter-
acting matter at high energy density.
1 Introduction
In order to study the state of matter which existed at the beginning
of the universe, physicists have tried to recreate the conditions of
the early universe, approximately 1 millionth of a second after it
exploded into being. It is thought that in this brief instant, the fun-
damental subconstituents (quarks and gluons) of matter had not yet
condensed into the composite particles (hadrons) which we know to
form the physical universe today. Rather, the early universe is be-
lieved to have consisted of a plasma of the subconstituents of matter
which were deconfined and therefore free to interact with one an-
other. To observe and study a transition to this primoridial phase
of matter is one of the primary challenges presently before nuclear
and particle physicists.
The effort to produce the necessary conditions in the laboratory
is accomplished at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) [3,
4, 10] of the Brookhaven National Lab (BNL). Let’s understand the
meaning of RHIC first. The Relativistic of RHIC describes objects
traveling near the speed of light. At this speed, motion is governed
not by Newton’s laws, but by Einstein’s theory of relativity. An
ion is an atom that has been stripped of its electrons, leaving only
the nucleus. Heavy ions are so called because their nuclei contain
many protons and neutrons. A collider is a particle accelerator in
which two beams of particles circulate in opposite directions and
can collide head-on at very high energy.
Figure 1 shows the physical facilities that make up the RHIC.
The RHIC consists of a huge ring and several of BNL’s existing par-
ticle accelerators, such as ATR, AGS, etc., which have been linked
together to provide a continuous path for the RHIC’s beam to travel.
Department of Computer Science, State University of New
York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-4400, USA. Email:
wxiaominari@cs.sunysb.edu
†Physics Department, RHIC, Brookhaven National Lab, Upton, NY,
11973-5000, USA. Email:hallman@bnl.gov
Beginning at the bottom right, the blue lines trace the underground
tunnels that bring the particle beam into the RHIC. Then, the beam
is divided and sent in one of two directions; clockwise, shown as
the yellow line, and counterclockwise, shown as the blue line. Col-
lisions occur at six points on the ring, forming intersections. There
are specially designed detectors at these intersections to record col-
lision data. In a collision, particles won’t be completely destroyed.
The ion bunches will actually pass through one another, creating a
hot, dense area that will last only a tiny fraction of a second. As this
area cools, some of the ions’ energy will convert to matter.
Figure 1: Physical facility of the RHIC experiment. See color plate
in color section.
In the experiment, gold nuclei at ultra high energy are used.
When these heavy ions collide head to head, a highly compressed,
high temperature state in which a phase transition to a deconfined
state is expected. In the aftermath of a central AuAu collision, thou-
sands of particles are produced which need to be observed and vi-
sualized, both individually and collectively to extract meaningful
science from this experiment. McCormick et al. [11] proposed a
volume rendering method for this kind of high energy physical ex-
periments. In their work, they were interested in the particle density
data. Each of the voxels in the volume would contain a count of the
number of particles mapped to it. Users can selectively control the
transparency and colors used in rendering. However in this work,
our concern is to help the scientists to find the correlation between
each particle track. Due to the overwhelming complexity of the par-
ticle states produced at the RHIC, a fundamentally new approach to
analyze and understand data is required.
2 Track Reconstruction
STAR is one of the two large experiments at the RHIC. Its primary
purpose is to search for signatures of quark-gluon plasma forma-
tion and investigate the behavior of strongly interacting matter at a
high energy density by focusing on measurements of hadron pro-
duction over a large solid angle. As the heavy gold nuclei collide at
the center of the pipe, they send out showers of subatomic particles.
Because of the magnetic force generated by the multi-layered cylin-
ders in the pipe, these particles eventually hit STAR’s many particle
detection sensors, which record the impact of those particles and
feed the information to computers as raw data. Later, physicists re-
trieve and sort through the data to reconstruct what happened in the
collision.
The information of tracks is stored in different tables. When a
charged particle moves in a static uniform magnetic field, its trajec-
tory is a helix. To reconstruct its geometry, we need at least five
parameters: the starting point, the length of the track, the dip angle
at the starting point, the azimuthal angle at the starting point and the
curvature. Based on the helix rendering technique [2], the 3D posi-
tion of the points on each track can be calculated by the following
equations:
xs  x0cosφh  s 1r  cosλ cosφ  r (1)
ys  y0 sinφh  s 1r  cosλ sinφ  r (2)
zs  z0  s  sinλ (3)
where s is the path length along the helix; (x0,y0,z0) is the starting
point at s  s0  0; λ is the dip angle at the starting point; r is the
radius at the starting point; φ is the azimuthal angle at the starting
point; h is the sense of rotation of the projected helix in the XY-
plane, h  signqB; B is the z component of the homogeneous
magnetic field and q is the charge of the particle. Figure 2 shows
the projection of a helix onto the XY plane. As the curvature is zero,
Figure 2: Projection of a helix on the XY plane
the geometry of a track reduces to a straight line. The formulas will
change to
xs  x0 s  cosλ  sinφ0 (4)
ys  y0  s  cosλ  cosφ0 (5)
zs  z0  s  sinλ (6)
3 Track Visualization
The method used currently in the RHIC visualization employs the
OpenGL standard graphics library. Figure 3 shows one of the re-
sult. Using this approach, users can interactively change the view-
point position, orientation and the colors of different types of tracks.
Figure 3: Simulation of the collisions’s aftermath as seen by the
STAR experiment – a shower of thousands of subatomic particles,
flying in every direction. See color plate in color section.
This approach works well if we don’t have many tracks and col-
lision points. As the real experiment begins, there are thousands
of tracks in one event. The 3D overlap and occlusion become so
serious that it is almost impossible for the researchers to see the
specific tracks clearly. We need an approach that not only helps us
understand the specific tracks, but also gives a global view of the
rest of the data.
To solve the problem, we developed the TrackVis system, based
on volume rendering techniques [6, 7]. During the track reconstruc-
tion step, we resampled the data on a predefined grid. Taking advan-
tage of the transparency character of the volume data, researchers
can concentrate on specific tracks, while still keeping the global
view of the rest of the data. In order to achieve interactive speed,
our system uses a VolumePro real-time volume rendering board [5]
on a PC. By combining interactive 3D visualization of flow fields
with scalar information, our system helps researchers to understand
the global properties of the final state that the particles produced in
RHIC interactions in a better way. The system is based on our ear-
lier work on VolVis - Volume Visualization software [1], compiled
using the library for VolumePro, and is written in Visual C++ 6.0.
Figure 4 shows the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of TrackVis,
along with a 3D view of 3384 particle tracks from a real experiment.
The left panel is the control panel. Physicists can change the 3D
cursor, light, blending and other parameters here. The bottom right
part is the RGBA transfer function window, allowing physicists to
change the transfer function and color mapping functions. In this
image, we use white for tracks we are interested in, blue for the
starting points of tracks, red for the ending points of tracks, and
gray for all the other tracks. Physicists can manipulate the transfer
function to render only a part of the features.
Currently our system supports the following functions:
 Zoom in and out
By changing the grid size, this function enables researchers to
magnify part of the track data in order to have a better obser-
vation.
Figure 4: Visualization of real collision data in 3D using volume
rendering. Please also see color plate at the end. See color plate in
color section.
 Feature representation using scalar value
Various track parameters such as energy and types of track
particles can be mapped to the intensity values of voxels.
 Track filtering
Physicists can change the range of parameters to display only
the tracks satisfying the conditions. For example, in Figure
5, we display tracks with curvature between 0.007 and 0.009
and map track energy to the intensity value of voxels, we can
see from the bottom right window that the corresponding en-
ergy parameter also falls in a specific range. This proves the
physical principle that the higher the energy value, the lower
the curvature value.
 Range of interest specification
This helps physicists to decide which portion of the data to
render.
 Track clustering
Tracks can also be clustered into groups based on their differ-
ence in curvature, dip angle or other parameters. This function
can dramatically decrease the number of tracks displayed.
 Fisheye view
The function of Zoom in and out scales the data set with a
same factor. Fisheye view can help researchers to view both
the data in focus and the global data. Currently there are two
distortion functions in our system. We will discuss them fur-
ther in the next section.
Figure 6 shows the 3D cursor of the system. It can be displayed
as crosshairs or planes. Physicists can specify the radius of the in-
teresting area centered at the 3D cursor. The size of the grid can also
be changed to 646464, 128128128 and 256256256.
This image here shows only the part of the tracks researchers are in-
terested in. It is discretized on a 128128128 grid. The bottom
window shows the energy distribution of that subset of tracks.
Besides the volume rendering functions, we also have a dialogue
used especially for track visualization. Physicists can change clus-
tering conditions, filtering variables, the fisheye view parameter,
zoom in and zoom out factors, and other features through the dia-
logue window.
Figure 5: Track filtering. See color plate in color section.
4 Nonlinear Magnification
Nonlinear magnification [8, 9] is a technique to stretch and distort
spaces in order to produce effective visualization of data. Several
methods have been introduced in the literature of information visu-
alization. Here we implement a 3D fisheye view. A fisheye lens is
a very wide angle lens that magnifies nearby objects, while shrink-
ing distant objects. It is a valuable tool for observing both local
detail and global context at the same time. Two 1D functions are
supported in our TrackVis
f isheye f unction : gx  d1xdx1 (7)
f x  tanhdx (8)
where d is the distortion factor. Applying these 1D functions di-
rectly to the X,Y and Z axis, we get a 3D fisheye. This type of
transformation is called the orthogonal transformation. If the 1D
function is applied to the radius component of the polar coordinates
of the grid points, it is a radial transformation. Figure 7 shows
the effect of a fisheye view. Image (b) is the result of using a 3D
orthogonal transformation of the fisheye function, while image (a)
is the original view of a subset of tracks. Physicists can change the
distortion factor to specify the amount of magnification.
5 Applications
There are many physics research groups in the STAR experiment,
such as the EbyE (Event by Event group), the PEC (Peripheral Col-
lisions group), the Spin (Spin physics group) and the Strangeness
(Strangeness physics group). Each of them has a different emphasis
on the same data set. Our TrackVis visualization system advances
the tool-set currently available to the RHIC scientists, so that they
can understand the regions-of-interest in the space of the data with
little effort.
For example, in the Strangeness group, researchers are interested
in a kink position between two tracks. The candidate tracks should
satisfy a set of conditions: they should have the same charge; their
3D distance at the closest point should be less than a specific value,
Figure 6: Range of interest specification. See color plate in color
section.
(a) (b)
Figure 7: (a) Fisheye view of the subset of tracks in original view
(b). See color plate in color section.
the distance of the last point of the parent track and the first point of
daughter track must be less than a certain value, and the decay angle
should be greater than a predetermined number, etc.. However, in
the experiment, many different topologies can occur and could fake
a real candidate; for instance, a track could be interrupted. On the
other hand, the vertex point may be relatively far from the kink and
this complicates the search and the identification of actual candi-
dates. Based on our TrackVis, researchers can interactively specify
their requirement of track energy, decay angle, etc. through the
user interface, limiting the number of track pairs. By modifying the
transfer function, they can emphasize the tracks they are interested
in, while having a global view of the other tracks. The fisheye view
also helps them to discover the fake candidates quickly.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We described how we used volume rendering and information vi-
sualization methods to establish the TrackVis system for the RHIC
project to help easily physicists investigate their experiments. Our
system is general, easy to use, low-cost, customizable, extensible,
fast and portable. New feature representation methods, clustering
techniques and magnification methods can also be added easily. It
has an immense potential to enhance the infrastructure of many sci-
ence and engineering applications. Many physics research groups
benefit from our system.
As the experiment continues, new physical models of tracks,
such as the multiple scattering model, will be included in the sys-
tem. As the amount of data generated from the experiment in-
creases dramatically, a fundamentally new model in the feature
space, such as a NURBS magnification model, will be needed.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by a grant from the Center
for Data Intensive Computing (CDIC) at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL). Thanks to Valery Fine and Wensheng Deng for
their valuable suggestions. We would also like to thank Marianne
Catalano for proofreading and Liang Wang for his patience and en-
couragement.
References
[1] R. Avila, T. He, L. Hong, A. Kaufman, H. Pfister, C. Silva,
L. Sobierajski, and S. Wang. Volvis: A diversified volume
visualization system. IEEE Visualization Proceedings, pages
31–38, October 1994.
[2] R. K. Bock, H. Grote, D. Notz, and M. Regler. Data Analysis
Techniques for High-energy Physics Experiments. Cambridge
University Press, 1993.
[3] N. Samios et al. Conceptual design report of the relativistic
heavy ion collider. Technical Report 52195, BNL, May 1989.
[4] T. Hallman and J. Thomas. Physics with the collider detectors
at rhic and lhc. Nucl. Phys., A590:9–13, January 1995.
[5] Mitsubishi Electric Information Technology Center America
Inc. Volume library interface user’s guide, a guide to pro-
gramming with volumepro v.1.0. 1999.
[6] A. E. Kaufman. Volume Visualization Tutorial. IEEE Com-
puter Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1991.
[7] A. E. Kaufman. Volume visualization. ACM Computing Sur-
veys, 28(1):165–167, March 1996.
[8] T. A. Keahey and E. L. Robertson. Techniques for non-linear
magnification transformations. Proceedings of the IEEE Sym-
posium on Information Visualization, pages 38–45, October
1996.
[9] T. A. Keahey and E. L. Robertson. Nonlinear magnification
fields. Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pages 41–49, October 1997.
[10] T. Ludlam and A. Stevens. A brief description of the relativis-
tic heavy ion collider facility. Technical Report 49177, BNL,
June 1993.
[11] P. S. McCormick, J. Liang, and R. D. Ryne. Visualizing high-
resolution accelerator physics. IEEE Computer Graphics &
Applications, pages 11–13, September 1999.
Figure 1: Physical facility of the RHIC experiment Figure 5: Track filtering
Figure 3: Simulation of the collisions’s aftermath as seen
by the STAR experiment – a shower of thousands of
subatomic particles, flying in every direction. Figure 6: Range of interest specification
(a) (b)
Figure 4: Visualization of real collision data in 3D using
volume rendering Figure 7: (a) Fisheye view of the subset of tracks in original view (b)
