AIRS, the First Hyper-spectral Infrared Sounder for 
Operational Weather Forecasting’. 
Hartmut H. Aumann*a and Larrabee Strowb 
aJet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91 109 
bUniversity of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 
aumann@jpl.nasa.gov Telephone: +1-818-354-6865 * 
Abstract-AIRS, the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder on the 
EOS-Aqua, is an infrared radiometer that covers the 3.7 - 
15.4 micron spectral range with spectral resolving power 
of 1200. AIRS is a cross-track scanner with 15 km nadir 
footprints, which produces global high precision spectra 
twice each day from 708 km orbital altitude. In addition to 
supporting NASA’s interest in process study and climate 
research, AIRS is the first hyper-spectral infrared radio- 
meter designed to support the requirements for operational 
medium range weather forecasting during its nominal 
seven year lifetime. AIRS, together with the AMSU and 
HSB microwave radiometers, are designed to achieve 
global retrieval accuracy of better then 1K rms in the lower 
troposphere under clear and partly cloudy conditions. Based 
on the excellent radiometric and spectral performance 
demonstrated during the pre-launch testing, we expect the 
assimilation of AIRS data into the forecast model to result 
in major forecast improvements. We present highlights of 
the AIRS pre-launch characterization results and concepts 
for ground data processing using direct retrieval and direct 
assimilation. Launch of AIRS on the EOS AQUA is 
scheduled for July, 2001. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The ability to accurately and reliably forecast the weather 
on a medium range time scale has immense economic and 
civic implications. In support of this goal the National 
Climate and Environment Prediction (NCEP) of the 
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOM) and the European Center for Medium-range 
Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) have developed Global 
Circulation Models (GCM), which integrate global 
meteorological observations with the physics of the 
atmosphere and extrapolate the observations into the future, 
i.e. make forecasts. The operational weather forecasting 
systems ingest global data from routine radio sonde 
launches and satellites into a 100 km spacing grid, i.e. 
about 40,000 grid points globally. At each grid point the 
state of the atmosphere is characterized at about 30 vertical 
pressure levels. The accuracy of the forecast decreases with 
the length of the forecast until, presently at about six days, 
the forecast is no longer useful. In addition, major regional 
events, such as rain, ice or wind storms are occasionally 
Copyright 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
missed altogether, or are misplaced in time and/or space 
even on the 24-hour forecast. 
Although much progress has been made, achieving the 
goal of a reliable one-week or ten-day forecast has been. 
frustrated by limitations in the quality of the data input 
from radio sondes and satellite sounders. The well- 
characterized, high vertical resolution data set provided 
by the AIRS on the EOS AQUA will provide the 
tropospheric and &;face data needed to achieve a 
breakthrough for medium range forecasting. 
The network of operational satellite sounders in polar orbit, 
using microwave and infrared sensors, produces very large 
data sets more than twice daily. However, due to two issues 
that were identified and conceptually resolved in the mid 
seventies, a large fraction of the data cannot be assimilated 
into the forecast: (1) lack of vertical resolution in the 
troposphere and (2) problems with clouds. 
The need for high vertical resolution in the lower 
troposphere. Kaplan’ and Chahine 23334 proposed to 
use the 4p CO2 R-branch channels to obtain the 
required vertical resolution in the tropospheric and 
to use super-window channels for surface temperature 
and emissivity . This involved advancing the state of 
art of precise radiometers to hyper-spectral resolution, 
v/Av>lOOO, with very demanding sensitivity. The 
concept was tested on a prototype spectrometer on an 
aircraft over the Gulf of Mexico’. 
The importance of designing a sounder system to 
deal with clouds. As soon as the basic concept of 
infrared temperature sounding was tested it became 
obvious that the presence of small amounts of cloud in 
the field of view produces large temperature profile 
errors. Smith6 proposed to test for clouds by com- 
paring adjacent fields of view. A process called “cloud 
clearing” using the combination of spatially collocated 
infrared and microwave data 
Chahine’ and validated by Susskind8 using MSU and 
HIRS/2 data. 
was developed by 
. - -  
. ~. . 4-1681 
Representatives of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) and NOAA defined the measure- 
ment requirements designed to resolve these issues with an 
advanced infraredmicrowave sounding system. The 
resulting Functional Requirements Document (FRD)9 
governed the design and development of the AIRS 
instrument. The AIRS FRD includes specification of 
spectral coverage, resolving power, spectral calibration 
accuracy and stability, instrument sensitivity, dynamic 
range, and absolute and relative radiometric calibration 
accuracy and alignment accuracy. AIRS, synchronized 
with the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU, 27- 
89 GHz) and the Microwave Humidity Sounder (HSB, 150 
- 187GHz), forms a complementary sounding system for 
NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). Although NASA 
funded AIRS for a flight on the Earth Observing System in 
1993 in support of its long-range interest in process and 
climate research, NASA funded representation from 
NOAA scientists from the beginning to insure proper 
instrument and data processing in support of NOAA's 
operational weather forecasting system. This makes AIRS 
the frst hyper-spectral infrared sounder designed in 
support of operational weather forecasting. 
AIRS produces raw, position tagged radiances (level lb), 
'kcloud-cleared" radiances, and retrieved geophysical 
parameters (level 2), i.e. temperature profiles, T(p), 
moisture profiles, q(p), surface temperature and emissivity, 
and total column Ozone. The AIRS data can thus be 
assimilated directly as raw radiances, cloud-cleared 
radiances, or as retrieved products. In the following we 
show the AIRS performance, verified during pre-launch 
testing, in the key spectral resolution and sensitivity areas. 
We then discuss the approach of AIRS to dealing with 
clouds and its interaction with noise for geophysical 
product retrieval and direct assimilation into forecast 
models. 
2. AIRS INSTRUMENT 
AIRS is a grating array infrared spectrometer, which covers 
the 3.7 - 15.4 micron spectral range with spectral resolving 
power of pAk =1200. AIRS is a cross-track scanner with 
15 km nadir footprints, which produces global high 
precision spectra twice each day from 708 km orbital 
altitude. 
Much attention was given during the AIRS design to insure 
mechanical and thermal stability over the seven -year 
nominal design. To maximize sensitivity and radiometric 
perfomance the entire spectrometer is cooled radiatively to 
160K. This temperature is regulated to within 30 mK. The 
scan mirror is cooled to 250K. 
The stability of the spectral calibration of an AIRS type 
grating spectrometer, in particular the absence of any 
Figure 1. AIRS during the final stages of pre-launch 
testing at Lockheed-Martin, Novembter 1999 
critical components required to move with interferometric 
precision, is virtually assured once tlhe grating has been 
ruled. Development of the AIRS instrument started in 
1993. Testing of the flight model started in 1999. Figure 1 
shows the AIRS instrument during tht: final stages of pre- 
launch testing at Lockheed-Martin in Lexington, 
Massachusetts during November 1999, before the 
instrument was wrapped in MLI (multi-layer super- 
insulation). The instrument was delivered to TRW in 
Redondo Beach, CA for integration into the EOS/Aqua 
spacecraft in December 1999. Launch is scheduled for July 
2001. 
The AIR.S instrument incorporates numerous advances in 
infrared sensing technology to, achieve a high level of 
measurement sensitivity, precision, and accuracy. These 
includes long wavelength HgCdTe infrared detectors 
operating at 60K and an active pulse tube cryogenic cooler 
to provilde the cooling. The AIRS hardware design and 
performance are summarized by Aurnann" and Morse". 
Full use of the high measurement sensitivity p d  accuracy 
capability of AIRS requires very careful pre-launch 
calibration. Pagano" describes the extensive pre-launch 
spectral, spatial, and radiometric calibration of AIRS at a 
test facility especially designed for AIRS located at 
Lockheed Martin Sanders faciliity in Lexington, 
Massachusetts. In the following, we briefly summarize the 
performance measured during pre-flight characterization in 
terms of system sensitivity, radiometric calibration and 
spectral calibration. Radiometric testing includes 
measurements of the radiometric response and the 
measurement noise. The linearity of the radiometric 
response: was measured by stepping a MST traceable Large 
Area Blackbody (LAT3B) over multipk temperatures: 205K, 
220K 230K, 240K, 250K, 265K 280K 295K and 3 10K. At 
each level the LABB was temperature stabilized and more 
than 100 scans of AIRS data acquired. The center of the 
LABB was carefully located and signal levels averaged over 
scans and fully illuminated footprints. The On-Board 
radiometric-Calibration (OBC) source was calibrated with 
the LABB at 3 1 OK. 
NEdTs Per Resoluhon Element from OBC Gain Data 
6 8 10 12 14 
Wavelength (microns) 
Fimirp 3 NFdT fnr ATRq npr SnPrtrnl Rpsnliitinn Flement nt 350K 
2.1 Noise performance 
which defines the radiance, N, as a function of 
(dn-dnm), the difference between a scene view 
and cold space view is a second order 
polynomial modified by a small polarization 
correction term to account for the modulation of 
the scene radiance by the scan mirror: 
2 
U, + ul (dn - dn,, ) + 9 (dn - dn,, ) 
N =  3 
where pr and p r  are the polarization factors for 
the scan mirror (r) and the spectrometer (t), and 
8 and 6 are the angles of the sc& mirror and 
spectrometer polarization orientation 
respectively. The pn p t  and the a2 terms were 
determined from the pre-launch calibration. The 
offset term, a,, varies with scan angle and is due 
the scan mirror by the polarized transmission of 
[ 1 + Pv Pt cos(@ - a 
to the modulation of the polarized emission of 
the spec’ometer: 
1.1 degree circular to 1.1 degree along-track by 0.6 degrees 
in the cross-track direction. A dependence of the spectral 
response function (SRF) on spatial structure within the 1 . 1  
degree FOV was discovered during pre-launch testing. This 
field mask was inserted to reduce the effect to below 
specification at the cost of 35% in signal. Significant 
dependence of the SRF on brightness distribution within 
the FOV would make the data unusable for operational 
applications. 
The outliers on the chart are due to relatively few of the 
2,378 total number of detectors in the focal plane of the 
spectrometer. These detectors have been identified and are 
not used for science data processing. The NEdT starts to 
degrade at the shortest and the longest wavelengths. Since 
the performance from PV HgCdTe at wavelengths longer 
than 1 3 . 7 5 ~  would have been unacceptable when the 
A I R S  design had to be frozen in 1995, AIRS uses fifteen 
PV HgCdTe detector arrays between 3.7 pm and 13.75 pm. 
The higher noise in the 1 2 - 1 3 . 7 5 ~  region results from 
pushing the state-of-art-performance of the PV HgCdTe. 
Between 1 3 . 7 5 ~  and 1 5 . 4 ~  AIRS uses two PC HgCdTe 
detector arrays. 
The NEdT shown in Figure 2 is based on tests acquired 
after insertion of a field mask at the field stop of the 
telescope. This narrows the AIRS FOV from the original 
U , ( @ )  = N,,p,.pt   COS^(@ - 8)  COS^^], 
where N,, is the radiance from the scan mirror. Although 
the radiance from the scan mirror at 250K is small, it can 
not be neglected. 
The term a1 is the instrument gain. It is routinely re- 
evaluated in-orbit using the OBC and the space view. 
Solving the AIRS calibration equation for a1 at the angles 
of the OBC of 180 degrees and the space view angle of 90 
degree: 
where Nobc is the Planck black-body function evaluated at 
the effective OBC temperature and E is a wavelength 
dependent effective OBC emissivity. The effective OBC 
emissivity is the ratio of the radiance from the OBC at its 
effective temperature to the blackbody radiance of the 
LABB derived from LABB temperature sensors. Deviation 
of the OBC radiance from a single temperature perfect 
blackbody, due to slight spatial response differences 
amongst the AIRS spectrometer detector in the near field, is 
on the order of *0.3%. The a2 term was deduced from the 
stepped LABB tests. For most channels the non-linearity, 
defined as a2 (dn2s,j-dns,J / a1 and evaluated viewing a scene 
at 250K, is less than 0.5% , with a few channels in the 9- 
l lpm region up to 1.5%. Excellent linearity makes the 
residual calibration error less dependent on the accurate 
knowledge of the second order term in orbit. 
As 'tnd-to-end" final test of the radiometric calibration a 
small fraction of the AIRS data while viewing the LABB 
during Thermal Vacuum testing was processed with the 
flight calibration prototype software. The software 
calculates a, from the known scan mirror temperature, 
given scan mirror and spectrometer polarization p g t  
product. The a2 term, obtained from the stepped linearity 
test, is fixed for each detector. The term a1 was calculated 
using the OBC temperature sensors and the effective 
emissivity, also in tabular form. The residual error is 
defined as the difference between the derived LABB 
temperature (after converting the radiance derived from the 
AIRS calibration equation) and the temperature of the 
LABB. Figure 3 shows the residuals calibration error at 
230K, 250K and 295K with the LABB at nadir. The 
residuals are typically less than O.lK, except at the 230K at 
the shortest wavelengths. Data taken at up to 40 degree 
scan ang1.e show comparable performance. 
We attribute this excellent radiometric calibration to the 
fact that the entire AIRS spectrometer is cooled and 
accurately thermostated to within 30mK of 161K. Details 
of the radiometric calibration algorithms can be found in 
the AIRS Level 1 b Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document 
(ATBD)I3. 
- 
2.3 Spectral Response Function Performance 
The AIIRS-Radiative Transfer Algorithm (AIRS-RTA) 
needs extremely accurate and stable spectral response 
functions (SRF) for each AIRS channel to ensure that the 
AIRS-RITA calculated radiances are within the AIRS noise 
level. The relevant parameters needed to characterize the 
SRFs are spectral centroid, width, and shape. The 
requirement, as stated in the FRD, is that the SRF centroids 
must be known at all times to within 1% of the SRF width, 
the SRF widths have to be known to 1-3% (of the SRF 
width), and the shape of the SRF has to be known down to 
< 0.1% of peak response in the wings for all scene 
conditions. Since the actual scene conditions within the 15 
km AIRS FOV are unresolved, but are likely to be non- 
uniform over land and in the presence of clouds, sensitivity 
of the spectral calibration to unknown scene contrast would 
result in a significant spectral calibration uncertainty. In 
fact, as mentioned above, a mask Wafs inserted at the field 
stop of the telescope to narrow the 
RNidual Temperature Error in Radiometry 
I 
P 
6 8 ' 0  12 14 
I I 
6 8 '0 12 14 
I - 0 5  I 
: - P2 *':;Zj 
I I I 
6 6 -0 12 14 
-0.5 
',Vasde length (microns) 
Figure 3 shows the residuals calibration error at 230K, 250K and 295K. The 
residuals are typically less than 0.1 K 
AIRS IFOV fioim t the original 1.1 
degree diameter circular to 1.1 
degree along-track by 0.6 degrees 
cross-track to reduce an unexpected 
field-illumination dependence of the 
spectral response function to below 
FRD specification. 
The AIRS spectrail calibration utilized 
a novel approach: the output of a high 
spectral resolutioa laboratory grade 
Michelson interf;:rometer'4 was fed 
into AIRS entrance pupil. The AIRS 
data system clock controlled the 
stepping of the interferometer to a 
maximum opticall path difference of 
2.88 cm. Each AIRS detector thus 
produced an interferogram whose 
Fourier transform is the spectral 
response function (SRF) for that 
detector. Absolute wavenumber 
calibration was a1:hieved by placing a 
gas cell containing low-pressure 
carbon monoxiide between the 
interferometer and AIRS, which 
superimposed several carbon-monoxide 
absorption lines on several SRFs in the 2100 cm-’spectral 
region. 
In principle, the positions of the SRF centroids are given 
by the standard grating equation, m h = d * ( sin(@) + 
sin(ed) ), where m is the grating order, h the wavelength, d 
= 77.560 pm is the groove spacing, Bi the angle of 
incidence and e d  the angle of diffraction. AIRS has two 
incident angles, ei = 0.55278 and 0.56423 radians, due to 
the use of two entrance slit rows in the spectrometer. To 
meet the AIRS requirements, second order terms had to be 
included. The diffraction angle can be expressed in terms 
of the detector position on the focal plane using: 
where gi is the position of the center of the ith detector in 
the kth array in the focal plan, and F k  is the focal length of 
the focusing mirror. Each AIRS detector is separated by a 
known distance of 50 pm. This leaves only two parameters 
to determine from the spectral calibration data for each of 
the 17 AIRS arrays; (1) the effective focal length Fk, and 
(2) the “starting position”of the first detector in each array, 
which’ we will call fl0. 
Y YL.4 
002- 
- 0015- 
-0.02 
-oo2$O0 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 
Wavenumber (cm?) 
Figure 4. The deviations of the grating model fit from 
the mean of all tests for the T = 161K calibration tests. 
A least-squares fit for these two parameters for each array 
used data from all good tests and all channels. The 
residuals of these fits exhibited some small systematic 
errors for some arrays, with a maximum error 
corresponding to 1-2% of a width. Consequently, our final 
grating model included a quadratic term that removes this 
small systematic error. The variation of the SRF centroids 
between different tests is within our specification (1% of a 
width). Figure 4 shows for each detector the difference 
between the centroid model and the centroids observed 
from the mean of all tests for the T = 161 K calibration 
tests. The green lines in Figure 4 bound the permissible 
1% of width specification. This figure highlights the 
sensitivity of the spectral calibration test setup and the high 
signal-to-noise of these measurements. The array positions 
were found to vary slightly with temperature by an amount 
equivalent to a centroid shift of 2.2% of a width per K. 
Since the spectrometer temperature is actively maintained 
within 30mK, the effect of temperature variations on the 
SRF centroid is negligible. The effective focal lengths Fk, 
did not exhibit any dependence on temperature between 
149K and 161K. 
The SRF width and shape for a grating spectrometer are 
frozen into the design by the grating ruling, grating 
illumination defined by geometrical and diffiaction effects, 
detailed properties of the order isolation filters and the focal 
length of the Schmidt mirror. The accurate determination 
of the SRF shape turned out to be the most challenging part 
of the AIRS pre-launch calibration effort. The SRF width 
measurements showed no variation with temperature, and 
were determined to the required specs (1-3%) or better. 
10-11 I \ i 
i U ; I  P 
2 -2 
10 
0) 
1 o - ~  
-300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 
Microns from SRF Center 
Figure 5. SRFs averaged over three broad 
wavenumber ranges. The dashed lines are the standard 
deviation of the fit. 
Figure 5 shows measured SRFs averaged over three broad 
wavenumber ranges. These are averages of channels over 
several arrays, nominally - 5-6 arrays per average. The 
SRFs are nominally 100 microns wide. The SRF magnitude 
at 3 full SRF widths from the channel center is below 0.1% 
of its peak value. The low level far-out-of-band response of 
the SRF, critical for separating the radiative contribution of 
the surface from that of the lower atmosphere. 
The observed SRFs were fit to a simple analytic function 
(roughly the sum of a Lorentz plus a Gaussian shape) with 
good results. Our main goal for these fits was to smooth 
A - 1  6 R 7  
noise in the SRF wing. These fits included the effects of the 
interferometer, which introduces very noticeable sinc- 
function ringing in the longest wave arrays. Variations of 
the SRFs within a single array were undetectable and below 
our specifications, allowing us to use a single shape (but 
not width) for each channel in each array. Variations in the 
SFG shape among arrays were also quite small, but big 
enough to be explicitly included in the calibration. 
3. DATA ASSIMILATION 
AIRS data can be assimilated into forecast models either as 
directly observed radiances, as cloud-cleared radiances, or 
as derived T(p), q(p), surface temperature and emissivity, 
cloud fraction, cloud height, etc. This is in principle a 
matter of computational convenience, if the error 
characteristics of the data can be determined accurately. 
However, the relevant noise for this purpose may not be 
the noise of the detectors (shown in Figure 2 based on pre- 
launch testing, which can be accurately monitored in 
orbit), but is a measure of the total uncertainty in the data 
due to the combination of various effects, detector noise 
being the lower limit. In the following we discuss the AIRS 
data processing on a conceptual level. The AIRS Level 2 
Products Algorithm Theoretical Basis D~cument’~ gives a 
algorithmic details in flow chart and pseudo-code. 
No matter how the observed upwelling spectral radiances 
are assimilated into the forecast, the observed data are 
directly or indirectly compared to the calculated upwelling 
radiance based on an assumed state.of the atmosphere 
described by the temperature profile, T(p), the moisture 
profile q(p), and the surface temperature and emissivity, T, 
and &. If the field-of-view is free of clouds, the AIRS 
Radiative Transfer Algorithm (RTA) calculates the 
‘bpwelling radiance” or ‘Mear column radiance” in each of 
the 2,378 AIRS spectral channels. The four main 
components of the upwelling radiance are surface emission, 
atmospheric emission, reflected thermal downward-flux 
and reflected solar flux. The T(p), q(p) profile for which the 
calculated radiances, &, agree with the observed 
radiances, lobs, in a least squares sense, i.e.: 
(where the sum is evaluated over all frequencies, i=l..M), 
then defines a possible state of the atmosphere and 
surface. Additional assumptions about the form of T(p), 
q(p) and/or a horizontal correlation between adjacent 
atmospheric columns are required to define this profile as 
the “most-likely’’ or the optimal solution. The quantity n 
represents the noise of the i-th frequency ‘khannel”. In 
principle we expect the minimum to be governed by chi- 
squared statistics, i.e. it should be of the order of M when 
the data fit the observations within the noise, if the noise is 
gaussian distributed with known variance, zero mean and is 
uncorrela.ted between channels. In practice, a formal 
retrieval ‘or direct assimilation cannot tie initiated using the 
basic assimilation equation until three problems are 
addressed: 
1. 
2. 
3.  
This equation is only valid for cloud-free cases 
Additional sources of ‘hoise” other than detector noise 
have to be accounted for 
The calculated radiances have to be adjusted to account 
for some bias relative to the ‘bbserved” radiances. 
3.1. Adjustment for clouds 
The practical experience with TOVSdHIRS/2 during the 
last two (decades has shown that a larg: fraction of the data 
from HIIW2 is contamination with cl~ouds. There are two 
potential solutions to this problem: 
1. The cloud-clearing approach. Chahine developed a 
method to calculate the radiance with would be 
observed if there were no clouds by combining 
observations from two differerit adjacent infrared 
spectrometer FOV’s and a matching microwave FOV. 
This method assumes that 
a) the two fields of view differ only in the fractional 
cloud amounts, but atmospheric and surface 
conditions, cloud height and cloud type in the two 
fields are identical, and 
b) the two fields of view of the infrared sounder are 
simultaneously observed with a microwave 
temperature sounder with golod mid-tropospheric 
weighting functions, such as the AMSU-A. 
The hole-hunting approach: The development of a 
reliable day/night algorithm to identify cloud-free data 
(i.e. :a hole in the cloud), such th,at the residual cloud 
contamination is less than the system noise is very 
difficult. NOAA/NCEP and ECMWF currently use this 
approach for NOAA-K processing. TOVS operational 
processing of NOAA 10 data for .lune 1988 treats 48% 
of the retrievals as ‘blear”, while the more research 
oriented GLA retrievals declare 35% of the retrievals as 
‘tssentially clear” 16. Recent assimiilation of TOVS data 
into ihe ECMWF analysis model indicates that less than 
10% of the HIRS/2 footprints are ‘blear”. 
2. 
The senious shortcoming of the hole-hunting approach is 
that, after two decades of experimentation, it still presents 
the user with the difficult choice: Either reject more than 
90% of the data, or take chances on miss-identification of a 
cloud clontaminated footprint as clear, which upsets the 
assimilation or retrieval process. For this reason AIRS on 
the EOS Aqua has been designed from the start to operate 
together with the AMSU to optimize this cloud-clearing 
approach by synchronizing the scan patterns and matching 
the foot-print pattern. The cloud-clearing approach has the 
advantage that as much as 90% of the data can be used for 
direct assimilation or retrieval, but the process involves a 
potential noise amplification and a noise correlation. The 
A -1 C Q Q  
noise appropriate for retrieval or direct assimilation 
process has to be scaled depending on the cloud contrast 
The single-layer cloud-clearing algorithm concept is as 
follows: If I1 and I , ,  respectively, are the radiances 
observed from two adjacent fields of view that satisfythe 
observational conditions for viable cloud clearing, then the 
method extrapolates to the ‘blear-column” radiance: 
Icleai = 11 + q * (11 -I,), 
where 77 is independent of frequency. The method does not 
require any field of view to be cloud free. Since all spectral 
channels on AIRS are spatially coincident, and since 77 is 
independent of frequency, it suffices to determine 17 at one 
frequency to be able to “cloud-clear” all frequencies. 
While the HIRS/3 and the AMSU on the NOAA-K have 
overlapping spatial coverage, the AIRS on the EOS Aqua 
has been designed from the start to operate together with 
the AM$U. AIRS optimizes the cloud-clearing approach by 
synchronizing scan patterns and matching the foot-print 
sizes, such that a 3 x 3 pattern of nine AIRS footprints is 
contained in a single AMSU footprint. This is illustrated in 
Figure 6.  For the single cloud layer algorithm the nine 
AIRS footprints are sorted into the 5 “most cloudy” and the 
4 ‘feast cloudy” footprints, which are combined to form 
the fields I1 and 12. 
;igure 6. The spatial relationship between AIRS and 
LMSU is phased and synchronized to optimize cloud 
learing. 
The methodology for solving for ll involves the careful 
choice of a small set of tropospheric sounding channels to 
match equivalent tropospheric Ah4SU weighting 
functions, and some successive approximations of the 
temperature profile T(p). Since a first approximation of 
T(p) is given by the AMSU “microwave only” retrieval, 
which is very insensitive to clouds, Iclear can be calculated 
and can be used for the fist  approximation of: 
q = (Iclear - 11 ) f (11 -12). 
The process of cloud-clearing involves a noise 
amplification of k = d(1+2*q2) and, since q is used for 
all frequencies, introduces a correlation between 
frequencies. The noise-amplification effect is mitigated on 
AIRS by the very high sensitivity of the spectral channels. 
The cloud-clearing method has been verified using the 
combination of HIRSf2 and MSU data by Susskind. 
3.2. Bias Evaluation and Bias Adjustment 
The quantity lobs - ICalc will almost certainly not have a 
global mean of zero, but will show some bias. The bias is 
due to one or more of the following: 
1. The inability to accurately calculate Icaic, due to 
uncertainties in the radiative transfer physics, i.e. line 
strengths, line shapes, the effect of foreign broadening 
on line width, etc. 
A bias was introduced in robs in the process of cloud- 
clearing or due to cloud contamination in the case of 
hole-hunting 
3. Instrumental artifact, such as inadequately known 
spectral response or radiometric calibration function, 
possibly due to long-term changes in instrument 
characteristics. 
Accurate estimation and elimination of the bias is critical to 
2. 
the success of the retrieval process and direct assimilation. 
Define a channel dependent bias correction function: 
B = robs - Icak  
which is evaluated using a large number ‘truth data”, i.e. 
“cloud-free” footprints where the state of the atmosphere is 
‘%assumed” to be known. In practice the observed bias for 
each truth point is expressed as a channel dependent bias 
equation: 
B = a + b*Iobs + c*csc(@ + d*Ts + e*Q + ... , 
where 6 i s  the slant path angle. T is the surface temperature 
and Q is the water vapor column, obtained from a short 
term forecast or approximated using other channels from 
the same footprint. The retrieval andor direct assimilation 
of the data then use the bias corrected ‘tuned radiance 
Inrned = robs + B. 
While the quantities a, b and c in the bias equation have 
the appearance of instrumental offset and gain errors, they 
and the other terms may in fact be due to the combination 
of residual instrumental effects and approximations in the 
radiative transfer algorithm. Lapse rate, sun angle, latitude 
and landocean dependencies are additional terms 
frequently included in the bias equation. The bias equation 
coefficients are determined from the truth data set in a least 
squares sense. For AIRS there may be enough redundancy 
in the 2,378 spectral channels to separate instrumental and 
spectroscopic effects. 
4-1689 
There are three conceptual approaches to collecting the 
truth data sets: 
The approach developed during the last two decades 
for the TOVS uses the operational radio sondes 
launched by the various national meteorological 
services. Since only about 30 of the 5,000 routine 
radio sonde launches per day are time coincident 
within a two hours, are within 100 km of the satellite 
overpass, and are cloud-free, it requires several months 
of data to reliably evaluate the global bias. The 
accuracy of the bias determination is limited by the 
accuracy of the radiosondes, assuming that the spatial 
and time mismatch between the satellite overpass and 
the radio sonde launches averages out. This approach 
will be used by the NOM/NESDIS affiliated AIRS 
team members for operational bias monitoring. 
An alternate approach uses special meteorological 
research sites, like the A M C A R T  sites in Oklahoma, 
the Arctic North Slope site, and the Westem Pacific 
site, to make the most accurate determine the true state 
of the atmosphere. Dedicated radiosondes launches one 
hour before and at satellite overpasses, supported by 
uplooking microwave and infrared radiometers, 
spectrometers, GPS and LIDAR will be used to 
determine the state of the atmosphere in the AIRS 
colmnn to well within 1K in lkm vertical layers and 
10% water vapor in 2km vertical layers at the time of 
the satellite overpass. This approach is statistically 
limited to the few available observing sites. It is the 
only approach where the standard deviation of (I,,bs 
Iculc> is not dominated by spatial and temporal 
mismatches. This is the approach selected by the AIRS 
Science team for the AIRS Validation phase during the 
first twelve months after launch. 
The third approach to evaluate the bias is to ' b e  
using the forecast". If one assumes that the analysis 
GCM model (or three hour forecast), which is based on 
ingesting all radiosonde and satellite data, is globally 
unbiased and accurate, then the statistical evaluation of 
- I,,/, ) for all footprints that are cloud-free 
yields the desired bias values. This allows the 
estimation of the bias using as little as one day's worth 
of data. If the data being evaluated have a significant 
influence on the forecast, then this third tuning 
process may lead to unexpected instabilities. 
Figure 7 shows a typical example of bias monitoring 
relative lo the forecast using the NOAA 14 HIRS channel 
#6 at 13.64 microns by ECMWF for clear, ice-free ocean 
from September 19 through October 19, 2000 
(T.Hollingsworth, private communication). This HIRS 
channel, which is sensitive to mid-tropospheric 
temperature, is not used in the ECMWF assimilation. The 
vertical scale is the brightness temperature bias in degree 
K. The 2'ld curve from the top (solid blue) is the mean value 
of (lobs - Iculc ), which fluctuates within 0.1K around 
+0.2K. The 3rd curve from the top (solid red) is the mean 
residual bias, after bias correction usirig a bias equation. It 
residual fluctuates within 0.1K around -tO.lK. The standard 
deviation of (observed- bias-adjusted-calculated), shown 
in the 1 st and 4'h curves (dotted red lines) is 0.6K. 
This bias evaluation shows that: 
1) The HZRS#6 calibration accuracy of 0.2K in the 240K 
to 2tjOK range is excellent, corresponding to 0.3% of 
the signal amplitude. 
2) The ECMWF bias estimation melhodology is capable 
of estimating a radiometric bias as low as 0.1K. This is 
an irnportant diagnostic capability, given that the AIRS 
radiometric calibration residual error (Figure 3) is 
typically 0.lK or less. 
3) The standard deviation of the bias is much larger than 
the 0.2K noise for each HIRS#6 footprint. The most 
likely cause for this is a combination of cloud 
contamination of assumed cloud-free footprints, 
possible uncertainties in the HIRS SRF used for the 
radiometric transfer calculations, andor disagreements 
between the upper tropospheric temperature measured 
by HURS#6 and found in the short-term forecast. 
I
2 
I 
H16o 
-1 
-2 
Figure 7. Thirty days of bias monitoring by ECMWF 
relatiive to the forecast using the N O M  14 HIRS 
channel #6. 
During the first year after launch the AIRS science team 
plans to (evaluate all three bias estimation approaches. Bias 
estimation and elimination demands instrument stability on 
a month's timescale. This stability is assured by the a- 
thermal design of AIRS and the absence of critical parts 
moving with interferometric precision. 
3.3. Adjustment for Noise. 
The noise measured during the pre-launch testing, shown 
in Figure 2, is the minimum noise. The effective noise has 
to accoimt for additional terms which are difficult to 
estimate based on simulations: 
4-1690 
Noise amplification due to cloud clearing 
Uncertainty in the calculated radiance due to the 
limited accuracy of the RTA which mimics noise 
Measurement error introduced by the instrument, e.g. 
any residual effect of scene dependence of the SFW, 
which has a random component (rather than a bias). 
The effective system noise is due to the combination of 
these three additional sources of noise with the detector 
NEdT. In general, the standard deviation Of - I,,I, ) is 
not a measure of the effective noise, since it may be 
dominated by temporal mismatch errors and/or cloud 
contamination. The AIRS validation p l d 7  includes radio 
sonde launches from special ground campaigns to coincide 
with the EOS Aqua overpasses, supported by uplooking 
LIDAR, GPS, microwave radiometers, and interferometers. 
These campaigns are designed to minimize temporal and 
spatial mismatch errors. Only for these data is the true state 
of the atmosphere sufficiently defined to consider the 
standard deviation of ( lobs  - Icalc ) as an estimate of the 
effective system noise. 
4. DIRECT RETRIEVAL FORMULATION 
The direct retrieval uses Iobs - B from a single AMSU 
footprint and the nine co-located AIRS footprints to obtain 
an optimum solution for T(p) and q(p). Direct retrievals 
can be formulated as regression, as a recursive physical 
retrieval, or as a combination of the two. After considerable 
evaluation of various approaches using simulated data, the 
AIRS science team selected data processing software starts 
with a microwave-only retrieval, followed, after cloud- 
clearing, by a regression retrieval. The solution from the 
regression retrieval is used as the initial guess of a physical 
retrieval. The physical retrieval uses 340 spectral channels, 
which were carefully selected from the 2,378 available 
AIRS spectral channels to minimize undesirable coupling 
between the solution for T(p), the solution for q(p), total 
Ozone estimate and surface temperature and emissivity, T, 
and &. While the physical retrieval is computationally more 
expensive than the regression algorithm, it has the 
potential for providing error estimates for TOp) and q(p) 
as a h c t i o n  of pressure level and for T, and E,. Based on 
simulated cloud-free data and detector noise limited 
performance the physical retrieval determines the 
temperature profile between the surface and lOOmb and the 
surface skin temperature with rms error of 0.5K The water 
vapor abundance is determined with 7% rms error. The 
margin with respect to the required 1K retrieval accuracy 
allows for the expected degradation when the algorithm has 
to deal with real data in the presence of clouds. 
Development of error estimates directly from the AIRS 
data, i.e. from first principles rather than "truth" data, is 
still under development. The retrieval also solves for a 
surface mean emissivity in the 3.7, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 12 
micron window regions for a rough surface 
characterization. 
Details of the AIRS on-orbit Validation Plan are available 
from the EOSPSO website 17. The process of in-orbit 
verification of the AIRS instrument is expected to be 
completed within five months after launch, resulting in the 
release of validated spectral radiances. The process of 
refining the data processing software from its pre-launch 
simulation-derived state to an optimized state based on real 
data including a validation of the level 2 data products is 
expected to be completed at launch + 12 months. Launch + 
12 months is also the goal for the first assessment of the 
impact of AIRS data on forecast accuracy. 
5 .  SUMMARY 
The AIRS instrument is a hyper-spectral infrared grating 
array spectrometer, which represents a major advance in 
passive IR remote sensing technology. The extensive 
spectral, spatial and radiometric calibration effort 
demonstrate the high measurement accuracy and stability of 
AIRS. The long-term stability of AIRS, assured by the a- 
thermal cold spectrometer design and the absence of critical 
parts moving with interferometric precision, assures the 
viability of AIRS as operational sounder in support of 
N O M  weather forecasting and the value of AIRS derived 
data to the climate and global change research objectives of 
NASA. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The AIRS instrument was designed, built and tested by 
LockheedSanders Infrared and Imaging Systems (LIRE), 
Lexington MA, under a systems contract with the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA. The calibration data 
analysis was the combined effort of the calibration team, 
including Tom Pagano, Ken Overoye and Margie Weiler 
from Lockheed-Martin, Steve Gaiser and Denise Hagan 
from JPL. The retrieval algorithm and software were 
developed by AIRS Science team members, notably Joel 
Susskind and Chris Bamett at NASA/GSFC, Mitch 
Goldberg and Lany McMillin at NOAANESDIS and 
Larrabee Strow at UMBC, under the leadership of Mous 
Chahine at JPL. 
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, operates under contract with the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
d - 1  K Q l  
REFERENCES 
[l] Kaplan, L.D. , M. T. Chahine, J. Susskind and J.E. 
Searl, Applied Optics, 16,322 (1977) 
[2] Chahine M.T., J. Atmos. Sci.,34, 744, (1977) 
[3] Chahine M.T., in “Inversion Methods in Atmospheric 
Remote Sounding” (A. Depak, ed.) p.67 Academic Press, 
New York (1977) 
[4] Chahine, M. T., in ‘Remote Sensing of Oceans and 
Atmospheres”(A. Depak, ed.), p.411 Academic Press, New 
York (1980) 
[5] Chahine, M.T. , H. H. Aumann, and F.W, Taylor, J. 
Atmos. Sci. 34,758 (1977) 
[6] Smith, W.L. Mon. Wea. Rev. 96,387 (1968) 
[7] M. T. Chahine, ‘Remote sounding of cloudy 
atmospheres. I. The single layer cloud.”, J. Atmo. Science 
Vol. 31,233-243, (1974) 
[SI Susskind, J., J. Rosenfield, D. Reuter, and M.T. 
Chahine ‘The GLAS physical inversion method for 
analysis of MRS-2MSU sounding data,” NASA Technical 
Memorandum 84936 (1982). 
[9] Aumann, H. H., “AIRS Functional Requirements 
Document”, JPL Internal Document D-8236, Rev. 1 ., 
Oct.1992. 
[lo] Aumann, H. H. and Chris Miller, “Atmospheric 
Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on the EOS Observing System”, 
SPIE V01.2583, pp 332-343,1995. 
[ 111 P. Morse, J. Bates, C. Miller, “Development and test of 
the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) for the NASA 
Earth Observing System (EOS).”, SPIE 3759-27, July 
1999. 
[12] Pagano, Thomas S., Hartmut H. Aumann and Lanabee 
Strow, Proceedings of the EUROPTO Conference in 
Barcelona, Spain, September 2000. 
[13] AIRS Level lb, IR, Algorithm Theoretical Basis 
Document Rev. 2.1 15 December 1999 
http://eospso.gsfc.nasa.gov 
[14] Bruker Instruments Model IFS-66V 
[ 151 AIRS Level 2 Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document 
Rev. 2.1 20 December 1999 
http ://eospso.nsfc .nasa. qov 
[16] M-oustafa T. Chahine and Joel Susskind, 
‘Fundamentals of the GLA Physical Retrieval Method” 
Proceedings of the ECMWF workshop on ‘The use of 
satellite data in operational numerical weather predictions“, 
9-12 May 1989. 
[ 171 AIRS Validation Plan, 5 June 2000. 
http://eospso.gscf.nasa.aov 
Hartmut H. 
Aumann is a Senior 
Research Scientist 
at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, AIRS 
Project Scientist and 
AIRS science team 
member since 1990. 
He holds a Ph.D. in 
Space Science from 
Rice University, 
Houston, TX. 
Larrabee Strow is 
professor of physics 
at University of 
Maryland, 
Baltimore County 
and AIRS science 
team member since 
1990. He holds a 
Ph.D. in Physics 
from the University 
of Maryland, 
College Park, MD. 
