The 94-GHz Cloud Profiling Radar 
For the CloudSat Mission 
Eastwood Im, Stephen L. Durden, Chialin Wu, Thomas R. Livermore 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 9 1 109 
eastwood.im@jpl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-0492 
Abstract - The CloudSat Mission is a new international 
satellite mission to acquire a global data set of vertical 
atmospheric cloud structure and its variability. Such data 
set is expected to provide crucial input to the studies of 
cloud physics, radiation budget, water distribution in the 
atmosphere, and to the numerical weather prediction 
models. 
The key science instrument aboard the CloudSat satellite is 
the Cloud Profiling Radar (CPR). CPR is a 94-GHz nadir- 
looking radar that measures the power backscattered by 
clouds as a function of distance from the radar. This sensor 
is expected to provide cloud measurements at a 500-m 
vertical resolution and a 1.5-km horizontal resolution. CPR 
will operate in a short-pulse mode and will yield 
measurements at a minimum detectable sensitivity of -28 
dBZ. In this paper, we will present the system design and 
the expected performance of this instrument, as well as the 
state-of-the art millimeter-wave technologies employed by 
this instrument. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
2. SYSTEM DESIGN 
1. INTRODUCXON 
The CloudSat Mission [l] is a new satellite mission 
currently being developed by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (JVASA), the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory (JPL), and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) to 
acquire a global data set of vertical cloud structure and its 
variability. . Such data set is expected to provide crucial 
input to the studies of cloud physics, radiation budget, 
water distribution in the atmosphere, and to the numerical 
weather prediction models. The CloudSat Mission is 
planned to launch together with another cloud measurement 
mission called PICASSO-CENA [2] in early summer of 
2003. During normal operations, the two missions will fly 
in formation to provide detailed, multi-parameter 
measurements of the 3-dimensional cloud field over the 
entire globe. 
One key science instrument aboard the CloudSat satellite is 
the Cloud Profiling Radar (CPR). CPR is a 94-GHz nadir- 
looking radar that measures the power backscattered by 
clouds as a function of distance from the radar. These data 
will provide an along-track vertical profile of cloud structure. 
Figure 1 shows the operational geometry of CPR. In this 
paper, we will present the system design and the expected 
performance of this instrument, as well as the state-of-the art 
millimeter-wave technologies employed by this instrument. 
Horiz. Res. 
Figure 1. Cloud Profiling Radar (CPR) operational 
geometry. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
4-1803 
2. SYSTEM DESIGN 
The design of CPR is driven by the CloudSat science 
objectives. The primary science objective is a minimum 
detectable cloud reflectivity (Z) of -26 dl3Z' at the end of the 
mission. This performance is needed since clouds are weak 
scatterers. By comparison the reflectivity for rain is typically 
20-50 dBZ, the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
(TRMM:, Precipitation Radar (PR) [3] has a sensitivity of 
around +20 dBZ. 
Maximizing the cloud detection sensitivity requires careful 
tradeoff among several competing and often conflicting 
parameters, including the cloud backscattering sensitivity, 
atmospheric absorption, resolution, and radar technology. 
The detection sensitivity is primarily determined by the radar 
received power and the noise level. The radar received power 
can be written as [4] 
where P, is the transmitter power, h is the wavelength, G is 
the antenna gain, 8 is the antenna half-power beamwidth, A 
is range resolution, r, is the range to the atmospheric target, 
q is the cloud reflectivity', and L is the signal loss. P,,(r) is 
the received qower from the atmosphere versus range. The 
product G A- 0' is proportional to the antenna effective 
area. Thus, the received power is increased by increasing 
antenna area, range resolution, transmit power, and 
reflectivity. The antenna size is limited by the physical 
launch constraints such as volume and mass. Transmitted 
power is limited by the technology of the transmitter itself 
and by the power supply capability of the spacecraft. 
The amount of power received is strongly influenced by the 
the interactions between the atmosphere and the intervening 
electromagnetic waves. Such interactions can be 
characterized by two key parameters: the cloud reflectivity 
and the atmospheric absorption. In general, the cloud 
reflectivity increases by increasing the radar frequency. In 
the Rayleigh regime at which the cloud particles are small 
relative to the radar wavelength, the cloud reflectivity 
increases as h4. In this case, the cloud droplets are 
relatively transparent at centimeter wavelengths, and 
millimeter wavelengths are required for cloud observations. 
On the other hand, signal absorption due to atmospheric 
gases may be prohibitively large at smaller wavelengths 
(i.e., higher frequencies). The atmospheric absorption 
spectrum [ 5 ] ,  [6] as shown in Figure 2 indicates that the 
spectral windows suitable for cloud observations are around 
35, 94, 140 and 220 GHz. From these considerations, the 
use of 94 GHz provides an increase of 33 dB as compared 
with the use of the TRMM PR frequency of 14 GHz. Even 
at 35 GHz the required transmit power andlor antenna size 
dBZ is dB relative to 1 mm6/m3. These are the units of 2, known as 
reflectivity or more properly reflectivity factor. Zis proportional to the 
reflectivity q, which is the radar cross section per unit volume, measured 
in units of *ti' 
exceeds limitations of technology andl cost. Frequencies 
above 100 GHz provide an additional increase in sensitivity; 
however., technology is not mature enough for a spaceborne 
radar. The use of 94 GHz for the CPR thus allows the 
sensitivity requirement to be met using available 
technology. 
Figure 2. Atmospheric gases absorption spectrum for 
various humidity conditions and due to 10 mmlhr 
rain [ 5 ] ,  [6]. 
Sensitiviity is also related to the pulse length 6); longer 
pulse lengths provide better sensitivity but poorer vertical 
resolution. CPR will operate using 3.3-ps monochromatic 
pulses to provide the required sensitivity while also meeting 
the range resolution requirement.of 500 m. The required 
vertical resolution can be maintained when using longer 
pulses by employing pulse compression techniques [7], [8]. 
In this case a frequency-modulated chirp is transmitted and 
the received signal is compressed by correlation with a 
replica of the transmitted signal. While pulse compression 
can be used to enhance the vertical resolution, it has the 
disadvantage of creating range sidelobes. For CPR, the 
required sidelobe suppression to make the chirp data useful 
down to the surface is at least 75 dB, probably greater for a 
smooth ocean surface. This is considered beyond the current 
state of the art. Hence for CPR only a conventional 3.3-ps 
monochromatic pulse is used. To maximize power, the 
short pulse must have rapid rise and fall times and minimal 
droop. 
The other approaches for improving sensitivity involve 
reducing noise from various sources. Thermal noise is 
generated by the finite antenna temperature and receiver 
temperaiure. The receiver noise is minimized by using a 
low noise amplifier and by reducing the losses between the 
antenna ilnd the low noise amplifier. The total noise power 
also depends on receiver bandwidth, so matching the 
receiver bandwidth to the transmit bandwidth provides an 
optimal SNR while maintaining the required resolution. 
The optimal 6 dB bandwidth is approximately 1.1-1.2 
times the reciprocal of the pulse length. For 3.3-ps 
rectangular pulse, the matched filter ,should have a 6 dB 
4-1804 
bandwidth of 330-360 kHz. The maximum expected 
Doppler shift due to a pointing off nadir of 0.1" is 8 kHz. 
In this case the receiver 6 dB bandwidth should be 376 kHz. 
An additional source of shifting is a change in the radar 
STALO during the roundtrip time. To keep this below 1 
kHz, the STALO frequency must not change by more than 
1 .Oe-8 in 5 ms (the STALO's Allen deviation requirement). 
Including margin for Doppler shifting we find that the 6 
dB filter should be 350-380 kHz. For a Gaussian shape this 
corresponds to a 3 dB width of around 270 kHz. 
Unfortunately, because of the detection scheme this filter 
must be implemented at a center frequency of 50-100 MHz. 
Such a narrow band filter is difficult, so the current 
specification is 320 kHz. Besides the receiver filter 
bandwidth, the shape must also be carefully considered. A 
filter with too sharp a cutoff would cause time domain 
ringing, causing the signal at one range bin to interfere with 
the signal at another. Ripple in the filter response also 
increases the mismatch and is undesirable. Simulations 
have shown that no more than 1 dB can be tolerated. 
The thermal, noise contribution is further reduced by 
averaging many samples of the measured power and 
subtracting the estimated noise level. The sensitivity 
improvement due to noise subtraction is proportional to the 
square root of the number of independent samples. The 
number of independent samples can be increased by 
increasing the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). However, 
the maximum PRF is set by range ambiguity 
considerations. For CPR, the nominal range window size 
is set at 30 km, allowing capture of the surface return and 
cloud return up to an altitude of 25 km. System noise level 
is estimated using the clear air radar return from 25 to 30 
km altitude. A data window of 30 km allows a maximum 
PRF of 5000 Hz. However, because the altitude varies over 
the orbit, such a high PRF would require continuous 
updating. Instead, a PRF of around 4300 Hz is used. The 
exact PRFvaries with altitude to satisfy the constraint that 
the received data window not overlap the transmit event. In 
particular, if the roundtrip time is T,  and the length of the 
data window is T, then the data window position @W) is 
To-(n-1)PRI-T, where PRIis the inverse of the PRF and n is 
the number of echoes in flight. The constraint on transmit 
versus receive is satisfied if DWP% and DWP<PRI-T, 
including some margin for switching from transmit to 
receive. 
In the baseline design, the radar measurements along the 
nadir track are averaged in 0.32-sec time intervals. This 
corresponds to an effective along-track horizontal resolution 
of 3.5 km (i.e., 0.3 s x 7 km/s + 1.4 km) on the CPR 
measurements after averaging. In order to provide enhanced 
capability to discriminate cloud features, the CPR 
measurements are sampled at 250-m in range, and 0.16 s 
along the nadir track. The 0.32 s averaging at 4300 Hz 
provides nearly 1400 samples for averaging. These samples 
are independent since the satellite moves 1.6 m between 
each pulse, which is substantially more than one-half the 
antenna diameter ( 1  m). The noise subtraction approach 
should allow signals that are 15 dB below the thermal noise 
to be detected. 
In addition to thermal noise, the backscattered signal may 
be contaminated by surface clutter through antenna sidelobes 
or pulse compression sidelobes. For a nadir-pointed 
antenna, the primaly clutter source is the surface return from 
previously transmitted pulses that are received through the 
antenna sidelobes. If the range to the cloud is r,, then all 
points on the surface with range r, is equal to ro+nc/2PRF 
will contribute. As discussed in [9], the surface clutter 
through sidelobes for a given n is due to an annulus on the 
earth's surface. The power received from the annulus P, can 
be written as a surface integral over the azimuth angle @ and 
the angle y between the earth radius to the nadir point and 
the earth radius to the annulus (shown in Figure 3). This 
integral can be simplified [9], giving the following 
expression for P, 
where Re is the earth's radius, h is the spacecraft altitude, i-1 
and r2 are the ranges to the inner and outer edges of the 
annulus, a" is the surface cross section, and g(  ) is the 
antenna pattern. The signal-to-clutter ratio (SCR) can be 
computed as the ratio of the power from the atmosphere 
(Eq. (1)) to the sum of power from all surface annuli (Eq. 
(2)). The number of the maximum annulus corresponds to 
the edge of a spherical earth model, while the minimum 
value corresponds to nadir return, and for nadir-looking 
radars, the minimum value of is 0. 
Figure 3. Surface clutter geometry for spaceborne 
atmospheric radars. 
The SCR depends on both the surface clutter and the 
atmospheric return. We can solve for the minimum 
detectable Z due to clutter, defined as that Z having an SCR 
of unity. Figure 4 shows the minimum detectable 
reflectivity factor Z versus altitude for antenna sidelobe 
levels of -38 dB and -50 dB. The calculation is for land 
surface clutters. For the CPR geometry, the clutters 
coming from angles less than 7" have minimal contributions 
to the overall clutter noise. Our calculations show that an 
antenna with a -50-dB sidelobe level at angles >7" is 
adequate to suppress the surface clutters, while a -38 dB 
level is not. This clutter model allows the establishment of 
4-1805 
the antenna sidelobe requirements. For a given an antenna 
sidelobe level, the surface clutter can be further suppressed 
using a frequency diversity scheme. In this frequency 
diversity approach, the transmitter transmits a sequence of 
pulses with carrier frequencies that are appropriately 
separated. The receiver tracks these frequencies, so that the 
desired echo from clouds is within the receiver bandwidth, 
while surface return from previous pulses leaking through 
antenna sidelobes is outside the receiver bandwidth. 
Calculations have shown that this approach provides 
sufficient clutter suppression even for a land surface and an 
antenna with constant -38 dB sidelobes (Figure 4). For 
CPR, the predicted antenna sidelobes beyond 7" from 
boresight are below -50 dB. Hence, frequency diversity is 
not needed. However, the frequency diversity approach has 
been kept as a backup in case the actual antenna performance 
falls short of expectation. 
- Tdj &-,.---L""-i---"*& 
6' $9 x - l  
&?m KE **q 
Figure 4. Minimum reflectivity factor Z due to clutter. 
The planned operational scenario calls for continuous radar 
science data acquisition. Table 1 shows the expected 
functional and performance parameters of CPR during 
normal operations. 
Table 1. CPR system parameters. 
Frequency 
Altitude 
Range resolution 
Cross-track resolution 
Along-track resolution 
Pulse width 
Peak power (end of life) 
PRF 
Antenna diameter 
Antenna gain (mi)  
Antenna sidelobes 
Integration Time 
Data window 
Minimum detectable reflectivity 
94.05 GHz 
720 km 
507 m 
1.4 km 
3.5 km 
3.33 ps 
1.6 kW 
4000 Hz 
1.85 m 
62 dBi 
0.48 sec 
0 - 2 5 k m  
- 5 o a  @ e > 7 "  
-28 dBZ 
Science requirements call for an absolute calibration of CPR 
to 2 dE4. 'This is accomplished by making frequent estimates 
of the transmit power by a power meter, and by frequent 
receiver ,gain monitoring through periodically coupling of 
the output of a noise diode into the receiver. These 
measurements, along with pre-launch measurements of the 
antenna pattern and transmit and receive path losses, are used 
by the ground data processing system to calibrate the data. 
Calibration accuracies are also monitored by examining 
ocean surface backscatter. 
Figure 5 shows the internal calibration scheme for CPR. 
The calibrated radar cross section per unit volume 
(reflectivity) can be found from 
(3) 
where Q is the integral of the normalized two-way antenna 
pattem. 'The antenna gain and Q are estimated from antenna 
range measurements. A is determined from laboratory 
measurernents of the received pulse shape. The transmit 
power P, is determined from the power detector, which 
samples a small amount of the transinit power from the 
antenna. :Received power P, is determined from P,o and from 
receiver gain measured by periodic coupling of known noise 
diode into receiver. 
Our current estimate of the calibration errors, including both 
pre-launch measurement error, launch effects, and the post- 
launch calibration stability, is -1.7 dEl. This accuracy can 
be further improved through (external calibration 
measurements during both pre- and post-launch phases. , 
power 
detector < 
't Pr  
Figure 5. CPR internal calibration approach. 
3. HARDWARE IMPLFMENTATION 
CPR is implemented by the following subsystems: Radio 
Frequenc:y Electronics Subsystem (EWES), High-Power 
Amplifier (HPA), Antenna, and Digital Subsystem (DSS). 
The simplified version of the CPlR instrument block 
diagram is shown in Figure 6 .  The RFES consists of an 
upconveirter which accepts a 10 MHz oscillator signal from 
the DSS and upconverts it to a pulse-modulated 94 GHz 
signal. The signal is amplified to approximately 200 mW 
by a MMIC power amplifier. A switch within the 
4-1806 
upconverter is used to provide the modulation for generating 
pulses. The receiver accepts the received signal from the 
antenna and downconverts it to an intermediate frequency 
(IF). A MMIC low-noise amplifier (LNA) provides the first 
stage of amplification. The gain of the LNA is large 
enough that additional stages have only a small contribution 
to the system noise temperature. The IF signal following 
downconversion is detected using a logarithmic amplifier; 
this approach has been used on the TRMM PR to provide 
high dynamic range [3]. 
Extended 
Reflector 
Digital 
Subsystem 4 
ed2Y-J Pwr Distrib. Unit 
Figure 6. Simplified CPR block diagram. 
The HPA, which amplifies the transmitted pulse to a 
nominal power level of 1.7 kW, consists of an extended 
interaction klystron (EIK) and a high-voltage power supply 
(HVPS). Both a primary and a backup HPA are used to 
enhance system reliability. The EIK tube is a space-qualified 
version of a commercial tube, manufactured by 
Communications and Power Industries, Canada, Inc. This 
family of EIKs has been used extensively in existing 
ground-based and airborne 94 GHz cloud radars [lo]. The 
EIK differs from standard klystrons by using resonated bi- 
periodic ladder lines as a replacement for conventional 
klystron cavities. The EIK provides a large peak power in a 
very compact and lightweight package. The high-voltage 
power supply (HVPS) provides the voltages needed to 
operate the EIK (heater, cathode, collector and modulator) 
and provides telemetry data necessary to system needs. The 
design uses a boost supply to minimize input current 
transients during the pulsing period and control EMC 
problems. 
In order the ensure adequate mitigation of the 94-GHz HPA 
technology risks in the CPR program, in 1999 the first 
engineering model for the EIK was built and tested for 
structural integrity. In 2000, the second EIK engineering 
model was built and is currently undergoing environmental 
testing. This second EIK unit is shown in Figure 7. In 
addition, the breadboard model for the HVPS was also built 
in 2000 and its performance was verified. This HVPS 
breadboard model is shown in Figure 8. 
Figure 7. The second engineering model of the CPR's 94- 
GHz Extended Interaction Klystron tube. 
Figure 8. The breadboard model of the CPR's 94-GHz 
High-voltage Power Supply. 
The CPR Antenna Subsystem consists of the collimating 
antenna reflector and the quasi-optical transmission line 
(QOTL) [ l l ] .  The collimating antenna is a fixed 1.85-m 
diameter reflector, made from space-qualified composite 
graphite material to reduce mass. The antenna provides more 
than 63 dBi gain, has beamwidth < 0.12", and has sidelobes 
iess than -50 dB for angles greater than or equal to 7" from 
boresight. This low sidelobe level is achieved using an 
offset feed design. In stead of using conventional 
waveguide, the antenna is fed by the QOTL for low loss. 
This QOTL approach is based on free-space transmission of 
Gaussian RF beams, with beam direction and focusing 
achieved by shaped metallic mirrors. The CPR Antenna 
Subsystem is graphically illustrated in Figure 9. 
4-1807 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Sun 
Sensor \. I 
Figure 9. Graphical illustration of the CPR Antenna 
Subsystem. 
The DSS provides the following functions: (1) to receive 
commands from the spacecraft and transmit them in the 
correct format to the rest of the radar; ( 2 )  to digitize the 
telemetryfrom the rest of the radar and incorporate the 
digitized words in the science and telemetry data streams; 
(3) to digitize the radar echo, do simple data processing and 
transmit the data to the as part of the science data stream to 
be downlinked to earth; (4) to generate the radar timing 
signals including the STALO; (5) to generate the radar 
signal that will be upconverted from L-Band to 94 GHz in 
the RFES and transmitted by the HPA. The first four 
functions are done in the Control and Timing Unit (CTU) 
portion of the DSS. The Digital Data Handler (DDH) 
accepts the analog signal from the RFES logarithm detector. 
It digitizes the signal and performs the required averaging 
at each of 125 range bins. The averaged power is converted 
to a floating point format prior to being sent to the solid 
state recorder. The use of floating point reduces the required 
number of bits and data rate. Owing to its simplicity, 
much of the DSS is implemented using FPGAs. No flight 
computer or flight software is used by DSS in order to 
reduce development time and cost. 
Power for CPR is provided by a Power Distribution Unit 
(PDU). The PDU accepts the nominal 28V DC prime 
power from the spacecraft, and converts the 28V input to 
appropriate secondary DC voltages to operate those lower 
voltage electronics subsystems. The PDU is based on 
commercial off-the-shelf power supplies. The PDU supplies 
power to the RFES, DSS, and the antenna subsystem (HPA 
selection switch). The HPA’s accept the 28 V power from 
the spacecraft directly. The spacecraft also directly supplies 
28 V power to replacement heaters. These will be operated 
whenever the radar is off, in order to maintain the 
electronics at tempgratures within the survival range. 
The Cloud Profiling Radar (CPR) on the CloudSat mission 
will provide the first global view of the vertical structure of 
clouds. It is a nadir-looking radar operating at 94 GHz. 
While the radar is fairly straightforward from a functional 
point of view, the required technology at millimeter wave 
frequencies presents some challenges. A design has been 
developed which meets the requirements and can be 
implemented using available technology. The design, as 
known during the formulation phase, has been presented. 
This design is undergoing some refinement. CPR will be 
implemented during the next two years:, in preparation for a 
launch in 2003. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the members of the 
CloudSa t Cloud Profiling Radar Engineering Team for 
providing the critical technical data and for review of this 
paper. The research described in this paper was performed at 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  G. L. Stephens, D. G. Vane, and S .  J. Walters, “The 
CloudStit Mission: a new dimension to space-based 
observations of cloud in the coming millenium,” GCSS- 
WGNE Workshop on Cloud Processes and Feedbacks in 
Large Scale Models, 1998. 
[2] D. M[. Winker, and B. A. Wieliclsi, “The PICASSO- 
CENA Mission,” Sensors, Systems, and Next Generation 
Satellite:;, H. Fujisada, Ed., Proc. SPI.?, 3870, 2000. 
[3] T. KOZU, T. Kawanishi, H. Kuroiwa, M. Kojima, K. 
Oikawa, H. Kumagai, K. Okamoto., M. Okumura, H. 
Nakatsuka, and K. Nishikawa, “Development of 
precipitation radar onboard the Tropicad Rainfall Measuring 
Mission (TRMM) satellite,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote 
Sensing, accepted for publication. 
[4] J. R. Probert-Jones, “The radar equation for 
meteorology,” Quart. J. Royal Meteor. Soc., 88, 485-495, 
1962. 
[5] H. J. Liebe, “An updated model for millimeter-wave 
propagation in moist air,” Radio Sci.., 20, 1069-1 089, 
1985. 
[6] R. Lhermitte, “A 94-GHz doppler radar for cloud 
observations,” J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 4, 36-48, 1987. 
4-1808 
[7] E. Im, S. Durden, F. Li, A. Tanner, and W. Wilson, 
“Pulse compression technique for spacebome precipitation 
radars,” Proc. 11th Intl. Con$ on Clouds and Precip., 
Montreal, Canada, 1079-1082, 1992. 
181 A. Tanner, S .  L. Durden, R. Denning, E. Im, F. K. Li, 
W. Ricketts, W. Wilson, “Pulse compression with very low 
sidelobes in an airborne rain mapping radar,” IEEE Trans. 
Geosci. Remote Sensing, 32, 211-213, 1994. 
[9] S .  L. Durden, E. Im, F. K. Li, and R. Girard, “Surface 
clutter due to antenna sidelobes for spacebome atmospheric 
radar,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing. 
[lo] G. A. Sadowy, R. E. McIntosh, S. J. Dinardo, S .  L. 
Durden, W. N. Edelstein, F. K. Li, A. B. Tanner, W. 
J. Wilson, T. L. Schneider, G. L. Stephens, “The NASA 
DC-8 Airbome Cloud Radar: Design and Preliminary 
results,” Proc. IGARSS’97, F02.6, 1997. 
[ l l ]  S .  Spitz, A. Prata, J. Harrell, R. Perez, and W. 
Veruttipong, “A 94 GHz Spacebome Cloud Profiling Radar 
Antenna System,” 2001 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, March 10- 17,200 1. 
Dr. Eastwood Im is the Radar 
Instrument Manager of the NASA 
ESSP CloudSat Mission. He is also 
the Supervisor of the Atmospheric 
Radar Science and Engineering Group 
at EL. He has extensive experience in 
spacebome meteorological radar 
science and remote sensing, and 
advanced radar system studies. Dr. Im 
is the Principal Investigator of the 
TRMM radarcalibration study and a member of the TRMM 
Science Team, and the Principal Investigator of the NASA 
IIP Second-Generation Precipitation Radar (PR-2) task. He 
has been a member of Science Steering Group for the EOS-9 
Global Precipitation Mission since the start of the planning 
phase. Dr. Im is the Associate Editor of the AMS Journal 
of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology. He has over 80 
refereed joumal and conference publications. 
Dr. Stephen L. Durden is a Principal 
Engineer at JPL and has contributed to 
the development of Airborne Rain ~ 
Mapping Radar and Airbome Cloud 
Radar, and to the design of spacebome 
synthetic aperture radar (LightSAR). 
He is a member of the TRMM Science 
Team Postlaunch Validation Team, 
and the System Engineer for both the 
94-GHz Cloud Profiling Radar for the ESSP CloudSat 
Mission, ,and the IIP Second-Generation Precipitation Radar 
prototype. He has also been actively engaged in microwave 
remote sensing research, including modeling of microwave 
scattering and data analysis. He is author or co-author of 
over 35 journal publications. 
Dr. Chialin Wu is a Principal 
Engineer at JPL, and is the 
Instrument Engineer of the Cloud 
Profiling Radar on the NASA 
CloudSat Mission. Previously, he 
was the Experiment Engineer of the 
SeaWinds radar scatterometers on the 
QuikScat and the ADEOS I1 (of 
Japan) Missions. Prior to the scatterometer instrument 
development, he served as deputy manager and system 
engineering chief of the Radar Office on the Magellan 
Mission to Venus, and as a member of the SAR Team on 
the Seasat Mission. He has published many papers and five 
US Patents in the field of radar systems and signal 
processing. The two patents on digital SAR processor with 
clutterlock, and on SAR interferometer for contour mapping, 
won major NASA awards. 
Tom R. Livermore has thirty years 
of experience in development of 
systems for aerospace, commercial 
and military markets. Currently, 
Mr. Livermore is the Project 
Manager for the CloudSat Mission, 
an Earth orbiting mission designed 
to measure the vertical structure of 
clouds and quantify their ice and water content. The 
CloudSat Mission will launch in 2003. Most recently, he 
was the Project Manager for the Multi-angle Imaging 
SpectroRadiometer (MISR), a key instrument on the Terra 
spacecraft, the first EOS mission launched in December, 
1999. He was the Project Manager for the Integrated 
Multispectral Atmospheric Sounder (IMAS) proposal 
efforts. IMAS is an Earth-orbiting design integrating 
millimeter-wave and infrared sensors to provide 1 degree, 1 
km resolution for atmospheric sounding. Prior to IMAS, 
Mr. Livermore led the Space Interferometry Mission Pre- 
Project effort, resulting in a Phase A start for the SZM 
Mission. He also managed the development and delivery of 
the Cassini Imaging Science Subsystem, comprising a wide 
angle and a narrow angle camera that are integrated into the 
Cassini spacecraft, currently en-route to Saturn for a 4 year 
tour. Mr. Livermore managed the development of the Drive 
and Control system for the W. M. Keck Observatory 10 
Meter Telescope, from 1985-1990. His other scientific work 
included two years managing the electronics section at the 
world’s largest radio telescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. His 
background also includes development of mmW radar and 
passive sensors, control systems and commercial electronics 
development. 
4-1809 
This page intentionally left blank. 
4-1-810 
