Basic System Identification for Condition Monitoring of 
Turbopumps 
S.J. DiMaggio* and B.H. Sako' 
The Aerospace Corporation, P.O. Box 92957, Los Angeles, CA 90009-2957 
(310) 336-6695 and (310) 336-2369 
samuel.j.dimaggio@aero.org and brain@foxtrot.aero.org 
Abstract-Condition monitoring of rotating machinery us- 
ing vibration measurements has been improved due to ad- 
vances in both data acquisition and digital signal processing 
techniques. For example, one method that has become 
popular is known as envelope detection, or demodulated 
resonance analysis. This method requires bandpass filtering 
of the vibration signal in the vicinity of a structural reso- 
nance that occurs in the transmission path between a poten- 
tial defect and the transducer. This implies that a basic un- 
derstanding of the structural dynamics associated with the 
system being monitored is required. It is the purpose of this 
paper to suggest a basic mathematical model that may aid 
the analyst in choosing the proper filter to use in the enve- 
lope detection technique. Additionally, the paper presents 
some simple experimental and analytical techniques that 
provide relevant system identification information for the 
model. In the course of the paper, the general method of 
envelope detection is reviewed as it applies to the condition 
assessment of turbopumps using gearbox vibration meas- 
urements. The effectiveness of the method is assessed using 
data acquired during a ground test of an actual rocket engine 
that experienced a gear failure. Potential use of the de- 
modulated resonance technique as an effective method in 
aerospace telemetry applications is suggested. 
1. NOMENCLATURE 
A 
ASD 
DTN 
F 
f k  
f n  
f L 0 X  
FRF 
H 
Hd 
Hi 
j 
LOX 
- 
amplitude of force input, Ibs 
autospectral density 
defect-to-nominal (ratio) 
input forcing function, lbs 
discrete frequencies, Hz 
natural frequency, Hz 
frequency of LOX shaft rotation, Hz 
frequency response funtion 
Hilbert transform 
system defect transfer function 
system i transfer function 
any integer 
liquid oxygen 
* Senior MTS, Environmental Test and Ordnance Departmenl ' Senior Engineering Specialist, Structural Dynamics Department 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
MIS0 
N 
I? 
n 
SDOF 
SF25 
SISO 
T 
nd 
xd 
Xl 
Xl 
Y 
Yd 
Yn 
Y, 
Y 
Yd 
Y ,  - I
a 
6 
At 
s 
multi-input, single-output 
number of data values per segment 
Fourier components of noise 
output noise, g 
number of segments per data record 
single degree-of-freedom 
static firing test number 25 
single-input, single-output 
length of single data record segment, s 
Fourier components of defect input 
Fourier components of input 
multiple inputs, g 
Fourier components of output 
Fourier components of defect output 
Fourier components of nominal output 
Fourier components of unmeasured outputs 
O~tpUt, g 
output due to defect, g 
unmeasured outputs, g 
analytic signal, g' 
pseudo-acceleration scale factor, g 
dirac delta function 
sampling rate, s 
coefficient of critical damping 
2. INTRODUCTION 
In conjunction with vibration measurements acquired during 
test or operation of a rotating machine, digital signal proc- 
essing techniques are used extensively in condition assess- 
ment programs across a wide range of ind~stries.l-~ Consid- 
ering aerospace applications in particular, these programs 
are used to assess both expendable launch vehicle (ELV) 
rocket engine turbopumps6 as well as the Space Shuttle 
Main Engine (SSME).7-s With the emergence of a viable 
reusable launch vehicle (RLV)' that will involve the re- 
peated use of its turbopump hardware, it is believed that 
health assessment programs will become more important. 
7-3189 
A basic problem associated with the assessment of rotating 
equipment such as a rocket engine turbopump is that the 
complex nature of the assemblies often precludes a compre- 
hensive analytical modeling of the dynamical system. Even 
a qualitative understanding of the system, however, can be 
useful in tailoring digital signal processing techniques to 
incipient failure detection. This seems to be especially true 
in the context of the envelope detection method due to its 
reliance on the amplification of defects in the vicinity of 
structural resonances. This method, also known as demodu- 
lated resonance analysis, has been used extensively in de- 
tection of bearing faults. 
Due to the amount of literature related to condition moni- 
toring of rotating equipment in general,”-’* and envelope 
detection in pa r t i c~ la r , ’~ ,~~  a complete discussion of the 
relevant work is not possible. In relation to the suggestions 
presented in this paper, certain research should be noted. 
Significant contributions related to this work have come 
from NASA Lewis Research Center.21-23 A comprehensive 
presentation of the mathematics associated with the enve- 
lope detection methods used in this paper is given by 
McFadden and in relation to rolling element 
bearing vibrations. Authors associated with providers of 
digital signal processing hardware and/or ~ o f t w a r e ~ ~ ” ~  have 
also contributed extensively to the field. Finally, system 
identification methods related to random vibrations are 
taken directly from Bendat and Piers01.~~ 
This paper uses the results of an impulse response test of 
limited scope, a turbopump component finite element model 
and an engine shutdown transient analysis to propose a 
mathematical model that appears to provide insight regard- 
ing the defect source mechanism for the vibration induced 
by a discrete gear-tooth fault. The suggestions offered in 
this paper are evaluated by comparing the theoretical devel- 
opment with a particular failure observed in a development 
test of a liquid rocket engine. The example presented herein 
is used to suggest that simple models of relatively complex 
systems can be used to tailor a health monitoring program to 
a specific piece of hardware. It is proposed that conclusions 
drawn from this particular failure can be extended to pro- 
vide insight into the basic design of an envelope detection 
routine. Finally, an additional benefit, previously docu- 
mented by Tecza et of this method as it pertains to 
aerospace telemetry applications is presented. 
3. CONDITION MONITORING OF ELV TURBOPUMPS 
Vibration measurements are acquired during static firing 
tests in order to help detect out-of-family vibration charac- 
teristics and to provide insight into the nature of potential 
defects. Steady-state data are acquired while the engine is 
fixed in a test stand and ignited. These data are then ana- 
lyzed and used to compare an engine’s vibration signature to 
other engines with known operating and hardware condi- 
tions. Envelope detection is proposed as a screening tool 
that can diagnose potential gear-tooth problems. The main 
difficulty is that measurements are acquired on the exterior 
of the gearbox and thus, vibrations induced by small defects 
in the internal components are often hidden within the high 
amplitude signal that is inherent in nominally operating 
rocket engines. It is, therefore, useful if certain frequency 
ranges can be identified in which the defect is more pro- 
nounced with respect to nominal system vibrations. 
In the case of turbopump components such as gears and 
bearings, the first indications of incipient failure may be 
short-duration impulses spaced at time intervals corre- 
sponding to the disturbance induced by a defect. The occur- 
rence of these impulses may be a result of several things, 
including gear-tooth cracks due to high-cycle fatigue or sur- 
face defects in a bearing. Regardless of the cause, in any 
case where the defect induces a series of short duration im- 
pulses, the resulting input energy will be spread across a 
wide region of the frequency spectrum. These impulses will 
correspondingly excite system resonances in the transmis- 
sion path between the defect location and the transducer. 
Likewise, these resonances have the potential to amplify the 
defect across a wide frequency range. In this sense, the 
structural system itself acts as a mechanical amplifier for 
detecting the presence of the impulse. Furthermore, because 
the response to the impulse is spread across a wide spec- 
trum, detection techniques can be focused in frequency re- 
gimes where the defect is not masked by nominal vibratory 
response of the pump. In what follows, it should be under- 
stood that the techniques discussed are directed toward de- 
fects that induce disturbances characterized by short dura- 
tion impulses that contain energy extending into the high 
frequency regime. 
In this paper, data acquired during the final static firing of a 
production engine that operated nominally during its accep- 
tance tests and later performed successfully during flight are 
compared to results obtained from a similar development 
engine that exhibited a catastrophic failure of its liquid oxy- 
gen (LOX) gear. This failure occurred at the end of a series 
of twenty-seven static firings. In the following sections, the 
fmal three static firings, denoted SF25, SF26 and SF27, are 
used to demonstrate the method proposed in this paper. Sub- 
sequent to the failure during SF27, analysis and laboratory 
testing attributed the failure to a fault that progressed from 
the root of a single tooth on the LOX gear, Thus, the theo- 
retical development will focus on developing a source 
mechanism that correlates the vibration induced by a dis- 
crete gear-tooth fault to the unique, demodulated spectral 
characteristics that appear in the envelope analysis of SF25- 
SF27. 
4. THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
This section focuses on the development of a simple input- 
output model that is used to suggest a source mechanism for 
7-3190 
the spectral characteristics observed on an engine with a 
gear-tooth fault. 
Fourier Transform 
Following derivations in Ref. 31, consider a data record 
y ( t )  that is divided into nd contiguous segments of length 
T. Each record segment ya f  (t) can be represented in digital 
terms, with a sampling interval of At ,  by N data values 
{yffm 1 where n = 0,. . ., N -1  and nz = 1, .  . . , nd . The dis- 
crete Fourier components of the mth record are defmed by 
the transform 
at the discrete frequencies f k  = k I T = k I NAt . 
Figure 1 - Multi-Input Single-Output System. 
Multi-Input Single-Output (MSO) Systems 
The output from an accelerometer mounted on the exterior 
of a rocket engine turbopump is a function of the multiple 
vibration producing mechanisms, or inputs, within the gear- 
box. The system can, therefore, be modeled using the simple 
MIS0 model described in Ref. 31 and shown in Fig. 1. Con- 
sider q transfer functions for the constant parameter linear 
systems Hi( f ) ,  i = 1 ,..., q ,  with q inputs xi(t), 
i = 1,. . ., q , and one output y ( t )  . The output noise term n(t) 
accounts for all deviations hom the ideal model, which may 
be due to nonlinear operations, non-stationary effects and 
instrument noise. The output y ( t )  may then be considered 
as the summation of the q unmeasured outputs y i ( t ) ,  
i = 1,. . . , q and the noise term n(0. This gives 
with a corresponding frequency relationship 
Since each unmeasured output & ( f )  satisfies, in the ab- 
sence of noise, 
the basic frequency domain relation between the inputs and 
the output is 
Note that X i  , &,  Y and i ( f )  can be determined from 
xi ( t )  , y i  ( t )  , y ( t )  and n(t) using the definition of Fourier 
components in (1). 
M S O  Systems with a Defect 
Now consider a system whose output is the summation of 
contributions from inputs xi (t) , i = 2,. . . , q , due to nominal 
system operation and a single input x1 (t) = Xd ( t )  that is the 
result of some defect in the system. Equation (5) can be re- 
written 
where the part of the total output resulting from nominal 
system operation is 
and the contribution from the defect is 
Note that the contribution to the total output from nominal 
system operation, or Y , is the sum of contributions from 
nominal system ouputs and the noise inherent in the system. 
7-3191 
1 0' 
10' 
h 
4 loo 2 
s1 16' 
4 
10'' 
1 N6 
I I I 1 1  I I I  1 1  ri I I I I I 1 1  I I I I 1 I I I I 1 I I I I 
1 ~ 
3 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 2 - ASD for static firing of a turbopump during 
nominal operating conditions. 
Also note that I'd, or the output resulting from the distur- 
bance induced by the defect, is amplified or attenuated by its 
associated transfer function H ,  ( f )  .
5. FAULT DETECTION AND DIAGNOSIS 
Using the MIS0 system to provide insight into development 
of a successful envelope detection process is the main pur- 
pose of the model and is the central point of this paper. In 
order to facilitate this discussion, the "defect-to-nominal" 
(Dnv) ratio is introduced as the ratio of the output due to 
the defect divided by the outputs due to nominal operation. 
i=2 
Note that this ratio is a function of frequency and can not be 
explicitly computed since only the total output, not the indi- 
vidual contributors to it, is measured. Nevertheless, it is 
suggested that an understanding of the relation in (9) can 
provide an analyst insight into the design of an optimal con- 
dition monitoring program. 
The goal of the turbopump vibration diagnostic routine dis- 
cussed herein is to determine the nature of a defect by 
monitoring the change in output characteristics measured by 
the accelerometer. In this case, that means being able to 
relate a change in the total output, Y ( f ) ,  to a known defect 
condition. In the MIS0 model proposed in the previous sec- 
tion, the input and output contributions for i = 2,. . . , q are 
associated with nominal system operation. It is, therefore, 
reasonable to expect that, for consistent operating condi- 
tions, any major deviation in the total output, or Y ( f ) ,  will 
be a result of the single-input, single-output (SISO) defect 
system ( i  = d = 1 ) described in the frequency domain by 
(8). It is suggested that the optimal manner in which to di- 
agnose an equipment problem is to focus attention in a fre- 
quency range in which the DTW ratio is highest or, in other 
words, where the output due to the defect constitutes the 
largest part of the total signal. 
Two distinct cases are considered as far as establishing a 
frequency range in which to concentrate detection efforts. 
The first applies to general condition assessment in which it 
is desired to detect incipient failure of various components 
within the engine. The second applies to the case in which a 
particular type of failure has already occurred and focuses 
efforts on preventing this unique failure in subsequent en- 
gines. 
Case I :  Detection of a General Class of Component Defects 
In the first case it seems that the best possibility for detect- 
ing a variety of defects is to identify a frequency regime 
where any potential defect is amplified and where nominal 
inputs are negligible. In other words, it is desirable to iden- 
tify a frequency region where X ,  (f) , i = 2,.  . . , q , are small 
and H ,  (f) is as large as possible. This is not as unrealistic 
an expectation as it may initially seem. It is postulated that 
this is the case if a gearbox housing structural resonance 
exists in a high frequency region that contains little vibra- 
tion due to nominal turbopump operation. For example, a 
representative autospectral density (ASD) corresponding to 
a 4 second time frame and data acquired at a rate of 25575 
samples per second for a nominally operating turbopump is 
shown in Fig. 2. Several peaks with significant amplitudes 
above the noise floor can be seen in the low frequency re- 
gime below 2000 &. These peaks are a result of known 
forced system responses due to shaft rotation. Depending on 
the construction of the turbopump, other forced responses 
due to rotating components or flow-induced vibrations are 
often observed. Notice the lack of distinct forced response 
peaks with amplitudes well above the noise floor in the 
higher frequency region between 3500 and 4500 Hz. It will 
be shown in a later section that, for the turbopump discussed 
herein, a gearbox housing structural resonance appears to 
exist in this region and thus, any component defect with 
input energy in this frequency range is amplified. 
If one considers that the nominal inputs X i  , i = 2,. . . , q , do 
not contain any significant energy at frequencies between 
3500 and 4500 Hz, then (9) will reduce to 
since H d ( f )  is large and the nominal inputs x i ,  
i =  2 ,..., 4 ,  are small. In other words, even though the 
gearbox resonance is in the transmission path for all inputs, 
only the defect is amplified because it has input energy in 
this frequency range, while the nominal inputs do not. As 
will be demonstrated in a later section, this is because de- 
fects that induce short duration force pulses generate input 
7-3192 
energy that extends into the high frequency regime. Note 
that in this case the DTN ratio, as described mathematically 
by (lo), actually represents a “defect-to-noise” ratio. 
Case 2: Detection of a Specific Defect 
In the second case, regarding fault detection of a particular 
component, it is suggested that it may be more desirable to 
focus diagnostic techniques in a frequency regime contain- 
ing a resonance that is unique to the transmission path be- 
tween the component in question and the transducer. In this 
region 
An example of this case can also be drawn from the gear 
failure outlined in a previous section. V a n ~ e ~ ~  states that the 
impulse resulting from large gear defects usually excites the 
natural frequencies of one or more gears in a set. Both a 
finite element and also a holographic experimental analysis 
identified the second diametrical mode of the failed gear to 
be at approximately 2689 Hz. The second diametrical mode 
of the gear is one in which the response shape is character- 
ized by two nodal diameter lines that divide the rotor into 
two regions of positive and negative phase respectively. In a 
nominally operating pump, the frequency range near this 
resonance may contain various forced inputs. If the diamet- 
rical resonance is strong enough to amplify the relatively 
low-level defect input x d  (f), such that the product 
H d  (f)X, becomes significant with respect to the other 
unmeasured outputs (f), i = 2, ...,q, it is possible that 
the defect signal may constitute the majority of the total 
output in a particular frequency range. This would again 
lead to a high DTN ratio as described by (9). 
While tailoring the envelope detection process as described 
in case two is indeed possible and can be more effective 
than the process employed in case one, the type of failure 
must be known a priori. Thus, unlike the method suggested 
for case one, the analyst should not expect to obtain optimal 
performance of the envelope technique for a general class of 
defects. Since case one deals with a more general class of 
component defects than does case two, emphasis will be 
placed on the former in the following sections of this paper. 
6. SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION 
In order to identify frequency ranges with a high DTN ratio, 
it is necessary to locate system resonances for the reasons 
discussed previously. When typical experimental and ana- 
lytical methods are used to do this, caution should be exer- 
cised when considering the identified frequencies in the 
context of the operational system. These analyses are nor- 
mally conducted on the static, uncoupled system at ambient 
temperature. This was the case for the holographic and finite 
Figure 3 - Measured FRF magnitude relating acceleration 
output to an impulse applied directly below the transducer. 
element analysis of the gear rotor discussed in the previous 
section. The effect of modal coupling, as well as component 
rotation and thermal loads, can serve to alter the frequencies 
of interest. The following is a case in which data acquired 
during actual operating conditions can be used to mitigate 
the unknowns associated with thermal and rotational effects 
on the gearbox housing resonance discussed earlier. 
In order for the process discussed in case one to be effec- 
tive, the analyst must identify a gearbox structural resonance 
with a natural frequency high enough to be out of the range 
of nominal turbopump inputs. For the turbomachinery dis- 
cussed herein, an impulse response test of limited scope was 
conducted during which twenty-two locations on the pump 
exterior were impacted with an instrumented force hammer. 
This static test was conducted under ambient temperature 
conditions. When the force impulse was applied adjacent to 
the accelerometer, which was mounted on a flat section of 
the gearbox, the frequency response function (FRF) shown 
in Fig. 3 was acquired. This FRF is characteristic of a single 
degree-of-freedom response with a natural frequency of 
4068 Hz and a coefficient of critical damping, measured 
using half-power bandwidth techniques, of approximately 
g = .02. Additionally, regardless of impulse location, all 
measured FRFs were characterized by a maximum at 4068 
Hz. Based on these results, it was concluded that a gearbox 
housing resonance existed near 4068 Hz. During operation 
of the turbomachinery under consideration, the pressure 
differentials across the impeller pumps induce significant 
thrust loads on the shafts. Consideration should, therefore, 
be given to the effects of modal coupling and rotational dy- 
namics on the frequencies measured under non-rotating 
conditions. 
In order to mitigate the effects of using ambient, static test 
results to define the gearbox resonance, an estimate of the 
gearbox natural frequency during operating conditions is 
made by performing a waterfall analysis of the SF25 shut- 
down time transient shown in Fig. 4. The SF25 transient is 
presented in a max-mean-min format that essentially pro- 
vides the envelope and mean of the time history within 20 
millisecond time intervals. The contour waterfall plot of 
spectral density for this transient is shown in Fig. 5, in 
7-3193 
600 
480 
b 360 
240 
3 120 
8 -120 
c $ 0  
4 -240 
-480 
-600 
-360 
175 180 185 190 195 
Time (s) 
Figure 4 - Shutdown transient for SF25. Plot shows the 
max-mean-min values that essentially define a running 
mean and envelope of the time history. 
0 2000 4000 6000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 5 - Contour waterfall plot of SF25 shutdown tran- 
sient. 
which the lightest regions represent the highest spectral den- 
sity. Between 182 and 183 seconds the engine is shut down 
and the high-amplitude forced responses due to shaft rota- 
tions and flow-induced vibration are no longer evident. 
Following the shutdown, significant vibration at system 
resonances can still be observed in the region of 4224 Hz 
and, to a lesser extent, at other frequencies. It should be 
noted that this relatively wide-band peak centered around 
4224 Hz appears consistently in the shutdown waterfall 
plots regardless of engine operating condition. These obser- 
vations support the existence of a gearbox housing reso- 
nance in the vicinity of the frequency measured during the 
impulse response test. A comparison of results indicates a 
less than four percent difference between the static (impulse 
response test) and dynamic (shutdown transient) predictions 
of the gearbox housing natural frequency. It is, therefore, 
inferred that the effect of modal coupling, thermal effects 
and centrifugal stiffening are not significant in the case of 
this particular resonance. 
k zy 5 
Figure 6 - SDOF model of the defect SISO. 
7. SINGLE DEGREE-OF-FREEDOM DEFECT MODEL 
In order to understand the effect of the gearbox housing 
resonance on the input due to a LOX gear defect, a simple 
single degree-of-freedom (SDOF) model is proposed to 
characterize the defect SISO. Note that this SDOF model 
should not be thought of as a physical model of the system, 
but rather is used as a paradigm by which the transfer func- 
tion associated with the defect can be mathematically de- 
scribed. 
The SDOF model shown in Fig. 6 is used to mathematically 
describe the defect SISO. This model is governed by the 
following equation: 
where F is the force input induced by the defect and y d  is 
the defect contribution to the total response acceleration. 
The transfer function relating the input and output is char- 
acterized by the natural frequency f n ,  the coefficient of 
critical damping 5 and the mass m. The values for the gear- 
box natural frequency and the damping coefficient are taken 
from the static impulse response test. The SDOF transfer 
function magnitude, IHd (f )i , for a unit generalized mass is 
shown in Fig. 7 and compares well to the measured FRF 
magnitude (also shown in Fig. 3) acquired during the im- 
pulse response test. 
Source Mechanism 
Consider a LOX gear containing a tooth defect that induces 
a short-duration force impulse once per revolution of the 
LOX shaft. Mathematically, the forcing function is defined 
as 
7-3194 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 7 - Transfer function magnitude squared for SDOF 
defect model with unit mass. Notice similarity with meas- 
ured data (from Fig. 3) shown by dotted line. 
100 
80 
60 
40 - 20 
E o  g -20 
-40 
-60 
-80 
-100 
0.02 0.025 0.03 0.035 0.04 
Time (s) 
Figure 8 - Input forcing function for series of short duration 
impulses. Spacing between peaks is the reciprocal of the 
LOX shaft rotation rate, or 1/(241 Hz). 
where A is the amplitude of the force impulses, 6 is the di- 
rac delta function, j are integers and fLox is the frequency 
of rotation of the LOX shaft. This input forcing function is 
shown in Fig. 8 for values of fLox = 241 Hz and A = 70 
pounds. The ASD of this defect input, or s d d (  f) , is shown 
in Fig. 9. Notice that the energy is spread across the entire 
frequency spectrum and is contained in spikes located at the 
fundamental and integer multiples of the frequency corre- 
sponding to the LOX shaft rotation rate. 
The response of the SDOF oscillator to this input is then 
governed by the following equation: 
where a = A i m  is a scale factor that can be thought of as a 
pseudo-acceleration that depends on the amplitude of the 
force impulses and the unknown system constant associated 
with the reciprocal of the SDOF's mass. The response of the 
SDOF oscillator for a value of 01 = 200 gs is shown in the 
time domain in Fig. 10. Note the recurring damped oscilla- 
tory response at the 4068 Hz natural frequency and an im- 
pact spacing of 1 fLox . Recall that this response is a repre- 
3 l@* 
10.' 
1 o-6 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 9 - ASD of defect input. Spacing between peaks is 
LOX shaft rotation rate, or 241 Hz. 
160 .- 2 80 
8 -80 
I k o  
3 -160 
. :z 1, I I I I , , I I I , , , I l j  
-400 
1 1.005 1.01 1.015 1.02 
Time (9) 
Figure 10 - SDOF response to series of short duration im- 
pulses. Spacing between response pulses is the reciprocal of 
the LOX shaft rotation rate, or 1/(241 Hz). 
sentation of the output due to the defect, or y d  (t) = y, (t), 
and that this must be added to the nominal system response 
to obtain the total output signal. 
8. ENVELOPE DETECTION 
It was suggested that the optimal manner in which to diag- 
nose a wide range of component defects (case 1) is to iden- 
tify a frequency range in which the D i T  ratio is highest. In 
this case, since it does not appear (see Fig. 2) that there are 
significant nominal turbopump inputs between 3500 and 
4500 Hz, a logical location for a high D l Y  ratio is at the 
gearbox housing resonance. Thus, the total output signal is 
bandpass filtered in a region near the gearbox structural 
resonance. Fig. 11 shows the time history response of the 
SDOF oscillator after it has been filtered using a 1000 Hz 
bandwidth Kaiser filter with a center frequency of 4068 Hz. 
The Hilbert Transform and Analytic Signal 
In order to determine the harmonic pattern of the impact rate 
due to the disturbance induced by the defect, the filtered 
7-3195 
120 
I E o  
8 -120 
4 -240 
-480 
-600 I I ' ' I '  I '  I '  ' I  ' I  ' I  
1 1.005 1.01 1.015 1.02 
Time (s) 
Figure 11 - Filtered SDOF response to series of short dura- 
tion impulses. 
160 
* 80 .I 
e g o  
8 -80 
4 -160 
-320 
-240 
-400 
1 1.005 1.01 1.015 1.02 
Time (s) 
Figure 12 - Envelope function of the filtered SDOF re- 
sponse to series of short duration impulses. 
output signal y(t)  is demodulated. This is accomplished by 
first developing the complex analytic function 
where H(t)  is the Hilbert transform of y ( t )  . The magnitude 
of the analytic function then provides an approximation to 
the envelope of the original function y ( t ) ,  and will hence- 
forth be referred to as the envelope function or demodulated 
signal. For example, the envelope of the filtered SDOF re- 
sponse of Fig. 11 is shown in Fig. 12. If plotted on the same 
scale, as in Fig. 13, it is obvious that the magnitude of the 
function defined in (15) provides a good approximation to 
the envelope of the original function y( t )  . While this paper 
is not intended to provide an in-depth discussion of the Hil- 
bert transform and the analytic signal, it is important to note 
that the accuracy of the mathematics in providing an ap- 
proximation to the envelope is improved as the bandwidth 
of the filter is decreased. The necessity of using a narrow- 
band filter and choosing the appropriate center frequency 
again leads to the conclusion that a basic understanding of 
the dynamics of the coupled system is helpful. 
The main value of this signal decomposition is that the high 
frequency response of the oscillator is no longer contained 
in the signal and what remains is a more slowly varying 
6 160 
.m 2 80 
8 -80 
4 -160 
c 5 0  
1 1 1 1 ' ' ' ~ " ~ 1 ~ ~ ' ~ ' I ~  
1 1.005 1.01 1.015 1.02 
Time (s) 
Figure 13 - Envelope function plotted with the filtered 
SDOF response to series of short duration impulses. 
0 500 1000 1500 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 14 - ASD of the demodulated signal. 
periodic function with a repetition rate equal to the fie- 
quency of the defect. In this manner, the pulse train shows 
up in the low frequency portion of the spectrum. Thus, the 
demodulated frequency spectrum can be expected to contain 
a peak at the fundamental frequency, and possibly its higher 
harmonics, of the disturbance induced by the defect. For 
example, the ASD of the demodulated function of Fig. 12 is 
shown in Fig. 14. Note the pronounced peak at the fie- 
quency of the assumed LOX gear defect, or fLox = 241, as 
well as the higher harmonics. 
Gear Failure Example 
Actual ground test data from SF25-SF27 of the engine that 
experienced a catastrophic LOX gear failure at the end of 
SF27 are used to assess the defect model postulated in the 
previous section. In the following discussion, the examples 
presented for the actual engine are taken from operating 
conditions corresponding to fLox = 241, as for the theoreti- 
cal development. It is postulated that, as engine operating 
time increased from SF25 to SF27, a local LOX gear-tooth 
defect grew until the gear failed. In order to demonstrate the 
veracity of this postulate, the theoretical responses shown in 
Figs. 10-14 are compared to actual data acquired during 
SF27 just prior to failure. Note that the same filters dis- 
cussed in the previous section are used to analyze the 
7-3196 
480 
2 360 
2 240 
.I 2 120 
8 -120 
3 t i 0  
2 -240 
-360 
-480 60x 
120.02 120.025 120.03 120.035 120.04 
Time (s) 
Figure 15 - Raw time history data from SF27. 
3 360 
240 .- ;;; 120 
8 -120 c. 
4 -240 
-360 
120.02 120.025 120.03 120.035 120.04 
Time (s) 
Figure 16 - Filtered time history and envelope function from 
SF27. Notice periodicity corresponding to the reciprocal of 
the LOX shaft rotation rate, or 1/(241 Hz). This is the same 
periodic nature as evident in Fig. 15. 
ground test data. Figure 15 shows the raw time history of a 
0.02 second time interval during SF27, while Fig. 16 shows 
the same time period with the bandpass-filtered and the de- 
modulated signal respectively. In order to provide a refer- 
ence for what follows, the ASD of the demodulated signal 
for a nominally operating turbopump is shown in Fig. 17, 
along with the theoretical prediction of the contribution due 
to a defect corresponding to a value of a =200 gs (see Fig. 
14). This plot indicates that, if a defect similar to the one 
discussed in the theoretical development were to exist, the 
ASD of the corresponding demodulated signal should be 
characterized by the fundamental and decreasing amplitude 
harmonics of the defect-induced impulse repetition rate. The 
signature should also contain some random vibration and 
noise in the regions between the peaks. The ASD of the de- 
modulated signal for SF27 just prior to failure is shown in 
Fig. 18 and is characterized by a spectrum that is consistent 
with the expected results. Note the similarity in periodic 
structure between the ASDs of the demodulated signals for 
the ground test (Fig. 18) and for the theoretical prediction 
shown Fig. 17. Note that the theoretical portions of the re- 
sponses shown in Figs. 10-14 are due only to the defect and 
must, therefore, be considered along with the outputs of the 
nominally operating system in order to obtain the total out- 
put. 
lo' 1 1 1 1 / 1 1 1 ,  1 1 1 1 , 1 1 ( ,  
1 o3 
0 500 1000 1500 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 17 - ASD of the demodulated signal for a nominally 
operating turbopump. The dotted line indicates the contri- 
bution of a potential defect for a value of a =200. 
h 
0 500 1000 1500 
Frequency (Hz) 
Figure 18 - ASD of the demodulated signal for SF27. Notice 
the similarity to the summation of the two functions shown 
inFig. 19. 
It is suggested that, as the defect evolved, the force induced 
by the defect consequently increased. In relation to the theo- 
retical development in the previous section this implies that, 
as the defect becomes more severe, the amplitude A of the 
force impulses defined in (13) and thus, the scale factor a 
in (14), become larger. It is reasonable to expect that, at a 
time earlier in the life of the equipment when the defect is 
not as severe, or a is smaller, the ASD of the pump's de- 
modulated signal will have the same basic shape as that ob- 
served for SF27. It is also expected that the amplitude of the 
fundamental and higher harmonics corresponding to fLox 
will be of diminished amplitude. In condition monitoring 
programs it is desirable to determine the presence of a de- 
fect as early as possible in the life of an engine. It is, there- 
fore, shown in Fig. 19 that the ASD for the demodulated 
signal taken ftom a time period during SF26 also contains 
the theorized presence of a distinct spectral peak at fLox ,  
albeit at a lesser amplitude. 
The particular gear failure example discussed herein was 
also analyzed using bandpass filters with center frequencies 
of 1500 and 2689 Hz respectively. These were chosen arbi- 
trarily, in the case of 1500 Hz, and to correspond to the sec- 
ond diametrical mode of the LOX gear, in the case of 2689 
7-3197 
1 oh 
1 0' 
h g lo' 
C M  " 10' 
8 loa 
lo.' 
10'' 
0 500 1000 1500 
Fkequency (Hz) 
Figure 19 - ASD of the demodulated signal for SF26. 
Hz. The results of the 1500 Hz filter were not able to pro- 
vide any indication of a gear defect until a few seconds be- 
fore failure. The 2689 Hi filter, however, indicated out-of- 
family gear behavior early in SF25. In comparison, the 4068 
Hz filter discussed in depth in the previous sections did not 
provide indications of gear-tooth problems until SF26. 
While it is not the purpose of this paper to compare the ef- 
fectiveness of different filters, it is important to note that the 
choice of filter center frequency affects the results obtained. 
This again leads to the conclusion that even a qualitative 
understanding of both potential defect source mechanisms 
and also the structural dynamics of the system under consid- 
eration can help an analyst to design an effective condition 
monitoring program. 
9. AEROSPACE TELEMETRY APPLICATIONS 
There is a distinct advantage in using the envelope detection 
method for performing in-flight assessment of rocket engine 
turbopumps. This particular application has been previously 
discussed by Tecza, et al.32 It has been suggested in this 
paper that the high frequency regime can be an effective 
spectral region in which to detect potential defects. Due to 
the limited capacity of normal aerospace telemetry systems 
to transfer or store information during a mission, the high 
sample rates necessary to digitize the signals make acquisi- 
tion of data in the higher frequency ranges impractical. 
When using the demodulated resonance technique, however, 
the bandpass filtering and envelope detection parts of the 
method can be performed onboard the vehicle in the analog 
domain before the data are digitized. Using the example 
presented herein as a case in point, instead of seeing the fEst 
indications of a potential defect above 3500 Hz, by using the 
envelope detection technique the analyst sees the change 
associated with the defect at 241 Hz in the demodulated 
frequency domain. The sample rates necessary to obtain the 
relevant information in the demodulated domain are, there- 
fore, more than fourteen times less than the rates necessary 
when using traditional frequency domain analysis. This dif- 
ference in digitization requirements can make the detection 
of defects in the higher frequency ranges during a mission 
feasible within the context of normal telemetry system ca- 
pabilities. 
10. CONCLUSIONS 
The envelope detection method has been shown to be effec- 
tive in diagnosing the existence of a gear-tooth defect in a 
rocket engine turbopump during actual operating conditions. 
It is believed that the results presented using the method 
described herein could be improved by pre-processing the 
data with order tracking and synchronous time averaging 
techniques. This process would enforce a consistent number 
of time samples during each revolution of the LOX gear, 
thus reducing the modulation effects due to speed variations, 
inherent in the system, on the synchronous components of 
interest. 
Additionally, the current work provides a rationale for con- 
ducting a cost-effective, simple set of tests early in the de- 
sign process that may lead to substantial benefits later in the 
life of a condition monitoring program. Consider that results 
from early turbopump development tests and design analy- 
ses can provide a reasonable idea of where significant 
forced rotordynamic and flow-induced vibrations exist in a 
turbopump. It is then suggested that an impulse response 
test be conducted in which a number of accelerometers are 
placed in various locations on the exterior surface of the 
gearbox housing. With an instrumented force hammer, lo- 
cations adjacent to the accelerometers are then impacted and 
the FRFs measured. It is desired to identify a location on the 
housing at which a single, well-defined structural resonance 
exists. It is further desired that this resonance be located in a 
frequency regime away from those occupied by predicted 
rotordynamic or flow-induced forcing functions. It is sug- 
gested that a transducer mounted at a location thus identi- 
fied, is one that has an improved chance to identify defects 
that induce excitations characterized by short-duration im- 
pulsive forces, even if the excitations are of relatively low 
amplitude. The reason for this is that data acquired from a 
transducer mounted as suggested, and then subsequently 
bandpass filtered and demodulated about the resonance 
identified, provide a greater potential for a high DTN ratio 
than could be expected from data acquired using an arbi- 
trarily mounted transducer. Finally, the application of the 
demodulated resonance technique for diagnosis of defects 
during a mission, by using analog circuits to perform the 
bandpass filtering and envelope detection, may become ex- 
tremely useful with the evolution of lUVs. 
1 1. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the U.S. Air Force Material 
Command, Space and Missile Systems Center under Con- 
tract F04701-93-C-0094. The authors would like to thank 
Don Taylor and Dr. Ron Rogers for their input on analog 
methods for envelope detection. 
7-3198 
12. REFERENCES 
[l] Leuridan, J., Van der Auweraer, H., Vold, H., “The 
Analysis of Non-Stationary Dynamic Signals,” LMS Inter- 
national application note, 1994. 
[2] International Standard (ISO) 3945, ‘‘Mechanical Vibra- 
tion of Large Rotating Machines with Speed Range from 10 
to 200 reds - Measurement and Evaluation of Vibration 
Severity in Situ,” Ref. No. IS0 3945-1977 (E). 
[3] Bradshaw, P. and Randall, R.B., “Early Detection and 
Diagnosis of Machine Faults on the Trans Alaska Pipeline,” 
MSA Session, ASME Conference, Dearborn, MI, Septem- 
ber 11-14, 1983. 
[4] Bate, A.H., “Vibration Diagnostics for Industrial Electric 
Motor Drives,” Bruel and Kjaer application note. 
[5] Kryter, R.C. and Haynes, H.D., “Condition Monitoring 
of Machinery Using Motor Current Signature Analysis,” 
Sound and Vibration, September, 1989. 
[6] DiMaggio, S.J., Rubin, S., and Sako, B.H., “Gear Fault 
Detection in Rocket Engine Turbomachhery”, 36‘h 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and 
Exhibit, 17-19 July 2000, Huntsville, AL. 
[7] Jong, J.Y., Dorland, W.D., Fiorucci, T., Zoladz, F. and 
Nesman, T.E., “Space Shuttle Engine Signature Analysis 
Techniques,” Sound and Vibration, May 2000. 
[SI Chin, H., “Automated Bearing Fault Detection with Un- 
supervised Neural Nets,” Proceedings of The 491h Meeting 
of the Society for Machinery Failure Prevention Technology 
(MPFT), April 18-20,1995, Virginia Beach, VA, 141-150. 
[9] Pettit, C.D., Barkhoudarian, S., Daumann, A.G., Provan, 
G.M., El Fattah, Y.M. and Glover, D.E., “Reusable Rocket 
Engine Advanced Health Management System: Architecture 
and Technology Evaluation Summary,” 3 f h  
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and 
Exhibit, 20-24 June 1999, Los Angeles, CA. 
[lo] Lyon, R.H., “Damage Detection and Identification in 
Structures and Mechanisms,” Proceedings of the Inter- 
national Modal Analysis Conference, Vol. 1, SEM, Orlando, 
FL, 1997. 
[l 11 Courrech, J., “Condition Monitoring of Machinery,” 
Chapter 16, Shock and Vibration Handbook, 4’ Ed., 
McGraw-Hill, 1996. 
[ 121 Brennan, M. J., Chen, M.H., and Reynolds, A.G., “Use 
of Vibration Measurements to Detect Local Tooth Defects 
in Gears,” Sound and Vibration, November 1997. 
[13] Barkov, A. and Barkova, N., “Condition Assessment 
and Life Prediction of Rolling Element Bearings-Part 1,” 
Sound and Vibration, June 1985. 
[ 141 Polyshchuk, V.V., Choy, F.K. and Braun, M. J., “New 
Gear-Fault-Detection Parameter by Use of Joint Time- 
Frequency Distribution”, Journal of Propulsion and Power, 
Vol. 16, No. 2, March-April 2000. 
[15] McFadden, P.D., “Detecting Fatigue Cracks in Gears 
by Amplitude and Phase Demodulation of the Meshing Vi- 
bration,” Transactions of the ASME, Journal of Vibration, 
Acoustics, Stress and Reliability in Design, 1986, Vol. 108, 
165- 170. 
[ 161 Staszewski, W.J. and Tomlinson, G.R., “Application of 
the Wavelet Transform to Fault Detection in a Spur Gear,” 
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 1994, 8(3), 
289-307. 
[ 171 Mitchell, J.S., Machinery Analysis and Monitoring, 
PennWell Books, PennWell Publishing Co., Tulsa, OK, 
1981. 
[18] Lyon, R.H., Machinery Noise and Diagnostics, Butter- 
worth Publishers, 1987. 
[19] Toersen, H., “Application of an Envelope Technique in 
the Detection of Ball Bearing Defects in a Laboratory Ex- 
periment,” Proceedings of The Integrated Monitoring, Di- 
agnostics and Failure Prevention Technology Showcase 
Conference, Society for Machinery Failure Prevention 
Technology (MPFT), April 22-26,1996, 121-132. 
[20] Courrech, J., “New Techniques for Fault Diagnosis in 
Rolling Element Bearings,” Proceedings of the 40th Meeting 
of the Failure Preventive Group, National Bureau of Stan- 
dards, Gaithersburg, MD, April 16-18, 1985. 
[2  11 Zakrajsek, J.J. and Lewicki, D.G., “Detecting Gear- 
Tooth Fatigue Cracks in Advance of Complete Fracture,” 
NASA Technical Memorandum 107145, NASA Tech Briefs 
, LEW-16433,1996. 
[22] Jammu, V.B., Wang, K., Danai, K. and Lewicki, D.G., 
“Model-Based Sensor Location Selection for Helicopter 
Monitoring,” NASA Technical Momorandum 1072 19, 
NASA Tech Briefs , LEW-16452,1996. 
[23] Decker, H.J., Zakrajsek, J.J. and Handschuh, R.F., 
“Enhancement of the NA4 Gear-Vibration Diagnostic Pa- 
rameter,” NASA Tech Briefs, May 1997, LEW-16284. 
[24] McFadden, P.D. and Smith, J.D., “Model for the Vi- 
bration Produced by a Single-Point Defect in a Rolling 
Element Bearing,” Journal of Sound and Vibration, 1984, 
96( l), 69-82. 
7-3199 
[25] McFadden, P.D. and Smith, J.D., “The Vibration Pro- 
duced by Multiple-Point Defects in a Rolling Element 
Bearing,” Journal of Sound and Vibration, 1985,263-273. 
[26] SKF Application Note CM3021, “Early Warning Fault 
Detection in Rolling Element Bearings Using Microlog En- 
veloping.” 
and software tools related to signal processing and system 
identification. He is a member of the AIAA and is an in- 
structor in the Mechanical Engineering Graduate Depart- 
ment at Loyola Marymount University. 
[27] Randall, R.B., “Cepstrum Analysis,” Bruel and Kjaer 
Technical Review, No. 3, 1981. 
[28] Randall, R.B., “Ceptrum Analysis and Gearbox Fault 
Diagnosis,” Bruel and Kjaer application note, No. 233-80. 
[29] Randall, R.B., “A New Method for Modeling Gear 
Faults,” Journal of Mechanical Design, April 1982, Vol. 
1041259. 
[30] Randall, R.B., Frequency Analysis, 3‘d Edition, Bruel 
and Kjaer, September 1987. 
[31] Bendat, J.S. and Piersol, A.G., Random Data Analysis 
and Measurement Procedures, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
1986. 
[32] Tecza, J.A. et al., Rocket Engine Turbopump Bearing 
Diagnostics, Astronautics Laboratory (AFSC) Technical 
Report AL-TR-89-042, August 1989. 
[33] Vance, J.M., Rotordynamics of Turbomachinery, John 
Wiley & Sons, 1988. 
Sam DiMaggio received his B.S. 
degree in Civil Engineering (1989) 
and his M.S. and Ph.D. in 
Engineering Mechanics (1990, 1993) 
from Columbia University. From 
1993-1996, he was a Senior 
Dynamics Analysis Engineer at Breed 
Technologies, Inc., where he worked 
on automotive vehicle dynamics and 
safety restraints systems. During 1997, he worked as a Prin- 
cipal Designer with the structural engineering consulting 
firm of Iffland Kavanagh Waterbury, P.L.L.C. He joined 
The Aerospace Corporation in 1998, where he works in the 
Structural Mechanics Subdivision on issues related to ex- 
pendable launch vehicles. He is a member of the U, 
ASME and SEM. 
Brian Sako received his B.A. and 
M.A. degrees in Mathematics (1978, 
1981) from the University of Hawaii 
and a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics 
from the University of California, Los 
Angeles (1986). From 1986-1987, he 
worked at Hughes Aircraft Company 
in the Radar Systems Group. He then 
joined The Aerospace Corporation in 
1987, where he currently works on developing algorithms 
7 - 3 2 0 0  
