Ultrashort 
Trajectory Estimation for 
Baseline Acoustic Positioning Systems 
Vincent Ricordel t, SCbastien Paris t and Jan Opderbecke $ 
t SIS/Signal - ISITV 
UniversitC de Toulon et du Var 
AV. Georges Pompidou, BP56 
83 162 La Valette du Var Cedex (France) 
Fax: (+33) 4 94 14 25 98 
ricordel@univ-tln.fr, paris@isitv.univ-tln.fr 
$ Institut Franpis de Recherche pour 1'Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER) 
Centre de Toulon, Zone Portuaire du BrCgaillon, BP330 
83500 La Seyne-sur-Mer Cedex (France) 
Fax: (+33) 4 94 87 83 07 
opderbecke@ ifremer.fr 
Abstract-The purpose of the paper is to describe an auto- 
matic estimation method of an underwater vehicle trajectory 
from ultrashort baseline system measurements. The standard 
Viterbi algorithm is then used to find the most likely trajectory 
of the dynamic system observed through the noisy measure- 
ments with a model of nonconstant speed as state variable. 
A decoupled trajectory is achieved by considering separately 
each coordinate of the point. Aberrant measurements are au- 
tomatically discarded. For very long trajectory, a temporal 
window is shifted along the data set, and an automatic adjust- 
ment of the algorithm parameter is performed. 
I 
11 
III 
Iv 
v 
VI 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Introduction 1 
Method 1 
Statistical modeling 2 
Temporal windows and overlapping 3 
Automatic adjustment of the parameters 4 
Conclusion 4 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The French research institute for exploitation of the sea 
(IFREMER) has developed a new deep-sea positioning sys- 
tem (POSIDONIA) for its underwater vehicles (W). This ul- 
trashort baseline system (USBL) is composed by an acoustic 
vessel-born localization system and sensors measuring vessel 
position, heading and attitude. The latter are used to trans- 
form the acoustic UV position into earth related coordinates. 
The UV is localized down to 6000m. Because of the different 
sources of measurement error that contribute to the overall 
positioning error, the accuracy is about 30m and false alarms 
occur [l] (see figure 7). Our research is then focused on 
the automatic estimation of the UV trajectory from the pre- 
recorded USBL measurements. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 @ 2001 IEEE 
11. METHOD 
The standard Viterbi algorithm [2] allows us to find 
the most likely trajectory of the dynamic system 'observed 
through the noisy measurements. 
The problem of optimum estimation [3] is briefly formulated 
with reference to figure 1 as follows; the system state xk at k 
th sampling instant is such as: 
X k  = f ( X k - - l , l ) k ) .  
xk depends on the state at the previous sampling instant and 
on a state noise v k .  The relationship between the measure- 
ment and the system state is given by: 
m k  = h ( x k , n k ) ,  
where m k  is the measurement at kth sampling instant cor- 
rupted by the noise n k .  At the initialization, the measurement 
set h f k  = {mo, ml, . . . , m k }  and p ( z 0 )  the a priori proba- 
bility density function (pdf) of the initial state are given. 
The problem is to find the sequence of states or trajectory 
X I ,  = { x o , x 1 ,  . . . , Xk that maximizes the a posteriori con- 
ditional pdf p (  X I ,  Ih f k  . The solution or modal trajectory is 
such as: 
Z k  arg max ( p ( x k  I M ~ ) ) .  
Dynamic programming allows us to construct a wise algo- 
rithm. Starting from the fact that: 
x k  
and introducing for each possible value of $1, the quantity: 
we end up with the classic recursion: 
Let ? k - l ( Z k )  the value of x,+-l that maximizes (1). The re- 
sulting algorithm proceeds in three steps: 
0 an initialization by defining I(x0) = p ( x o ) ;  
4-1791 
a forward procedure with, at each sampling instant i, the 
calculation of I ( Q )  from mi, equation (1) and ?i-l(xi) ob- 
tained at the previous iteration. The iterative procedure is 
repeated until the lcth instant is reached; 
the modal trajectory is found by tracing backward a stage 
at a time using the function & ( & + I ) .  
- I nk Signal-Generating process f0 xk FE 
111. STATISTICAL MODELING 
A. Monodimensional model 
the kth sampling instant: 
Each position measurement is a three dimensional point, at 
Considering only one dimension, a model with nonconstant 
speed as state variable is used: 
where Tk, ,  indicates the position and V k , ,  the nonconstant 
speed. It obeys the following state equation: 
where A t k  is the non constant time interval between the two 
successive measurements m k - 1  and m k ,  E is a constant, and 
v k , ,  the Gaussian state noise such as: 
The choice of speed depends on A t k :  
1. if A t k  5 5s, a choice among nine values is done: 
vx = [-4,. . . , -1 ,O,  1,. . . ,4IT; 
2. if A t k  > 5s, fifteen values are available: 
v, = [-7,. . . , - l , O ,  1,. . . , 7IT. 
At the initialization A t 0  is supposed to be equal to 5s and we 
choose: 
2 0 =  [ A  : I  [ y > x - 5 ]  + [ ; ] v o , x .  
B. Transition probabilities 
defined as follows: 
The transition pdf from the Xk-1  state to the X k  state is 
P ( X k / 3 : k - l )  = K d ( r k , x  - r k - l , x  - A t k v k - 1 . x )  x 
where K is a normalization constant and d() the Kronecker 
symbol. We denote: 
The most probable transitions give an advantage to small ac- 
celerations or decelerations, because the expected trajectory 
must be simooth. At the initialization: 
1 
P ( X 0 )  = 9. 
C. Measurement likelihood 
ture [4] defined as: 
This pdf can be written as the uniform-Gaussian mix- 
where 0, is the standard deviation of the measurement noise, 
U ,  the measurement domain and P, deinotes the probability 
for a measurement to be correct (typicallly P, = 0.7). 
When the gap between the measurement m k  , and the po- 
sition rk,:c is small, the likelihood is high (sek figure 2). If 
I m k , ,  - rk,,l is greater than half of the domain U,, the like- 
lihood equals zero so the aberrant measurement m k , ,  is kept 
away. It implies two consequences: 
a jump appears in the trajectory at the k th instant (see fig- 
ure 3); 
the sum ( A t k  + At,+,) will be useld to determinate the 
next state. 
The algorithm manages with consecutive jumps. In such a 
case the time interval to determinate the current state is the 
sum of thie successive time intervals from the first aberrant 
measurement. 
D. viterbi recursive equation 
is equivallent to recursively define I ( X ~ )  by: 
Note that because of equations (2), (3) and (4), equation (1) 
In practioe we use: 
with E = 0.125 and 0 1  = 0.125-l. When handling with a 
very large set of data, the calculation of equation (5) suffers 
4 - 1 7 9 2  
014 - 
012 . 
0 1  - 
008 - 
006 - 
0 -  
0 
5 
0 
0 
1 - 
mx- rx 
Fig. 2 
Measurement probability with the typical values U ,  = 65, 
ox = 1 and P, = 0.7 
m o , x  - 5 - 
m 0 , y  - 5 
m ~ , ~  - 1.25 
1 
1 
0.25 - 
from underflow numerical problem. A solution consists in 
scaling I ( X k )  [ 5 ] :  
+ 
where: 
T ( X k )  = 
-; j 110,X’ 
E 
_ E  
E. Tridimensional model 
The equation of the 3D state model is: 
T 
x k  [ r k , x , r k , y ,  r k , z ,  v k , z ,  v k , y ,  v k , z ]  , 
The state equation follows: 
At the initialization we have: 
r i  o o 5 
0 1 0 0  
0 0 1 0  
0 0 0 1  
0 0 0 0  
xo = 
I 
k-4 k-3 k-2 k-1 k 
t-----+ 
A tk 
Fig. 3 
Backtracking procedure of the Viterbi algorithm: the points 
symbolise the system states and the lines the random paths. 
The measurements at the ( k  - 3) and ( k  - 2) sampling 
states are aberrant and a jump is done. 
A decoupled 3D trajectory is achieved namely at each sam- 
pling time the three coordinates of the point r k  are esti- 
mated separately using for each of them the monodimen- 
sional model described previously. Nevertheless, if a jump 
occurs when estimating a coordinate, this jump is forced on 
the two other point coordinates. The algorithm parameter set 
to adjust is finally: 
s = ~ ~ x , ~ y , ~ z , ~ z , ~ y , ~ z ) .  
Iv. TEMPORAL WINDOWS AND OVERLAPPING 
Because of the very large amount of data and in order 
to reduce the computing cost, it is preferable to estimate a 
piece-wise trajectory instead of process straight one only long 
track [6].  Figure (4) shows how a window of T measurements 
is shifted along the data set (typically T = 50). 
As figure (5) illustrates it, after the backtracking stage of the 
4-1793 
Viterbi algorithm, the possible tracks differ only in the last 
sampling instants of a temporal window. We take advantage 
of this propriety to overlap the trajectories, considering a win- 
dow: 
the point, from which the 3D trajectory is split, is detected; 
all of the possible tracks from this point are stored; 
the next trajectory estimation is initialized using this group 
of tracks. 
T measurements 
4-- 
t 
__* 
I I I I I I 
I 
I I  
initialization initialization 
by overlapping 
Fig. 4 
Temporal windows and overlapping. 
I 
rxr"r Y 
I b ' io0 io0  io0 io0 iooo 
t 
Fig. 5 
Trajectory estimation in one dimension with 200 
measurements ( S  = { (T, = 2, U ,  = 60)). A zoom in the end 
of the trajectory is shown. The estimated track is thick. 
v. AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT OF THE 
PARAMETERS 
The result of figures (5) and (S), where the measurements 
are very noisy, shows the robustness of OUT method but the 
estimated tracks are short. When processing a very large set 
of data, it is necessary to adjust locally the parameter set S 
of each .window in order to avoid any break in the track. To 
overcome this drawback an heuristic process is designed that 
aims to ;idjust automatically the parameter set SE of each 2th 
window. Figure 6 illustrates the algorithm principles: 
1. at the beginning a set S* of typicall parameters is chosen 
and: 
2. when estimating sequentially the trajectory, a break occurs 
in the lth window (namely all the measurements of the win- 
dow are aberrant), considering the previous (I - 1)th window: 
(a) the number of jumps for each dimension is counted; 
(b) is modified by reducing os: or/and cry or/and (T, 
corresponding to the coordinate(s) wil h the jump maximum 
number. The goal is to penalize the measurements spread. 
(c) the trajectory of the ( I  - 1)th window is estimated again 
with the new set of parameters Sl-1. 
3. the trajectory estimation of the Zth window is achieved 
with Sl. If a break occurs again, go to 2 and continue to 
modify S1-1. 
This algorithm for the automatic parameter adjustment is not 
expensive because in practice a break occurs rarely and, in 
this case, each iteration implies the new trajectory estimation 
for only two temporal windows. 
The experimental result shown on figure 7 illustrates the effi- 
ciency and robustness of our algorithm: the measurement set 
contains 1600 samples, and the whole trajectory is automati- 
cally estimated for different choices of the temporal window 
size T (for instance T = 30,50 or 100 measurements). We 
used 
Sl = S*,Yl. 
s* = { ( T ~  = uY = 2,0, = 2.5, 
U ,  = uY = 60, u : ~  = 30). 
t 
__f 
T measurements 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
7 v I 
,]Traj;tory with  = o - ( 1 - 1 ) ;  0.5 I
Trajectory I I 
I I - - - - - -  
Fig. 6 
Proce:ss for an automatic adjustment of the parameters. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The work presented in this paper concerns the problem of 
estimating of an underwater vehicle trajectory from ultrashort 
baseline system measurements. 
Using the Viterbi algorithm, we have constructed an original 
4-1794 
method with a nonconstant speed state model, a jump pos- 
sibility in the track, a scaled metric, temporal windows with 
overlapping, and an automatic adjustment of the parameters. 
The algorithm is robust w.r.t false alarms and the amount of 
calculus is real time compatible. 
REFERENCES 
[l]  J. Opderbecke, “At-sea calibration of a usbl undenva- 
ter vehicule positioning system,” in Proc. of the IEEE 
Oceans’97. Halifax, 1997. 
[2] G.D. Forney, “The viterbi algorithm,” Proc. of the ZEEE, 
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 268-278, March 1973. 
[3] R.E. Larson and J. Peschon, “A dynamic programming 
approach to trajectory estimations,” IEEE Transactions 
on Automatic Control, pp. 537-540, July 1966. 
[4] C. Jauffret and Y. Bar-Shalom, “Target motion analysis 
in the presence of false a lms ,”  Joumal of Acoustical 
Society of America, vol. 94, no. 3, September 1993. 
[5] S .  Paris, Extraction automatique de pistes fre‘quentielles 
en sonar passifpar chaines de Markov cache‘es, Ph.D. 
thesis, UniversitC de Toulon et du Var, November 2000. 
“Some im- 
provements in speech recognition algorithms based on 
hmm,” in Proc. of Intemational Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing ICASSP. Albuquerque, 
[6] A. Kriouile, J.F. Mari, and J.P. Haton, 
USA, April 1990, pp. 545-548. 
Vincent Ricordel was born in 1967. He 
received the Ph.D. degree in Signal Pro- 
cessing and Telecommunication from the 
University of Rennes, France, in 1996. 
He now holds an assistant professor posi- 
tion at the University of Toulon, France. 
His research interests include video cod- 
ing, trajectory estimation and image se- 
quence analysis. 
SCbastien Paris was born in 1973. He 
received the Ph.D. in Optic, Signal and 
Image from the University of Toulon, 
France, in 2000. He now holds an tem- 
porary assistant professor position at the 
University of Toulon, France. His re- 
search interests include statistical signal 
processing, estimation and detection us- 
ing HMM. 
Jan Opderbecke was born in 1963. He 
received the Diploma in electrical engi- 
neering from the Technical University of 
Braunschweig, Germany, in 1990, and 
the PhD at Ecole Normale Supkrieure de 
Cachan, France, in 1994. He now holds 
a research engineer position at the french 
institute for research on the exploitation 
of the sea (Ifremer) in Toulon, France. 
His research interests include sienal and ” 
image processing applications related to underwater vehicle 
navigation and seabed mapping. Among his work is the fully 
automatic integrated navigation system of Ifremer’s manned 
submersible Nautile and the visual mosaicking system of the 
remote operated vehicle Victor 6000. 
4-1795 
Fig. 7 
The data from the underwater vehicle. The estimated track is thick. 
‘X 
t 
I ~ 100 200 300 400 
t 
800 
400 
rz T 
I , 100 200 300 400 
t 
Fig. 8 
Trajectory estimation in 3 dimensions with 100 measurements (S  = {a, == ay = 1.5, (T, = 2, U ,  = 60, uy = 65, U, = 30)). 
Two temporal windows of T = 50 measurements are usled. The estimated track is thick. 
4 - 1 7 9 6  
