The Migration of Digital Avionics Data Buses to Low Cost 
Optical Avionics Data Networks (The LOADNET Project) 
Henry C.H. Eyoh, Robert Blue, Robert D. Gardner and Ivan Andonovic 
[h.eyoh, r.blue, r.gardner, i.andonovic]@eee.strath.ac.uk 
Broadband Networks Group, Optoelectronics Division 
Department of EEE, University of Strathclyde 
Royal College Building, 204 George Street 
Glasgow G1 lXW, U.K. 
Abstract-The objective of the LOADNET project has 
been the identification, adaptation and installation of 
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) networking components 
for optical avionics data networks. The aim of this paper 
is to recommend the use of telecommunication Layered 
Approach to analyze and design fbture aerospace fibre- 
optic networks. This approach can also be applied to other 
platforms, given their respective requirements,.which can 
be disseminated into sufficient detail and mapped into the 
Layers. A correlation between the requirements and the 
capability of the COTS protocol can be made to assess its 
suitability and any modifications that may be required. 
From part of the initial work done on the project we have 
selected three prominent COTS network technologies for 
illustrative purposes. Multiple protocols will be necessary 
in the network and, as a result, multiple protocols over 
LOADNET (MPOL) is currently under investigation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2 OS1 LAYERED ANALYSIS APPROACH 
3. AIRBORNE TRAFFIC ESTIMATION 
4 ASYNCHRONOUS TRANSFER MODE 
5 IEEE 802.3 
6 FIBRE CHANNEL 
7 RECOMMENDATIONS 
8 LOADNET 
9 SUMMARY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
It is widely accepted in the avionics community that 
photonic technology has the potential to offers a number 
of significant advantages over conventional electrical 
hardware. These include massive signal bandwidth and 
immunity of passive fibre-optic components to EMI. 
Furthermore, future avionics requirements are driving 
bandwidth specifications fiom hundreds of megabits to 
tens of gigabits per second, which is beyond the limits of 
electrical interconnect technology. In order to harness the 
cost effectiveness of utilizing commercial off-the-shelf 
(COTS) components in the aerospace industry, low cost 
optical avionics data networks (LOADNET) has been 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 8 2001 IEEE 
conceived to study and implement COTS in an airborne 
data communications network. Existing airborne 
applications of fibre-optic technologies have traditionally 
used proprietary components for each application. Each 
application still benefits in terms of performance and 
safety but suffers ftom high initial and life cycle costs. 
LOADNET will provide the European aerospace industry 
with a developed, standardized COTS solution to the 
technology, making significant cost savings through 
commonality across many platforms and applications. 
Despite the success of adapting FDDI to ARINC 636, it is 
recognized that the aviation industry has been 
conservative in adopting a layered architecture for 
designing communications networks. However, this 
adaptation has sparked some interest in the application of 
COTS components and manufacturing processes to the 
fibre-optic avionics data networking [l]. This is important 
for two reasons, the first being the relative cost savings 
achievable with COTS components, as well as the 
aviation certified components becoming readily available 
to non-aviation applications. The second reason is to 
realize the importance of Intemet and that eventually 
aircraft would become an integral component, i.e. a node 
in a huge network, of the global communications 
infrastructure, ftom ground based telecommunications 
networks to airport networks and satellite networks. To 
benefit fiom the revolutions seen in the 
telecommunications industry, it is necessary for the 
aviation industry to adopt or adapt similar design 
methods, which is the theme of the layered approach 
proposed in this paper. 
The approach undertaken by the team to evaluate COTS 
networking technologies and fibre-optic components for 
the airborne environment has been to analyze networking 
technologies where applicable in terms of Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) layers [2]. Not all networking 
technologies are defined strictly according to the OS1 
layers, many reaching into or straddling adjacent layers. 
However, the use of layering as a fiamework simplifies 
the application of technologies to the intended 
environments, as well as reducing time and effort in 
standardization. This technique removes the need for 
understanding the details of the communications network 
and requires only the knowledge of the services offered 
3-1243 
by the underlying network. Consequently, knowledge of 
the physical network can be developed independently and 
requires only the constraint and specification of the 
services required by the higher layers. Figure 1 shows a 
layered architectural view of the typical communications 
network. 
The structure of the paper is organized as follow: section 
2 introduces the readers to the OS1 reference model and a 
brief summary of the OS1 layers. In section 3 a short 
description of some of the aircraft tr&ic is presented. 
Sections 4, 5 and 6 cover the application of the layered 
approach to the three COTS network protocols covered in 
this paper, as well as the comparison of their 
characteristics to the avionics requirements. Subsequently 
our recommendations for applying the layered approach 
are given in section 7. This is followed in section 8 that 
introduces the LOADNEiT project and the relevance of 
the layered approach in assisting the initial investigations. 
Finally, the paper is summarized in section 9. 
2.0SI LAYERED ANALYSIS APPROACH 
Layering, or Layered Architecture, is a form of 
hierarchical modularity that is central to data network 
design. What is important is that a module performs a 
given function in support of the overall function of the 
system. Such a function is called the service provided by 
the module. Users of that module will be concerned only 
with the interfaces and the functional relationship 
between the inputs and outputs. All of the advantages of 
modularity (i.e. simplicity of design; understandability; 
and standard, interchangeable, widely available modules) 
providle the motivation for a layered architecture in data 
networks. Note that there are two quite separate aspects to 
the communication between a module, at layer n, and its 
layer 17 peer at another node. The first is protocol that the 
peer modules use in exchanging messages or bit strings so 
as to provide the required functions or service to the next 
higher layer. The second aspect is the specification of the 
precise interface between layer n module at one node and 
the layer n-1 module at the same node through which the 
messages above are actually exchanged. The first aspect 
is more important for a conceptual understanding of the 
operation of a layered architecture, lout the second is also 
vital in the actual design and standardization of the 
system. 
The International Standards Orgimization (ISO) has 
developed the layers of the reference model of OS1 as an 
international standard for data packet networlcs. The OS1 
layers have a relatively well-defined structure that helps 
in undierstanding the concept of layering. The readers are 
referred to several well-establishled publications that 
clearly explained the principles used in defining the OS1 
layers. However, to summarize, the complete 
communication subsystem is broken down into a number 
of layers, each of which performs a ?well-defined function. 
Briefly, the OS1 model consisted of 7 layers, fiom top to 
bottom, application, presentation, session, transport, 
network, data link and the physical layer. Communication 
is initiated by an application requesting a connection to a 
remote application. 
The physical layer covers the physical interface between 
devices and the rules by which bits are passed fkom one to 
Figure 1 Layered .Architecture of Network Communications. 
7-1 244  
another. The data link layer attempts to make the physical 
link .reliable and provides the means to activate, maintain 
and deactivate the link. The principle service provided by 
the data link layer to higher layers is that of error 
detection and control. The network layer provides for the 
transfer of information between end systems across the 
communications network. The higher layers do not need 
to know the underlying data transmission and switching 
technologies used to connect systems. The transport layer 
(see also Figure 2) provides a mechanism for the 
exchange of data between end systems. The connection- 
orientated transport service ensures that data are delivered 
error-fkee, in sequence, with no losses or duplications. 
The layer may also be concerned with optimizing the use 
of network services and providing a requested quality of 
service (QoS) to session entities. The upper three layers 
provide mission specific applications the means to access, 
manage and define the communications needs of 
programs. Since these functions are beyond the scope of 
this report, they will only be briefly mentioned in the next 
chapter, pertaining to the applications in an airborne 
environment. 
3. AIRBORNE TRAFFIC ESTIMATION 
With the growing importance of In-flight Entertainment 
systems (IFE) [3] it is necessary to consider an aircraft 
data network to support a wider range of traflk 
requirements. The avionics traffic can be classified into a 
spectrum between two extremes, such as the flight control 
process and an email program. The traffic can be 
characterized in terms of four properties: sensitivity to 
latency, bandwidth requirements, sensitivity to 
information loss and sensitivity to delay variations. The 
most demanding type trafiic will require negligible 
latency, high amount of guaranteed bandwidth, negligible 
packet loss (separate'fiom BER) and very low tolerance 
to delay variation (such as real-time data). On the other 
hand, IFE traffic is very similar to land-based broadband 
Internet traffic, with video-on-demand, email, web- 
surfing etc. However, to quantify aerospace traffic it is 
necessary to measure and model available trafic pattern 
[4]. This is not widely available and in most cases is 
proprietary information. The types and number of 
applications requiring networking can be quite large and it 
is not possible for us to consider all of them. The 
following are just a small selection, mainly due to the lack 
of information. 
Flight Control Traflc 
Time and mission critical applications such as real-time 
flight command and control., which require low latency, 
low delay variation, low packet loss and low but variable 
bandwidth demand. Flight commands have to reach the 
destination in the shortest time possible with minimal 
delay variations. Furthermore, packet loss cannot be 
tolerated but the bandwidth demand will be relatively 
lower. 
Imaging Sensors Traflc 
Real-time video monitoring systems and radar require 
timing correlation between the source and destination. 
Therefore low latency and low delay variation will be 
necessary. The bandwidth demand can be fairly high, 
such as in thermal imaging devices, and can either be 
constant or variable depending on compression. However, 
the application will be relatively tolerant to packet loss as 
the images change very little between frames, but 
compressed imaging will be less tolerant than raw 
imaging. 
Communicative Traf$c 
Communications devices within the aircraft and to 
external devices. These applications can tolerate bounded 
latency, delay variations, and sufficiently low packet loss 
as well as relatively low bandwidth demand. These may 
include communication of systems status. A slight delay 
in communication is usually tolerated, such as during long 
distance phone call, and, because these are usually 
interactive, a packet loss will not be easily detected. On 
the other hand, communication of aircraft systems status 
will require bounded delay and negligible loss. 
4. ASYNCHRONOUS TRANSFER MODE 
The initial investigations of the project have selected a 
large number of network technologies for detail study, but 
three prominent COTS network technologies are used 
here for illustrative purposes. The aim of this paper is to 
propose the use of conventional telecommunication 
layered approach to analyze and design future aerospace 
fibre-optic networks. A rough mapping of the three COTS 
network technologies is made against the OS1 reference 
model, as shown in Figure 2. In the following sections, 
the Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) layers are 
mapped to the OS1 layers in terms of functional 
requirements [5].  The mapping can occur in two ways, the 
first is the ATM user mode in which it is assumed that the 
users access the ATM network directly through the ATM 
Adaptation Layer (AAL). In this case, the three layers of 
the ATM protocol can be mapped to the lower four layers 
of the OS1 model, The alternative is the use of ATM 
network within a heterogeneous array of interconnected 
networks that utilize the Internet Protocol (E), and each 
providing different levels of QoS to the traftic. The ATM 
protocol stack maps into the data link and physical layers 
of the OS1 model. 
Network Equivalent Layer 
The functions carried by the network equivalent layer of 
an ATM network are: . Network addressing 
QoS provision 
Routing . support of IP 
3-1245 
Application 
Presentation 
Session 
Transport 
Network 
Data Link 
Physical 
OSI Reference Model 
,.):[ Fl,[ 1 
,’ 
, 
/’ ,’ --- --- 
-_c-- 
FC-1 -. -. - - __e- -_-.-- 
Physical Physical -.-- 
-- -- __-.--..--_-._-__-._ 
A TM Protocol IEEE 802.2 and Fibr,e Channel l.evels 
Stack IEEE802.3 
Figure 2 Mapping of COTS protocol stack to the OS1 reference model. 
The International Telecommunications Union - 
Telecommunications Standardization Sector (ITU-T) 
established ATM protocols, calls for a hierarchical 
integrated services data network (ISDN) telephone 
numbering scheme, specified in ITU-T E.164, to be used 
in public ATM networks. The ATM Forum has extended 
ATM addressing to include private networks [6]. The 
ATM Forum has also defined an address format based on 
the stnicture of the OS1 network service access point 
( N S A P )  addresses, which can be used as alternative 
addressing scheme for private ATM networks 
The use of IP has been proposed in ARINC project paper 
664 [7II by the aviation industry and could made the 
support of IP in an airborne environment as ubiquitous as 
in the case of Internet. However the fundamental 
dif€erertce between IP communication method and ATM 
conneclion oriented method makes the transport of IP 
datagrams over ATM network a complex problem. 
Generally, two methods are used for transporting Ip over 
ATM [$I; local area network emulation (LANE) 1:9] from 
the ATM Forum, and Classical IP-over-ATM [lo] from 
the Internet engineering task force (IETF). The packet 
length of IP is variable and it can contain 65,536 bytes of 
upper layer information. A variable length packet enables 
the efficient use of the bandwidth but makes switching 
and bulTering a more complex operation. The functions of 
IP consist of: 
Fragmentation and reassembly 
Routing 
Error reporting 
Fragmentation and reassembly concerns the transfer of 
user packets called messages, over network that supports 
smaller packet size. This packet size is defined by the 
Maximum Transfer Unit (h4TtJ). Routing enables 
information to be sent across a large network or to 
interconnect the subnetworks. Error reporting refers to the 
use of Internet control message protocol (ICMP) to 
indicate to the higher layer of the loss of packets. 
In LANE a number of components ;we required: 
LAN emulation client (LEC) 
LAN emulation server (LES) . . LAN emulation confguration server (LECS) Broadcast and unknown servers (BUS) 
LAN.E enables the setup of virtual LAN (VLAN) where 
users are grouped in terms of comrnon interest, instead of 
geographical disposition. Unforhmately, no standards 
exist in the inter-working of IP ()OS protocols and the 
QoS specification of the ATM protocol. 
In the case of classical IP over ATM, the Intemet 
engineering task force (En) used the subnetwork or 
overlay model of addressing, in which the ATM layer is 
responsible for mapping IP addresses to ATM addresses. 
This requires an ATM address resolution protocol (ATMt 
ARP) to map higher-layer addresses to their 
corresponding ATM addresses. A dedicated ARP servejr 
rUnnig on an ATM-attached router located in each 
subn’etwork carries out this mapping. Data transfer is 
achieved by creating a virtual chanlnel (VC) between end- 
users and using LLC/SNAP encapsulation of IP packets 
prioI to AAL 5 segmentation. 
Functional-The large address space of IP allows a large 
numlber of nodes to be connected, but because IP uses 
3-1246 
routing to connect distant nodes, this could mean that the 
routing information will be too large to process. This 
results in high latency, which is not acceptable in avionics 
applications. However, IF' also supports subnetwork 
addressing, which divides a larger network into a group of 
smaller ones to make routing more manageable. Although 
faster, the latency is still unacceptable for critical traffic. 
Furthermore, IP does not provide guarantees on data 
delivery. This is currently being addressed by a number of 
proposals that aims to provide some quality of service to 
the higher layers [SI. This does not necessary mean that 
QoS will be provided by an IP over ATM network, due to 
the fact that QoS information is not exchanged between 
Ip and ATM layers. No standards have been developed 
for these proposals, hence, their merits cannot be properly 
assessed for avionics network. 
ATM addressing scheme has similar capabilities but 
instead of routing packets at intermediate nodes, the ATM 
connection-oriented approach means that minimal route 
processing is required when the information is transferred. 
However, this could cause significant delay for relative 
short transfers. This can be taken care of by static 
connection setup, also known as permanent virtual 
circuits (PVCs), for the duration of the flight. Furthermore 
available bit rate (ABR) services may be used for non- 
essential trait. Because of the fact that ATM has been 
designed for virtually all forms of data traffic, the service 
required by avionics data can be borne by the service 
classes of the ATM protocol. This requires the use ATM 
adapters on each connected avionics devices. And 
complicated multiplexers are required to handle the large 
disparities in bandwidth requirements between the 
avionics devices. 
Environmental-For ATM adapters the addressing and 
call setup functions can be implemented in soha re  or 
hardware. The software and computing system for 
avionics system are based on the VME and more recently 
the PCI Mezzanine (PMC) standards, therefore adaptation 
will be required if connection setup and addressing are 
implemented in software. This will pose no environmental 
problem for the hardware that has already been approved 
for aviation use. On the other hand, if ATM connection 
and addressing is integrated on the adapter board, testing 
and certification of ATM adapter board will be required. 
Beside the end system, ATM switches will be required to 
route the connections, as well as the management of the 
end-to-end connections. This is an integral part of the 
ATM switch and thus will depend on the ATM switch to 
be tested and certified as a whole. Currently the operating 
environment of ATM adapters and switch has to be 
restricted to the pressurized and temperature controlled 
areas. 
For a heterogeneous network using an ATM backbone 
network, LANE components are required. LECs are 
implemented in software, either on the adapter board of 
the IP device or on the ATM edge switch, which translate 
IP frames into ATM cells. As part of ATM edge switch, 
the switch will have be tested and certified for aviation 
use. On the other hand, porting of the LEC software will 
be required for the proprietary soharehardware of the 
avionics devices. LES, LECS and BUS are generally 
located in the ATM switch, hence will depend on the 
testing and certification of the ATM switch. For the 
classical IP over ATM implementation, the address 
resolution protocol (ARP) server is usually located on the 
IP router and is mostly a software component. 
Cost/Life Cycle-ATM adapters have been available for a 
number of years, but they are not as widely available as 
other LAN adapters, such as Ethernet and Fast Ethernet. 
Furthermore, the cost of ATM switch is usually much 
higher compared to other LAN switches. But the 
complexity of the ATM LAN ensures that the 
introduction cost will remain high. This will only change 
if ATM switches are more commonly found in private . 
networks. 
Because of the rising popularity of ATM backbone 
switching in building and campus wide networks, as well 
as the necessity of LAN interconnections, the availability 
of ATM backbone switches and LANE components are 
less of a concern. But the LANE components add to the 
cost of such ATM components. Compared to LANE the 
classical IF' over ATM implementation may cost less but 
places heavy burden on the router. ATM remains widely 
accepted in backbone and core networking but for IP 
centric Internet the small size of the ATM cells have been 
regarded as very inefficient. Thus a larger cell size may 
be necessary in the future. 
Data Link Equivalent Layer 
The collective functions of the AAL layer and ATM layer 
can be approximately modeled as the data link layer of the 
OS1 model. These functions include the provision of 
service and the routing of user information through the 
network by means of VC and virtual path (VP) switching. 
Other functions include flow control and error correction 
and detection mechanism for the user information. ATM 
uses a connection-orientated approach and the user and 
CAC entity negotiates services through a Traffc Contract, 
which consists of traffc parameters and traf€ic 
descriptors. 
Six categories of services are offered using five types of 
AAL. The categories are CBR, rt-VBR, nrt-VBR, UBR, 
ABR and GFR; and the AAL. types are AALO, AAL1, 
AAL2, AAL3/4 and AALS [l 11. The first three services 
can be regarded as the basic capability of the ATM 
network while the latter three are catered towards 
bandwidth-on-demand type of applications. 
The AAL. layer adapts user data units into ATM payload 
format. The functions performed by AAL include the 
following: 
3-1247 
S A R  of user information . 
8 
8 Recovery of source clock 
Handling of cell delay variation 
Handling of cell payload assembly delay 
Handling of lost and mis-inserted cells 
User data error detection and correction 
Protocol error detection and correction 
The ITU-T or ATM Forum do not officially support AAL 
type 0, but it is defined with empty AAL protocol 
encapsulation. AAL type 1 is designed to work with CBR 
traffic including timing information required between 
end-users. Information is transferred from the user to the 
AAL layer at fixed intervals. AAL type 2 is designed for 
rt-VBR services, which requires timing information to be 
exchanged between source and destination applications. It 
is specifically designed to carry low bit rate, variable 
length, delay sensitive packets. AAL type 3/4 is intended 
for connection-oriented and connectionless data services. 
It should be noted that the connection-oriented technique 
is still required to support the connectionless service. 
AAL type 5 is intended for connection-oriented and 
connectionless data communications, and is 
recommended by ATM Forum and IETF to encalpsulate 
IP packets. It provides similar service to AAL 3/4 but 
without multiplexing capabilities. 
The ATM layer has to perform the following functions: 
Generic flow control 
8 Cell header generatioxdextraction 
Cell VPWCI translation 
Cell multiplexing/demultiplexing 
The main function of the ATM layer is the 
switchinghouting of ATM cells through the ATM 
network. This is carried out using a combination of 
switches, VC Identifiers (VCIs) and VP Identifiers 
(VPIs). In contrast with IP routing, VCI and VPI do not 
specifier; a unique destination but instead define a 
particular virtual connection in an ATM link. A lookup 
table is located in the ATM switching nodes that enables 
the switch to determine the outgoing port in relation to the 
VCI/vp[ of the ATM cell. The allocation (of the 
VCIsNI’Is from source to destination is carried out using 
a separate routing function of the network. It should be 
noted that VCs and VPs are virtual pipes and their 
bandwidth capacity varies with the requirements of the 
connections. 
In the ATM reference model the control plane handles 
connections setup, monitoring and releases. Network 
access is standardized by the Q.2931 signaling protocol 
[12]. Associated with control signaling is the invocation 
of a caul admission control (CAC) network functiton that 
attempts to accommodate the connection request without 
degrading the QoS of other connections. This is 
coordinated between the originating ATM switch, interim 
ATM nodes and the destination node. A number of layer 
management functions carry out the monitoring, reporting 
and, in some cases, error recovery of individual layers of 
the reference model, using the operational, administration 
and management ( O M )  cells. Besides routing, the main 
issues regarding guaranteeing ( )OS are congestion 
preveintion and control methods used. Preventive 
measures include traffiic shaping by the user node and 
traffk policing carried out by the network node. Within 
the ATM network, congestion may still occur and these 
are imostly reflected in buffer overflow. Several 
techniques are used to address this problem, which 
include cell discarding based on the priority bit and 
differentiated buffer allocation, where higher priority 
traffic: are given more space or are transmitted first. The 
ATM Forum has only standardized the leaky bucket 
technique in various parts of the nletwork to cater to the 
bursty nature of ATM traffic. 
Functional -Not all the service categories are suitable 
for avionics applications. ATM has been designed to 
optimize the utilization of network resources and 
introduce degrading of service if necessary to counter 
congestions. This property also means that network 
perfo~mance may be impossible to determine during 
certain intervals or events. This is highly undesirable for 
an avionics data network. To avoid this problem it is 
possible to specify a minimum network performance 
using QoS driven design process and install a network 
with !;&iciently excessive resources to guarantee that the 
mininial QoS goals are met. On thle other hand it is also 
possible to select stringent services for avionics 
applications and assume that all traffic demand CBR and 
rt-VBR services only. 
AAL type selection is crucial to the end-to-end 
connection performance. AAL 1 is suitable because of its 
circuit switched mode of operalion. This service is 
applicable to both real-time and non real-time delay 
sensitive applications. AAL 2 is similar to AAL 1 in 
certain aspects concerning avionic,s application but it is 
designed for real-time variable bit rate services and 
compressed video such as that usecl for video-on-demand 
planned for the In-flight Entertainment system (EX) is an 
example. AAL type 3/4 on the other hand caters for 
computer data exchanges that are not sensitive to delay 
but have critical constraints on packet loss. It is important 
to note that a 10-bit CRC error detection and correction 
mechanism is included in each ATIM cell’s payload. This 
helps to ensure data integrity at the destination, especially 
when compared to the AAL 5 ,  which only has a CRC-32 
mechanism to protect up to 615535 bytes of user 
information. 
The connection-oriented approa*ch may become a 
cumbersome process when certain avionics applications 
exchange information on an on-demand basis and new 
connections may degrade n’etwork performance 
noticeably to critical processes. ‘This situation can be 
improved by using permanent virtulal channels (PVCs) as 
oppo!jed to switched virtual channe!ls (SVCs). In this case, 
? - 1 2 4 A  
all essential connections are set up once only. The 
connections will remain in place for the duration of the 
flight and multiple PVCs may be allocated to each 
connection to provide redundancy. However, congestion 
control techniques used in the telecommunication industry 
are not suitable because cells can be discarded and user 
information may be lost at a critical time. Even though it 
may appear that the ATM network is unpredictable it 
should be noted that routing is based on lookup tables and 
hence the state of network can be known at one particular 
instance. The fact that routing tables are used enables 
manual or pre-determined routes to be programmed to 
ensure a close control of the network. To achieve 
acceptable network performance it is necessary to 
separate traffic and plan network capacity and operation 
accordingly. A combination of above-mentioned 
techniques should yield an acceptable avionics ATM 
network. 
Environmental-Environmental issues depend on the way 
the AAL and ATM layers are implemented. A survey of 
the suppliers' products reveals that not all AAL types are 
utilized; the commonly found ones are AAL types 1, 3/4 
and 5. These usually exist in chipsets and industrial 
standard compliant versions are available. These chipsets 
will presumably be suitable for pressurized environment. 
Ruggedization will be required if the components are to 
be exposed to airbome temperature extremes. 
Cost/Lifecycle-The cost of chipsets is not available at 
the time of writing but currently the cost of ATM adapters 
and switches are higher, compared to rival LAN 
technologies. Pricing for ATM switches is specified in 
cost per port and both stand-alone and rack based 
switches are available. The cost of ATM switch also 
depended heavily on the buffering technique implemented 
and the complexity of the management functions. Private 
and public ATM switches are becoming widely available 
and thus their lifecycle is measured by the switching 
capacity, which is the number of bits switched per second 
or the number of cells switched per second. 
Physical Equivalent Layer 
The function of physical layer includes the following: . HEC generatioxdverification . Cell delineation . Cell rate decoupling . Cell scrambling . Frame adaptation and extraction 
Header error correction (HEC) provides protection to the 
4 bytes of the ATM cell header. This ensures that the 
ATM cells &e routed correctly. The ATM Forum has 
identified two types of transmission fiame, one is known 
as the cell-based [13] and the other is the SONFiT/SDH 
based format 1141. When SONETISDH Eraming is used, 
the ATM cells are inserted into the synchronous transport 
signal (STS) or the virtual container. The SONET/SDH 
layer improves the physical link performance monitoring 
and robustness, but introduces additional processing to the 
ATM network. It is also interesting to note that currently 
SONET/SDH provides the only standard for -1OGb/s 
transmission. On the other hand, cell-based transmission 
depends on an inherently reliable fibre-optic system and 
thus relies on a combination of HEC bit pattem and 
scrambling to achieve synchronization. Compared to the 
SONET/SDH based frame, more bandwidth is also 
available to the user in cell-based transmission. In 
addition, standards have been developed by the ATM 
Forum for ATM cells to be transported with low cost fibre 
plants typically found in private networks, e.g. Plastic 
Optical Fibre (POF) [15]. 
Functional-The HEC provides protection against 
routing error. This would useful to an avionics application 
that demand very high data integrity. Adaptation of ATM 
trfl ic to SONETISDH fiame is undesirable and 
redundant, as SONETISDH requires very 'accurate time 
synchronization for transmission. Scrambling and error 
protection in the payload make further adaptation to 
SONET/SDH unnecessary and also reduces the 
bandwidth available to the users. For avionics network the 
cell-based format would be more efficient, but the highest 
standardized bit rate is 2.488Gb/s, compared to 1OGb/s 
for SONET/SDH. 
Environmental-The Physical layer COTS components 
are implemented in hardware and are often available as 
single chip solution. Other components include the fibre- 
optic transceivers and fibre plant. For silicon-based 
hardware the industrial standard is used for more 
demanding requirements but this standard does not satisfy 
the even more demanding operating conditions found in 
aviation. Adaptation will be required for applications 
outside the pressurized locations. Currently review of the 
fibre plant for avionics application is an ongoing process 
within the project. 
Cost/Life Cycle-Pricing of the electronic and fibre-optic 
hardware is hard to obtain at this time but cost will be 
increased when the components are to be ruggedized. 
The life cycle issue can be addressed in two parts: in 
terms of electronic components and in terms of fibre-optic 
components. The Physical layer may be changed to reflect 
advances in technology or higher bandwidth capability 
and this will require corresponding changes in the 
electronic components, even though the functions of 
Physical layer can still be performed. On the other hand, 
some fibre-optic components are upgraded fiequently to 
reduce installation cost by introducing cheaper 
manufacturing techniques. These changes normally occur 
in the replaceable parts of the network. For the fibre cable 
the life cycle issue is of major concern because for the 
fibre cannot be easily removed after installation. 
Maintainability of fibre plant is therefore of great concern 
when selecting the components. 
3-1249 
5.  IEEE 802.3 
The IEEE 802.3 standard [ 161 was developed by the IEEE 
from the Ethernet specification created by Xerox far LAN 
communications and is designed to adhere to the 
guidelines defined by the OS1 reference model. It is 
required to perform the functions of the data link and 
physical layer, together with IEEE 802.2. Using the layer 
architecture the resulting IEEE 802.2 & 802.3 
combination can be stacked with the Logical Link Control 
(LLC) sublayer [17] as the top layer. The Media Access 
Controller (MAC) sublayer constitutes the middle layer 
and the Physical (PHY) layer handles the transmission of 
bits and physical media dependent functions. Today 
Ethernet is considered synonymous with IEEE 802.3. 
Therefore in this paper the two terms are used 
interchangeably. Internet was popularized by the 
combination of the Transmission control protocolhnternet 
protocol (TCP/IP) suite and Ethernet. Therefore it is 
assumed that IP is the primary network protocol for a 
Ethernet network, but the reader is reminded that the LLC 
sublayer allows other network layer protocols to be 
multiplexed over the Ethernet network as well. 
Network Layer 
IP has become the de facto network layer protocol and its 
future seems certain with the IPv6 being standardized for 
Next Generation Internet by the IETF [ 181 However IP is 
a connectionless “best effort” protocol meaning that no 
guarantees are given for transfer of user information. In 
order to provide priority traffic with an acceptable QoS a 
number of schemes have been proposed for IP networks. 
They allow voice and multi-media information to be 
transported over a connectionless network. The proposals 
can be classified into two categories: signaling schemes 
that work at layer 3 and 4; and the IEEE 802.1p/Q/D 
protocols that are layer 2, the data link layer. The 
collective aim is to define QoS architecture to guarantee 
performance for delay sensitive applications such as IP 
telephony. 
Functional-Besides packet routing IP has to provide 
network addressing. Traditionally routers are software 
based and suffer from a slow processing speed. The 
widespread use of Internet has created a global network 
that stretches the routers so far so they have become a 
bottleneck. There have been a number of solutions 
proposed for this problem. Initial efforts concentrate on 
off-loading as much processing into hardware as possible. 
Other eEorts involve the development of IP switching, 
including Multiple Protocol Label Switch (MPLIS), and 
new type of switch that combines the functions of Layer 2 
and Layer 3, now widely known as the Layer 3 switch. 
Environmental-Routers are essentially part hardware 
and mostly software solutions, where the software uses 
routing protocols and maintains routing tables. This has 
become the bottleneck in the Internet and the LAN 
industry has been trying to off-load as much processing as 
possible into application specific integrated circuits 
(ASIC). There has been a number of products that are 
classi Eies as network processors that process packets from 
a variety of Layer 2 protocols, from cells to Ethernet 
frames. These processors are used to interface or 
consbuct intelligent switches that are able switch at tens 
of gigabits per second. The processors are usually 
availa.ble as a single chip solution and also as a set of 
chipsets for the switching fabric. 
Cost/LifecycIe-In generally these processors are in many 
ways similar to microprocessors and would cost 
considerably more than chips for layer 1 and 2. On the 
other hand, routers are expensive equipment that requires 
frequent software updates to remove bugs and to add new 
functionality. In contrast, a hardware-based router will be 
cheaper but suffers in terms of scalability and lifecycle 
cost. 
Data Link Layer 
Functions performed by the layer include: 
. LLC 
Framing for transmission . Medium access . Bridging and Switching . Error detection and recoveiy 
Each Ethernet frame contains a source and destination 
address, distinct from the IP address. The layer 2 address 
is known as the MAC address and leach contains 6 bytes, 
The format of the Ethernet frame and the IEEE 802.3 
frame: are identical but the Ethernet uses the frame header 
to identify the upper layer protocol whereas El33 802.3 
used the LLC header in the payload to identify the upper 
layer protocol. 
When Ethernet was developed, shared medium was the 
most cost effective cabling option. To allow access to the 
shareld medium the Carrier Sense Multiple Access / 
Collision Detection ( C S W C D )  was created. Most high- 
speed1 Ethernet variants can operate in half or full duplex 
mode. When fibre-optic cable is used the connections are 
generally point-to-point [ 191. For half-duplex 
transtnission, CSMA/CD will be utilized to ensure that 
stations can communicate over a single medium, in this 
case a single strand of fibre, and that collision recovery 
can take place. A collision domain is defined by the time 
of a valid minimum-length frame transmission. This 
transmission, in turn, governs the maximum separation 
between two end stations on a shared segment. 
Full duplex provides the means of transmitting and 
receiving simultaneously using separate medium. Full 
duplex has allowed bandwidth cn Ethernet and Fast 
Ethemet networks to be easily and cost-effectively 
enhanced. The use of full-duplex switched Ethernet 
eliminates collisions on the medium; therefore, 
CSMA/CD need not be utilized as a flow control or 
access medium. In Gigabit Ethernet. There exist an 
optional flow control mechanism that sets up between the 
two stations on the point-to-point link. If the receiving 
station at the end becomes congested, it can send back a 
frame called a pause frame to the source at the opposite 
end of the connection; the pause frame instructs that 
station to stop sending packets for a specific period of 
time. The sending station waits the requested time before 
sending more data. The receiving station can also send a 
fiame back to the source with a time-to-wait of zero and 
instruct the source to begin sending data again. This flow 
control mechanism was developed to match the sending 
and receiving device throughput. Gigabit Ethernet also 
introduces carrier extension (CE) bits. When frames of 
less than 512 bits are transmitted, the CSMAKD MAC 
adds carrier CE bits to meet the minimum slot time 
requirement. This makes Gigabit Ethernet very inefficient 
for small frames due to the large amount of CE bits being 
transmitted. To address this problem a feature called the 
Burst Mode was introduced to allow the node to transmit 
multiple small fiames continuously up to 8192 bytes of 
data. 
A bridge is used to connect different Ethemet LANs. 
Bridge performs the basic fiame filtering functions before 
retransmitting the incoming fiame. Bridge looks at each 
incoming frame and analyses the destination address in 
the header. Using its internal memory it will then forward 
the frame to another port or discard the frame. A switch is 
similar to a bridge except it creates multiple parallel paths 
internally to forward frames from the input ports to the 
output ports. Thus in operation it is much faster than the 
bridge, which can only forward one fiame at a time. The 
switch is also capable of bridging LAN segments with 
different speeds. The performance of the switch is 
influenced by four basic components. These are 
backplane capacity, forwarding mechanisms, port speed 
and buffer size. Three forwarding mechanisms are used: 
store-and-forward, cut-through, and modified cut-through. 
Store-and-forward buffers the entire fiame before 
switching is carried out. Cut-through stores the fiames 
just long enough for the destination address to be 
determined. To avoid f o m d i n g  erroneous frames, the 
modified cut-through technique tries to combine the best 
features of both. The selection of the forwarding 
mechanism depends on the intended application, such as 
the tradeoff between latency versus error-fiee switching. 
When a large number of LANs are connected, multiple 
paths may exist between nodes, which would duplicate 
entries in different bridges. Therefore, a single broadcast 
could create a looped broadcast stom. Therefore the 
spanning tree algorithm (STA) w a s  created to disable 
parallel paths and to ensure that forwarding paths 
construct a tree hierarchy such that only one path exists 
between two nodes. STA has since been standardized as 
the IEEE 802.1D [20]. STA also supports redundancy and 
keeps the disabled paths as backups. However, STA may 
not be desirable in situations where parallel paths would 
alleviate congestion in parts of the network. 
Functional-LLC sublayer can be used to set up 
connectionless and connection-oriented connections. 
However, if used with a CSMA/CD MAC the QoS cannot 
be guaranteed. Connection-oriented should be more 
compatible with avionics networking requirements. 
Recently priority indication, by modifying some bits in 
the Ethernet frame header, has been proposed and 
standardized in IEEE 802.3~ [19] and IEEE 802.3Q. The 
effectiveness of these techniques remains questionable for 
avionics network. However, using full duplex switching 
without the need for channel contention, the problem of 
latency, delay variation and guaranteeing bandwidth can 
be alleviated. This will require careful planning and 
implementation of the Ethernet switch. The MAC address 
is a unique ID given to each Ethernet hardware. However 
this address is only capable of reaching the domain to 
which it is being transmitted. A repeater, hub or switch is 
required to forward the frame to the destination MAC 
address. Therefore the method by which forwarding is 
carried out is crucial in determining the end-to-end 
latency. The STA was developed to prevent uncontrolled 
multi-path broadcasting, which is important in making the 
network stable. This algorithm only allows the use of 
alternative paths in case of failure of the primary route. 
Environmental-The LLC sublayer is typically 
implemented in software, where it performs the 
multiplexing and demultiplexing of the MAC frames to 
and from the layer 3 protocol, in most cases the TCP/IP 
suite. 
MAC addresses and operations are usually hard-wired, 
forming part of the hardware. Ethemet switches are 
similar in operation to the conventional telecom switches 
and are relatively simple in design, with most of its 
functional components in silicon. On the other hand, 
bridges are complex in that parts of its functions, such as 
address tables, are implemented in software. Our survey 
indicates that MAC functions can be implemented in a 
single chip, and switches can be constructed from these 
single-chip solutions. The majority of the bridges and 
switches offered are not suitable for aviation use. 
However, it is possible to adapt the chipsets used for these 
bridges and switches to aviation standards. 
Cost/Lifecycle-There are three major variants of 
Ethernet. The first generation offers transmission speed of 
lOMb/s and is usually referred to as plain Ethemet. The 
second generation is offers speed of lOOMb/s and is 
known as the Fast Ethernet. Finally, the latest version of 
Ethernet is called the Gigabit Ethernet and the current 
standards provided lGb/s, with lOGb/s standards under 
development. In the LAN market, 10/100 Mb/s Network 
Interface Cards (NIC) are widely and cheaply available. 
10/100 Mb/s Ethernet switches are becoming more 
common with lower prices and are usually used to expand 
3-1251 
the bandwidth of LANs. On the other hand, Gigabit 
switches are just coming onto the market and it is forecast 
that switched Gigabit Ethernet will become the s!.andard 
for Worligro~p and backbone applications. 
Physical Layer 
The physical layer, or PHY, protocol defines the electrical 
signaling, symbols, line states, clocking requirements, 
encoding of data, and connectors for data transmission. 
The higher layer communicates with the PHY through a 
series of standard interfaces. For Ethernet this interface is 
the Attachment Unit Interface (AUI). Fast Ethernet refers 
to this interface as the Media-Independent Interface (MII) 
and a variant called the Reduce MU (RMII) pioneered by 
AMD. A Gigabit MU (GMII) has also been developed for 
Gigabit Ethernet. On the other hand, the P W  layer 
communicates with the physical medium using the 
Media-Dependent Interface (h4DI). In short this allow 
MAC frames to interface with multiple types of P'HY or 
allows the PHY layer to interface with different MAC 
layers. 
There are currently three categories of Ethernet, denoted 
by their speed and the fact the data are transmitted1 in the 
baseband. They are IOBASE for lOMb/s Ethernet, 
IOOBASE for Fast Ethernet and 1000BASE for Gigabit 
Ethernel. There are further variants of each category, 
depending on the respective physical medium. We have 
concentrated solely on fibre-based specifications. 
IOBASE-FL is the most widely used fibre version of 10 
Mb/s Ethernet, which specifies a pair of fibre strand for 
connections to repeater, nodes and switches. IOOBASE-FX 
is the standard for fibre-based Fast Ethernet, which uses 
components from the FDDI fibre Ph4D standard, 
including the encoding schemes and transmission rate. 
Two fibre specifications are available for Gigabit 
Ethemet, depending the wavelength of the light source. 
Gigabit Ethernet's PHY also uses the same components 
developed for Fibre Channel (FC), but with a different 
transmission rate. A 1OGb/s PHY layer is currently being 
developed by the Gigabit Alliance. 
To extend the diameter of the network, repeaters are 
deployed to regenerate Ethernet frames for longer 
distance transmission. Because repeaters do not perfonn 
processing of the MAC h u e ,  it is usually considered a 
PHY device. However, it introduces a certain amount of 
delay in regenerating the signal and this affects the 
maximum inter-node distance. Therefore the distance 
between nodes and repeaters has to be reduced to cater to 
the increased propagation delay. 
Functional-Fibre-based connections are point-titpoint, 
which means that full-duplex transmission is the preferred 
method. For IOOMb/s and 1Gb/s transmission speed it is 
important to study the effect of electrical signaling and 
the associated EMI emission, even though transmission is 
baseband. The transmission overhead depends on the 
encoding scheme used and is calculated differently from 
that used in framing-type such as SONET/SDH frames. It 
is possible that use of Fast Ethernet on board aircraft is a 
simpler process, given the fact that a version of FDDI 
called the ARINC 636 [21] is already being standardized 
and certified. However, other issues such as Ethernet 
switching, topology and MAC have to be taken into 
account. On the other hand, Gigabit Ethernet make use of 
FC physical components and thus ensures that time to 
market is shortened and thus simultaneously drives down 
the pnice. The use of the repeater is not recommended as it 
introduces points of failure along the transmission path 
and allso because the distance covered in the airframe is 
considerably restricted. The use of an encoding scheme 
allows redundancy to be introduced. Unused symbols can 
be allcocated to transmission monitoring and line control 
messaging purposes. 
Envirmmentul-The PHY layer is entirely hardware 
based and our survey concluded that components are 
available in industry operating standards but fall short of 
the more extreme unconditioned environmental 
requirements. The mega and gigabits transmission 
components also have to be certified for EMI 
requirements. It is necessary to ensure minimal changes 
are required in upgrading the comjponents in the future, 
especially when Gigabit Ethernet has been very 
successful in MAN and will be supplemented by 10 
Gigabit Ethernet in the future. 
Cost/l,ifecycle-The cost of Fast Ethernet components 
has declined so much over the years that it makes the use 
of lOMb/s Ethernet much less favor.able. Though different 
chips are required for copper-based and fibre-based 
implementations, the cost of fibre standards components 
remains viable. Conditions exist for Gigabit Ethernet 
PHY components to become cheaper as the same 
components can be used for Fibre Channel, which is 
gaining popularity in the Storage Area Network (SAN).  
6.  FIBRE CHANNEL 
The intention of the Fibre Channel (FC) [22] is to develop 
a practical, inexpensive, yet expandable means of quickly 
transferring data between workstations, maintkames, 
supercomputers, desktop computers, storage devices, 
displays and other peripherals. I;ibre Channel is the 
general name of an integrated set of standards being 
developed by the American National Standards Institute 
(ANST). 
There are two basic types of data cam"mcation between 
processors and between processors and peripherals: 
channels and networks. Fibre Channel attempts to 
combine the best of these two methods of communication 
into a new I/O interface that meets, the needs of channel 
users as well as network users. 'The topology can be 
select'ed depending on system performance requirements 
3-1252 
or packaging options. Possible FC topologies include 
point-to-point, crosspoint-switched or arbitrated loop. FC 
operates at a wide variety of speeds (133 Mbit/s, 266 
Mbit/s, 530 Mbit/s, and 1 Gbits/s) and on three types of 
both electrical and optical media. 
FC is structured as a set of hierarchical functions. The 
lowest level (FC-0) defines the physical link in the 
system. FC- 1 defines the transmission protocol including 
serial encoding and decoding rules, special characters and 
error control. The Signaling Protocol (FC-2) serves as the 
transport mechanism of Fibre Channel. The framing rules 
of data, the different mechanisms for controlling the three 
service classes and the means of managing the sequence 
of a data transfer are defined by FC-2. The FC-3 level of 
the FC standard is intended to provide the common 
services required for advanced features. FC-4, is the 
highest level in the FC structure and defines the 
application interfaces that can execute over FC. It 
specifies the mapping rules of upper layer protocols using 
the FC levels below. 
FC levels can be roughly mapped to the two bottommost. 
OS1 layers based on their functions and support of IP, a 
layer 3 protocol. Therefore FC-4, FC-3 can be regarded as 
the equivalent of LLC sublayer and FC-2 is similar to the 
MAC sublayer. Hence FC-2, FC-3 and FC-4 performed 
the fimctions of Data Link Layer. Furthermore FC-1 and 
FC-0 carried out functions of the Physical Layer. It is also 
interesting to note that ATM AAL 5 PDU can be mapped 
onto FC levels, in which case the A l l 4  data unit is treated 
as a network layer protocol unit. 
Network Equivalent Lqe r  
Fibre Channel is equally adept at transporting both 
network and channel information and allows both 
protocol types to be concurrently transported over the 
same physical interface. At the present time, SCSI and IP 
[23][24] are primary commercially used upper layer 
protocols (ULPs) on Fibre Channel. Establishment of IP 
communications with a remote node is accomplished by 
initiating a FC exchange, which is unidirectional and thus 
separate exchanges must be established for each direction. 
An Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) server is required 
to translate between the 4 bytes IP address and the 3 bytes 
FC address identifier. Generally this ARP server is 
located within the switch fabric and accessed via a 
dedicated FC address identifier using the ARP datagrams. 
In the IP addressing and routing algorithms there is the 
concept of an lP subnetwork. A subnetwork is a group of 
IP nodes, which can communicate with each other 
directly. Communications between subnetworks is 
accomplished with a IP router, or gateway in the case of 
different networks. It is possible that nodes within the FC 
network may support different classes of service and 
speed that makes direct communications impossible. 
Nodes with similar capabilities are grouped into 
“regions”. To permit inter-connections between different 
regions a node that is compatible with both regions is 
required to perform the functions of an IP router. 
An important factor that affects the transmission of IP 
packets over different networks is the Maximum Transfer 
Unit (MTU), which defines the maximum size of the 
Layer 2 fi-ames permitted on the network. The length field 
of the IP header allows up to 65,535 bytes, which greatly 
exceeds the frame size of almost all Layer 2 protocols. 
Therefore it is necessary to fi-agment the IP packet before 
transmission. The fragmentation and reassembly process 
is fairly slow, which makes it desirable to make the size 
of IP packets similar to the Layer 2 frame. However, since 
each IP packet is mapped into a sequence of FC frames, 
each up to 2112 octets in length, the fi-agmentation and 
reassembly is undertaken by the FC-4 level. The low 
overheads of FC frames and the requirement that IP’s 
MTU is 65,280 bytes, allow for a more efficient transport 
of IP packets. 
Functional-The ability to support multiple types of 
higher layer protocol means that FC is just as capable as 
IP in the handling of intra-system communications, such 
as computer bus or backplane data transfer. The latter 
application can be found in [25]. IP is designed with the 
assumption that software processing is much faster than 
the quality and bandwidth of the communications 
channel. Hence it is inherently unsuitable for real-time 
mission critical communications. However, it is possible 
to ensure that the underlying network is fundamentally 
error-fiee and capable of transporting real-time traffic. 
Thus the ability to offer various classes of service 
including guaranteed service makes the FC network 
fundamentally suitable for real-time communications. In 
this way the QoS schemes for IP can be mapped onto the 
FC network in the same way as ATM networks. 
Environmentd-The network addressing function is 
software based and the IP router may be needed for large 
networks, but should be avoided if possible. The FC-4 
mapping functions are implemented in software as well. 
Therefore this is not an environmental related issue but a 
software portability problem. IP is widely used in 
Windows and Unix platforms but rarely if ever been used 
on avionics systems, which utilize VME systems. 
Cost/Lifecycle-The cost of an IP router is prohibitive 
and should be avoided ifpossible. The real cost relates to 
the porting of IP and FC mapping functions to aviation 
computing systems. As a result being s o h a r e  based, it 
would be highly upgradeable or portable when newer 
computing platforms were introduced. 
Data Link Equivalent Layer . 
The FC-4 level defines the rules and procedure for 
mapping upper layer protocols to the FC network. The 
functions perfiormed by FC-4 are: 
3-1253 
8 ULP encapsulation 
8 Address mapping 
8 Connection setup 
For most networking protocol stacks, the concept of a 
data packet or datagram maps directly onto the fibre 
channel sequence. The sequence is segmented into 
frames, transmitted across the fibre channel ‘fabric:’, and 
then reassembled before delivery to the remote figher- 
level protocol. A FC sequence is a series of one or more 
related frames transmitted unidirectionally from one port 
to another. All frames must be part of a sequence. 
Multiple sequences to multiple ports may be active at the 
same time. A FC exchange is a series or one or more non- 
concurrent sequences between two ports. The sequences 
may be in either direction. All sequences (and therefore 
all frames) must be part of an exchange. 
The FC-3 level is intended to provide a framing protocol 
and other services that manage operations over multiple 
FC ports on a FC node. One of the functions is called 
striping, where data could be simultaneously transmitted 
through multiple FC ports to increase the effective 
bandwidth. 
The functions of FC-2 [26] include: 
8 Frameformatting 
8 Management of exchanges, sequences. and 
frames 
8 Flow control 
8 Class of service 
8 Loginnogout 
8 Topologies definition 
Each FC! frame has a payload length from zero to 21 12 
bytes, including the optional header from ULP. Two types 
of frames are specified in FC, data and link control 
frames. Link control frames are used for 
acknowledgements, link response and link command 
purposes. During communications, both the sequence and 
exchange status are monitored for the error recovery 
policy specified by the exchange. Four exchange error 
policies are defined 
8 Abort, discard multiple sequences: An error in 
one frame will cause that frame’s sequence and later 
sequences in the exchange to be undeliverable. 
8 Abort,  discard a single sequence: An error in one 
frame does not cause rejection of subsequent 
sequences. 
8 Process with infinite buffering: Delivery of 
sequences does not depend on all the frames of the 
sequence to be intact. As long as the first and last 
frames are intact. 
8 Discard multiple sequences with immediate 
retransmission: Link control frame is used to request 
that a corrupted sequence be retransmitted 
immediately. Applies only to class 1 connections. 
The error policy is determined at the beginning of the 
exchange and cannot be changed (luring the exchange. 
Link control frames are used to indicate successful or 
unsuccessful reception of each data kame. They are only 
used for class 1 and 2 frames. Class 3 frames do not 
require acknowledgement. If the returned link control 
frame indicates busy or reject, the frame may be 
retransmitted a number of times. On the other hand, if no 
link control frame is returned, enor recovery will be 
performed at the sequence or exchange level. There is no 
facility to retransmit a single error fr,ame in FC. 
FC defines five Classes of service. which are specified 
during: initiation of exchanges but FC ports do not have to 
support all classes of service. Class 1 service is intended 
for communications that require a dedicated channel to 
the destination port. Once established, the bandwidth of 
the (dedicated connection is guaranteed by the 
interconnecting ports and the destination port. Class 2 is a 
connectionless service with acknowledgement, hence the 
FC network does not guarantee the order of delivery but it 
guarantees the delivery of the data frames. Class 3 is a 
connectionless service without acknowledgement, which 
depends on the ULP to perform error detection and 
recovery. Class 4 [27] provides fractional bandwidth 
allocation of the resources of a path through a Fabric and 
Class 4 can only be used with the pure Fabric topology. 
Class 4 circuits will guarantee thal frames arrive in the 
order they were transmitted and will provide 
acknowledgement of delivered fkunes. Intermixing of 
Class 2 and 3 frames is mandatory for devices supporting 
Class 4. Furthermore, FC defines a way to intermix class 
2 anti class 3 traffic with class 1. Bandwidths are 
dedicated in a class 1 connection but there will time when 
no trrtffic or little traffic is being transmitted. Intermix 
allows frames of other sources to be transmitted to the 
destination port when no class 1 traffic is present. Class 6 
[28] provides support for multicalst service through a 
Fabric by allowing each source FC port to set up a Class 1 
dedicated connection with the multicast server within the 
Fabric. 
Segmentation and reassembly are: the FC-2 functions 
provided to subdivide application data to be transferred 
into payloads, embed each payload into frames, transfer 
these frames over the links, and reassemble the 
application data at the destination port using the frame 
and sequence identifiers. In general, there are two types of 
errors detected in the FC network, a frame error and a link 
error. A fiame error is detected by a missing sequence 
number and recovery is performed at the sequence level 
according to the exchange error recovery policy. On the 
other hand, link errors occur at the Physical layer, when 
loss of signal or loss of synchronization is detected. 
Recovery from link error depends on the FC levels 
affected, and for the FC-2 level this may be as simple as 
an exchange error recovery poliqy or a more complex 
operation such as the re-initiation of the link or network. 
7 - 1  3 6 4  
Three types of topology are specified by FC. These 
consist of point-to-point, arbitrated loop E291 and fabric 
[30]. In each topology a pair of fibres is required for each 
FC port. The point-to-point is the simplest and the 
associated link initialization and login procedures are 
simpler by comparison. Arbitrated loop enables 127 port 
addresses to be allocated in a ring topology. This method 
eliminates the need for interconnecting devices such as a 
switch, but the initialization and login process is more 
complicated. The fabric is a generic term to describe the 
interconnections provided by one or more switching 
devices. The switching ports are connected to the FC node 
poqs but may also be connected to other switching ports 
to form a larger switching matrix. The switching is carried 
out on the FC destination port address in the h n e  
header. The capability of the FC switch is implementation 
dependent and they are also required to satisfy the classes 
of service for end-to-end connections. Flow control in FC 
network is performed on a credit-based algorithm. Two 
types of credit are defined, end-to-end credit and buffer- 
to-buffer credit. The credits allow each sending port to 
control the amount of fiames it can send without 
receiving acknowledgements. This credit is established 
during port login. 
Functional-FC provides multiple classes of service that 
include dedicated connections and intermix. This caters 
for real-time mission critical applications and enables the 
applications to perform multiplexing if required. A class 2 
service would be useful for non-real-time but loss 
sensitive applications. The Class 4 service can be used to 
separately manage dedicated connections from a node that 
runs multiple processes. The exchange policy can be used 
to ensure the integrity of the network by making sure that 
error in critical data is handled promptly. Mapping of both 
network and bus types of connections mean that FC can 
be used for inter and intra rack communications. Multiple 
topologies allow the FC network to be used for different 
areas, such as point-to-point in high bandwidth and 
critical data transfer, such as high quality imaging 
sensors. Arbitrated loop is used mainly for cost saving by 
eliminating the switch, which can be costly. However, it 
should be noted that the loop configuration does not 
support redundancy such as in the case of Fibre 
Distributed Data Interface (FDDI). The switch fabric 
topology allows flexible interconnectivity and the setup 
procedure allows relatively low latencies. A dedicated 
circuit is provided for class 1 connections. This will 
ensure that critical data will not be lost in the fabric. 
Environmental-The implementation of FC-3 and FC-4 is 
done in software, since these functions are logical and 
carried out across the host bus. FC-2 deals with the FC 
fiames and the connection aspect of FC network; 
therefore it is implemented in both hardware and 
software. The software part handles the fiaming, which is 
variable in length. 
Cost/Lifecycle-The cost of the FC network depends on 
issues such as the classes of service and topology 
supported. Different service classes demand different 
amounts of buffering and processing. The fabric topology 
provides flexibility at a much higher cost for the switches. 
FC standardization is an on-going process and mappings 
of more ULPs are defined. Software-based mapping will 
ensure an easier upgrade path. FC does not specify the 
implementation of the switches, only the class of service 
to be supported and the initialization process to be 
performed. This means that the switches can be upgraded 
as switching technologies are improved. 
PhsicaI Equivalent Layer 
The Physical Layer of FC consists of FC-0 and FC-1, 
which specifies the type of encoding, the data rate and 
transmitted bit rate. They also carry out link performance 
monitoring and maintenance. The basic bit rate over the 
links is 1.0625Gbh and the data rate is 800Mbh. The 
basic bit rate can be scaled down to half, one quarter, one 
eighth and also scales up to double and quadruple over the 
links. Fibre is the primary physical medium but copper 
can also be used. The functions performed by FC-0 and 
FC-1 are [26]: 
. Encoding . Link maintenance . Signaling . Media specifications 
Transceiver specifications 
The FC-1 level defines the encoding technique to ensure 
the encoded bit stream can easily be recovered by the 
receiver during synchronization. Encoding also introduces 
redundancy to allow the transmission of control symbols 
to monitor and maintain the physical medium. Certain 
combinations of transmission characters, called ordered 
sets in FC, are used to identify fiame boundaries, to 
communicate link status and command communications. 
Three kinds of ordered sets are available. Frame 
delimiters mark the beginning and end of the fiame, and 
also identify the class of service and the fiame’s relative 
location to other frames in the sequence. Primitive signals 
such as the Idle signal, are used to maintain the link when 
there is no data being transmitted. Finally, there is the 
primitive sequences that are used to perform link 
initialization and link level error recovery. 
The FC-0 level describes the operations involved in 
converting a stream of information bits characterized by 
some electrical signal, into a signal format suitable for the 
cable medium, whether fibre or copper wire. FC-0 also 
describes the transmitters and receivers used for 
interfacing the media and possible transmission rates. 
Each FC port must contain a bi-directional pair of fibre or 
copper for connections. Because the transmitted signal 
has to terminate at a FC port, a communications path 
between two FC node ports may consist of different 
3-1255 
media and media length. However, the FC frame does not 
change during the transmission. A mechanism has also 
been developed to reduce the duty cycle of the optical 
transmission when a fault is discovered in the link. This 
mechanism is called the Open Fibre Control (QFC), 
which is used for eye safety reasons. 
Based on QoS contract 
Functional-The FC- 1 provides error monitoring and 
reporting using redundancy in the encoding scheme. The 
initial specifications are intended for fibre-optic 
implementations. FC-0 also specifies the OFC mechanism 
to satis@ eye safety requirements. FC supports different 
hierarchically related bit rates and defines them in terms 
of data rate provided to the ULP. 
Not natively supported Class 1 s'ervice 
less costly certification and a wider field of market. 
However, most of the components for FC are developed 
primarily for Storage Area Network ( S A N )  and are not 
suitable for general aerospace use 
Cost/L,fecycle-The components are used for Gigabit 
Ethernet, which should mean a lower cost. But the 
components are certified for used in computer network 
only and thus would require ruggedization. FC has been 
designed for networking and peripheirals communications; 
therefme it is reasonable to assume that FC products 
would be used extensively. 
Envivonnzental-Currently FC-0 and FC-1 
implementations are in hardware and the fact that the 
components can be used for Gigabit Ethernet should mean 
Table 1 Categorization of Communications requirements and relationships with COTS capabilities. 
Syntheses 
- Requirements 
- Network Layer 
Routable address 
Network size > 500 
- 
I Subnetwork addressing 
Flow Control 
I Delivery Priority 
I Data Link Laver 
I GuaranteedBW 
Connection Method 
1 Guaranteed Latency 
Classes of Priority 
Error Recovery 
I Framesize 
Physical Layer 
maintenance 
Data bit rate 
ATM I IEEE 802.3 I Fibre Channel 
Supported through IP 
and ATM addressing address identifiers 
Yes with IP and ATM 
Support IP and 3-byte Port 
Yes with 3-byte Port address 
identifiers 
Yes with IP & VLAN I Yes with IP I 3-byte Port Identifiers 
IP requires other 
protocols while ATh4 Credit-based IP requires other protocols 
IP requires other Use Class of service protocols while ATM 
Connectioni-oriented 
IEEE 802.2 
Class of service 
Not specifically supported Specified in maximum Not specifically end-to-end dela 
lEEE 802.lq Class of service 
Fixed and 53 bytes 
Fibre and copper 
Specified in standards 
Fibre and copper 
Provided by OAM cells Provided by encoding Provided by ordered sets --I1 
25M, 51M, lOOM, 
155M, 622M, 2.4886 
and 9.6G b/:s 
l O O M ,  200M, 400M, 800, 
1.6G and 3.2G b/s l O M ,  lOOM and 1G b/s 
3-1256 
7. RECOMMENDATIONS 
To analyze the applicability of COTS networking 
technologies to the aircraft environment it is necessary to 
first understand the requirements of various applications 
that will be communicating on the network. These 
requirements will have to be analyzed and classified into 
requirements for the network layer, the data link layer and 
the physical layer. This algorithm can be iterated to 
provide increasing detail about the requirements and their 
dependencies on the elements of the layers. This process 
is currently under study in the LOADNET project and 
Table 1 can be interpreted as a subset of an intermediate 
level correlation. 
The lefhnost column is the set of requirements or criteria 
derived from a higher-level set of specified requirements. 
On the right columns, the ability of the technologies to 
match those requirements is indicated. The result of such 
iterations of correlation would eventually yield the best 
technology and, possibly, various modifications required 
for each layer. Two recommendations can be made fiom 
our preliminary analysis; first is the fact that multiple 
protocols are suitable for aerospace applications and their 
selection is very much more dependent on cost than 
functional issues. Therefore multiple protocols may have 
to be supported. Next the operating ranges of COTS 
components may require that two bands of operating 
temperatures are defined, one in the -40 to +S5 "C region 
and the other in the -55 to +150 "C region. The latter will 
require the COTS components to be ruggedized 
accordingly. This will contribute to cost savings by 
intermixing the components according to environmental 
requirements. 
8. LOADNET 
Previously, research objectives in applying optical 
technologies to aerospace have concentrated on 
engineering fibre technology in order to optimize 
functional performance. In contrast the emphasis in 
LOADNET will be on: 
exploiting commercial hardware and network 
technologies; 
investigating through-life cost implications and 
processes for an optical physical layer and 
ensuring these are controlledconsidered at the 
system design phase; 
developing an optical network modeliug tool to 
facilitate design optimization; 
developing physical layer elements concurrently 
in order to optimize system, as opposed to 
component, performance; , 
ensuring where possible that the optical physical 
layer is transparent to higher network layers; 
promoting European and International 
standardization of all aspects of an avionic 
optical network life-cycle. 
= 
The aim of LOADNET is the utilization of high-speed 
COTS optical networking technologies in place of 
traditional low speed digital bus. LOADNET will create 
standards for adapting COTS components and the 
associated design, manufacturing, certification, 
installation, as well the as through life support of the 
fibre-optic network. These standards will eventually be 
applicable to other applications such as automotive, 
locomotives, defense vehicles and waterborne platforms. 
The Layered Approach has identified a need for an 
avionics data network to support multiple protocols and 
this is also the requirement of LOADNET. A detailed 
study has been carried out on the inter-layer 
communications to determine the complexity and scope 
of a multiple protocol over LOADNET (MPOL). The 
inter-layer interfaces of the network technologies 
discussed above are included in the study and their 
corresponding standards are: 
UTOPIA 
MIIandGMII 
FC-2/FC- 1 
The Universal Test & Operations PHY Interface for ATM 
(UTOPIA) was developed to allow an ATM layer to 
communicate with multiple Physical layers. This allows 
new Physical layer technologies to be introduced without 
making changes to the upper layers. In this respect it 
satisfies the OS1 principle, which promotes the separation 
of functionality between two adjacent layers to allow for 
growth. The Media Independent Interface (h4IC) and 
Gigabit MII (GMII) serve similar purpose for Ethernet. 
These specifications enable Ethemet to adapt the PMD 
layer of FDDI and the FC-O/FC-1 levels of FC for Fast 
and Gigabit Ethernet respectively. However, in this case 
some modifications are required to the CSMAICD 
algorithm, but without modifying the frame format. The 
interface between FC-2 and FC-1 has not been clearly 
defmed but their interactions can be derived by comparing 
their respective functions against the OS1 reference 
model. 
A reference model of MPOL is shown in Figure 3. 
MPOL is being designed to allow multiple protocols to 
communicate with the LOADNET physical fibre-optic 
network. Currently the specification of LOADNJ3T is 
under development and the key issue is the "phantom" 
dependencies between the non-adjacent higher layers to 
the Physical layer, which has not been captured by the 
layered approach. This may be due to some of the COTS 
protocols layering not conforming to the OS1 reference 
model or the inadequacy of the OS1 model itself. An 
effective method will be necessary to address this 
shortcoming. 
3-1257 
Figure 3 Multiple protocols support over LOADNET. 
9. SUMMARY 
The layered approach delivers insightful information 
regarding the strength and weaknesses of each protocol as 
well as the necessity of including particular layers in the 
network. There have been numerous proposals on the 
vertical combination of various layers to provide a 
simpler and more efficient networking architecture for 
extremely high capacity core networks. Applying the 
layered approach is a fundamental prerequisite {in this 
endeavor and to adopt this technique for the aerospace 
industry now could mean cost and time savings in the 
future. Furthermore, integration to the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN), which is being 
developed with open architecture in mind, would create a 
seamless global aerospace network for enhanced de- 
centralized trafiic control [31]. 
It is also very important to realize that fbture networks on 
board aircraft may consist of more than one networking 
protocol.. Therefore it is necessary to look at the location 
and installation constraints imposed upon the physical 
network infrastructure, such as the fact that the fibre plant 
has to be in-place until the aircraft’s mid-life upgrade. 
Hence a cost effective physical network has to be able to 
work with all the protocols that will be used to build the 
network. The profound effect of this requirement is 
currently under study within the LOADNET project, 
tentatively titled “Multiple Protocols over LOADNET 
(MPOL)”. Beside the aviation industry, the application of 
MPOI, can also be extended to other mobile platform and 
static hostile environmental conditions. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Thanks to Nick Brownjohn of BAE Systems (UK) for 
sharing his expertise in the aerospace industry and his 
constructive comments on the paper.. 
REFERENCES 
[l] M.W. Beranek, E.Y. Chan, H. E. Hager, Q. N. Le and 
J. S. Wilgus, “merging opportunities for applying COTS 
optoel~ectronics in avionics fiber-optic networks”, 
Microprocessors and Microsystems, Elsevier No. 22,439- 
451,1999. 
[2] Bijendran N. Jain and Ashok K. Agrawala, Open 
System Interconnection: Its Archit\ecture And Protocols, 
Amstadam: Elsevier Science, 1990. 
[3] Emma Kelly, “Spinning an Airborne Web”, Flight 
Intm!ational, Vol. 158, No. 4746, September 12-18,2000 
[4] Teresa C. Mann-Rubinson and Kornel Terplan, 
Network Design: Managemefivt and Technical 
Perspectives, London: CRC Press, 1999. 
3-1258 
[5] ITU-T, “B-ISDN Protocol Reference Model and its 
Application”, ITU-T Recommendation 1.321, Geneva, 
1991. 
[6] The ATM Forum Technical Committee, “ATM Forum 
Addressing: Reference Guide”, af-ra-0106.000, 
http://www.atmforum. com, February 1999. 
[7] ARINC-Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee, 
“Aircraft Data Network, Part 3, Intemet-based Protocols 
Suites and Services - Strawman for Project Paper 664”, 
00-1 28/SAI-699, http://www. arinc. com/aecc, August 
2000. 
[SI Daniel Minoli and Andrew Schmidt, Internet 
Architectures, New York: Wiley Computer Publishing, 
1999. 
[9] The ATM Forum Technical Committee, ‘TAN 
Emulation Over ATh4, version 1.0”, af-lane-0021.000, 
http://www. atmforum. com, January 1995. 
[lo] M. Laubach, “Classical IP and ARP over ATM”, 
IETF Network Working Group RFC 1577, 
http://www. iegorg/rfc, January 1994. 
[ l l ]  Natalie Giroux and Sudhakar Ganti, Quality of 
Service in ATM networh, Stat-of-the-art TrafJic 
Management, London: Prentice Hall PTR, 1999. 
[l 11 The ATM Forum Technical Committee, “ATh4 User- 
Network Interface Specification, version 3. l”, afuni- 
0010.002, http://www. atmforum. com, 1994. 
[ 121 ITU-T, “Broadband Integrated Services Digital 
Network (B-ISDN) - Digital Subscriber Signaling System 
No. 2 (DSS 2) - User-Network Interface (UNI) - Layer 3 
specification for basic call/connection control”, ITU-T 
Recommendation Q.2931, February 1995. 
1131 ATM Forum Technical Committee, “622 and 2488 
Mbit/s Cell-Based Physical Layer”, af-phy-0128.000, 
http://www. atmforum. com, July 1999. 
[14] ATM Forum Technical Committee, “2.4 Gbps 
Physical Layer Specification”, af-phy-0133.000, 
http://www. atmforum. com, October 1999. 
[15] ATM Forum Technical Committee, “155 Mb/s 
Plastic Optical Fiber and Hard Polymer Clad Fiber PMD 
Specification Version 1. l”, af-py-0079.001, 
http://www. atmforum. com, Janwy 1999. 
[16] IEEE Standards, “Information technology-- 
Telecommunications and information exchange between 
systems--Local and metropolitan area networks--Specific 
requirements--Part 3: Carrier sense multiple access with 
collision detection (CSWCD)  access method and 
physical layer specifications”, IEEE Std 802.3, 1998 
Edition, 1998. 
[17] IEEE Standards, “Information technology-- 
Telecommunications and inforniation exchange between 
systems--Local and Metropolitan area networks--Specific 
requirements-Part 2: Logical link c0ntr0l”, IEEE 802.2, 
1998 Edition, 1998. 
[18] S. Deering, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification” IETF Network Working Group RFC 2460, 
December 1998. 
[19] Robert Breyer and Sean Riley, Switched, Fast, And 
Gigabit Ethernet, USA: Macmillan Technical Publishing, 
1999. 
[20] IEEE Standards, “Information technology-- 
Telecommunications and information exchange between 
systems--Local and metropolitan area networks--Common 
Specifications--Media access control (MAC) bridges”, 
IEEE Std 802.ID, 1998 Edition, 1998. 
[21] Derek E. Anderson and Mark W. Beranek, “777 
Optical LAN Technology Review”, IEEE 1998 Electronic 
Components and Technology Conference Proceedings, 
1998. 
[22] Alan F. Benner, Fibre Channel: Gigabit 
Communications and I/O for Computer Networks, New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1996. 
[23] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology - Fibre 
Channel - Link Encapsulation (FC-LE)”, ANSI X3.287- 
1996,1996. 
[24] M. Rajagopal, R Bhagwat and W. Rickard, “IP and 
ARP over Fibre Channel”, IETF Network Working Group 
RFC 2625, June 1999. 
[25] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology - HIGH- 
Encapsulation of Frames of the Fibre Channel Physical 
and Signaling Interface (FC-PH Encapsulation) (HIPPI- 
PERFORMANCE PARALLEL INTERFACE ‘ - 
FC)”, ANSIX3.283-1996,1996 
[26] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology - Fibre 
Channel - Physical and Signaling Interface (FC-PH)”, 
ANSIX3.230-1994, 1994. 
[27] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology - Fibre 
Channel - Physical and Signaling Interface-2 (FC-PH-2)”, 
ANSIX3.297-1997, 1997. 
[28] ANSI Standards, “Fibre Channel Physical and 
Signaling Interface-3 (FC-PH-3)”, ANSI X3.303-1998, 
1998. 
3-1259 
[29] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology -- Fibre 
Channel - Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL)”, ANSI X3.272-1996, 
1996. 
[30] ANSI Standards, “Information Technology -- Fibre 
Channel - Fabric Generic Requirements (FC-FG)”’, ANSI 
X3.289-1996. 1996. 
[3 11 ARINC-Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee, 
‘‘Aeronautical Telecommunications Network (ATN). 
Implementation Provisions, Part 1, Protocols and Services 
- Draft 1 of Project Paper 637”, 00-001/DLK-870, 
http://www. arinc. com/aecc, January 2000. 
Henry C. H. Eyoh received the B.Eng degrees with 
honours in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 
the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, in 1995. 
He was awarded a Graduate Studenship to pursue a PhD 
degree from the Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore since 1996. His Ph.D. dissertation focmsed on 
the ATM switching protocol over an Optical C D M  
environment. Since July 2000 he has been a Research 
Fellow with the University of Strathclyde working on the 
LOADNETproject. He is a student member of the IEEE 
Communications Society. 
Robert Blue graduated with an honours degree in Physics 
and an MSc in Optical Electronics from University of 
Strathclyde (Glasgow). He undertook a Kodak sponsored 
research project in the area of optical jibre sensors and 
was awarded a PhD in Optical Electronics in 1996. As a 
member of staf at the university he conducted research 
into the development of optical sensors and systems for 
applications in ophthamology and on-line condition 
monitoring of high voltage transformers. From 1998 to 
2000 he worked at Photonic Research Systems 
(Manchester) on areas such as lifetime imaging using 
software-controlled CCDs, synthesis and application of 
quantum dots, infrared quenchable pho:cphors, 
upconversion rare-earth-doped materials, and’ high 
sensitivity jluorescence detection systems for industrial 
and biomedical applications. He is currently employed by 
the Broadband Networks Group at Strathclyde University 
investigating the development of optical networks for 
avionics applications. He is the principal author of 15 
joumal and conference papers, and has two patent 
applications. 
Robert D. Gardner received the 
B.Eng and Ph.D. degrees in 
Electrical and Electronic 
Engineering from the University of 
Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, 
U.K, in 1994 and 2000, 
respectively. His Ph.D. dissertation 
focussed on network management 
and event handling techniques in 
high-speed networks. Since 
January 1998 he has been a Research Fellow in the 
University working on the EPSRC-funded Photonic 
Netwcv-ks in Avionics (PHONA v) project. During this 
time he has also acted as a consultant to Ilotron Ltd. in 
Colchester, who are active in thejield of optfcal network 
and cptical packet switch design and fabrication. His 
research interests include eventlalarm correlation, 
network management, optical local area networks, high- 
speed network modelling and simulation, neural networks 
and communications protocols. He is a member of the 
IEEE Communications Society and Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems Society. 
I. Andonovic, Professor of Broadband Networks, joined 
the Electronic and Electrical Engineering Department at 
the University of Strathclyde in 1985 following a three 
year period as research scientist (at Barr & Stroud) 
responsible for the design, manufacture and test of guided 
wave devices for a variety of applications. His main 
intere.rts centre on the development of optical networks, 
specijkally in guided wave architectures for 
impleinenting optical signal proctwing and switching 
functions for future networks. He was holder of a two 
year Royal Society Industrial Fellowship in collaboration 
with BT Labs, during which time he was tasked with 
inveshigating novel approaches to networking. He has 
edited two books and authoredco-authored jive chapters 
in bocks and over I80 joumal and conference papers. He 
has been chairman on the IEE prcfessional group E13, 
held LI BT Short Term Fellowship. Pro$ Andonovic is a 
Fellovv of the IEE, holds Senior Member status within the 
IEEE and is member of the EPSRC College2OOO. 
3-1260 
