Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Mission 
for Monitoring Earth 
Jeffrey Hilland, Steven Bard, Richard Key, Yunjin Kim, Parag Vaze, and Bryan Huneycutt 
California Institute of Technology 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
Pasadena, CA 
jeff.hilland(~ipl.nasa.~ov 
818 354-4787 
Abstract-Advances in spaceborne Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (SAR) remote sensing technology make it possible 
to acquire global-scale data sets that provide unique 
information about the Earth's continually changing 
surface characteristics. Short duration missions such as 
the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C) and the Shuttle 
Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) have established the 
vast potential of SAR for expanding our knowledge of 
Earth [ 1-31. A long-duration (2 5 year) free-flying SAR 
mission is essential to routinely provide valuable 
information about the dynamic characteristics of our 
planet. The SAR mission concept, consists of a dual 
frequency, polarimetric, interferometric system that has 
broad scientific, environmental preservation, operational, 
and commercial utility. A feature that greatly reduces the 
potential for tasking conflicts is the instrument's ability to 
operate both frequencies independently and 
simultaneously. 
The implementation approach includes an innovative 
government-industry collaboration that has the potential 
to lead to the creation of new information industries, in a 
manner similar to the Internet, Global Positioning 
Satellite (GPS) and commercial space 
telecommunications. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
4. REFERENCES 
2. h4ISSION DESCRIPTION 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
1.  INTRODUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS 
This paper presents a technical summary of a dual-band 
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) system design performed 
by JPL. This system concept was developed after the 
LightSAR Project was unable to obtain an industry 
partner with acceptable risk to the government [ 101. It is 
one of the mission concepts studied as part of NASA's 
effort to develop an Earth-imaging radar satellite system 
that will return valuable science data, demonstrate 
advanced technologies, and revolutionize commercial 
radar imaging from space". 
Because a dual-band SAR offers important benefits both 
to the science and civil operations community and to U.S. 
industry, an innovative government-industry teaming 
approach is being explored in which NASA puts the 
system in orbit and private industry operates a 
commercial ground segment and produces data products 
for scientists in return for commercial rights to the data, 
(Fig. 1). This approach leverages experience from 
previous commercial space-based imaging radar efforts 
and government studies [ 8- lo]. 
The design presented here is a non-optimized engineering 
solution, which has been examined in sufficient depth to 
establish confidence that it can be produced and will meet 
a broad set of requirements. The design achieves reduced 
cost by using advanced radar technology components 
with a proven commercial spacecraft bus, by using 
commercial launch and operations services, and by 
following a fast-paced schedule. Conclusions from the 
design exercise are: (1) the dual-band system is 
technically feasible, and (2) with a projected cost of 
<$400M costs can be reduced by 25 percent, compared to 
previous fiee-flying, space-based imaging radar missions 
(including launch services). 
2-719 
Commercial 
G R O U N D  S E G M E N T  
J \ 
Uplink Station 
Custom er Services 
Center 
(data planning & mgmt.) ”I Network 
SAR Data C U S T O M E R S  
Processing 
SAR Data 
Catalog and (Flight segment com m andlcontroi, orbit 
de le rm in ation) 
Because of its planned long-tenn (5yr) operation, the 
system would collect large amounts of valuable 
information about our changing planet. It would provide 
an important contribution to NASA’s Earth Science 
Enterprise @SE) and to civilian environmental 
operational monitoring programs [ 91. The goal of the 
NASA ESE is to develop a scientific understanding of the 
Earth system and its response to natural and human- 
induced changes to enable improved prediction of 
climate, weather, and natural hazards for present and 
future generations. A new SAR mission is essential to 
help address the fundamental ESE question of “how is the 
Earth changing and what are the consequences for life on 
Earth?” 
One key science application of this new SAR mission is 
measuring motion of the Earth’s surface to better 
understand earthquakes and volcanoes and to support 
emergency management efforts. Other applications 
include studying the movements and changing size of 
glaciers and ice floes to better understand long-term 
climate variability; developing highly detailed and 
accurate elevation maps; monitoring floods and 
predicting where they are likely to occur; assessing 
terrain for the likelihood of discovering oil or other 
natural resources; early recognition and monitoring of oil 
spills; assessing the health of crops and forests; planning 
urban development and understanding its likely effects; 
studying land cover and land-use change. Because of 
advances in radar and spacecraft technology, the 
spacecraft under study would provide greater capability 
than comparable systems that are now in orbit, or are 
being planned. 
The satellite would provide nearly complete coverage of 
the Earth’s surface every 8-10 days. This repeating 
coverage gives the system the unique capability of 
continuously monitoring changes in the Earth’s 
topography as small as a few millimeters. Capabilities 
under study would enable the radar to measure features as 
small as a few meters, offering significant potential for 
commercial use in topographic mapping, land 
management, planning, and development. 
2. MSSION DESCRIPTION 
The mission will generate data for commercial, Earth 
science, and civilian applications. It is capable of 
detailed mapping of Earth surface change using its 
repeat-pass interferometry technique for continuous 
monitoring of Earth’s dynamic topography to a height 
accuracy of a few millimeters. Moreover, the system will 
have the ability to map large areas of the Earth’s surface, 
especially oceans, using a ScanSAR technique. ScanSAR 
utilizes multiple radar beams to perform elevation 
steering and achieve a much wider swath (cross-track) 
than with a single beam [ 111. The mission can also 
provide both high-resolution measurements for 
commercial interests and large-scale geophysical 
measurements. Because of federal regulations restricting 
the bandwidth available at L-band, ground resolution 
greater than 3 m is not realizable. 
2-720  
The flight segment consists of a commercial spacecraft 
bus carrying an L- and X- band SAR instrument. The 
radar operating modes include high resolution (3 to 5 m 
ground resolution with swath width of 20 km for both L- 
and X-band), dual and quad-polarization L-band modes 
with 25 m resolution and 50 km swath, ScanSAR (500 
km) and ultra- wide swath (900 km) low-resolution 
ScanSAR for mapping large areas. Other system features 
include Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers to 
help provide precision orbit control to enable repeat pass 
interferometry for millimeter-level surface deformation 
measurement. The satellite will operate at an 800 km 
sun-synchronous, polar orbit, after being launched by a 
Delta-11 or equivalent vehicle. The nominal exact orbit 
repeat is 8 to 10 days, and the orbit will be maintained 
within a 250 m diameter cylinder to enable the required 
surface deformation measurement accuracy [ 4,5,6]. 
Field of View 
(range of incidence 
angles in degrees) 
Number of Looks 
Polarizations 
Noise Equivalent 
Sigma 0 (dB) 
2.1. Radar design 
a) 15to43 
c) lot060 
28 to 44 20 to 40 25 to 52 20 to 48 20 to 52 20 to 52 8 to 57 b)10 to 60 20 to 52 20 to 52 
4 4 4 3 8 40 b) 1 4 8 a) 1 
b) 4 
a) 1 
c) 4 
H H o r W  HH'HV' HH&HV'or H H o r W  H H o r W  HH&HVvor H H o r W  W W W W, VH W & VH W&W 
a) -20 to -24 
-31 to -40 -34 to -37 -30 to -37 -31 -25 to -31 a) -32 to -41 -34 to 42 b) -23 to -30 a) -20 to -30 a) -27 to -34 
b) -31 to -44 c) -23 to -30 b) -24 to -20 b) -27 to -34 
A parameterization of the Gband and X-band radar 
designs considered is presented in Table 1. Note that the 
swaths 100 km wide will provide 25-m horizontal 
resolution, accurate to within a few millimeters vertically. 
As shown in Table 1, even higher resolution, 1-3 meters, 
is being considered in order to provide opportunities for 
additional commercial applications, such as high- 
resolution surface mapping and co-registration with 
electro-optical sensor data. The wide-swath ScanSAR 
mode will provide large-area mapping over the 500-km- 
wide area. 
Characteristics of design concept under study include 
state-of-the-art technologies with significant reduction in 
mass and volume, as well as instrument and mission life- 
cycle costs. These technologies, such as monolithic 
microwave integrated circuits (MMIC), when applied to 
an L-band, multipolarization, high-performance SAR 
with multiple resolutions and swath imaging capabilities 
will increase the radar capability without increasing the 
mass. To meet the imaging agility needs, electronic beam 
steering has been included in order to maximize the 
targetable swath. In addition, as noted previously, X 
band is being considered for very high-resolution 
Table 1 . L/X SAR System Design. 
table shows not only the frequency diversity but the commercial applications, although, C band also has 
polarization and operational mode diversity as well. sufficient bandwidth allocated to meet some high- 
The longer (L-band) wavelength radar and use of 
multiple polarization modes will allow better distinction 
of textures, vegetation structures and water content, soil 
moisture, ice thickness, and other parameters. Imaging 
resolution imaging needs. 
To make L/X S A R  commercially viable and to obtain 
time series of data over multiple seasons, designs for 
missions with lifetimes of 5 years are being examined. 
2-721 
The design life is important in terms of the reliability of 
the electronics, and sizing of propellant required to 
maintain the orbit over the mission life. In addition to 
greater costs for higher quality electronic parts and 
increased redundancy, additional electronics and 
propellant translate into additional mass. This may result 
in the need for a more costly launch vehicle with greater 
lift capability. Therefore, a balance must be achieved 
between the overall system performance and the scope of 
requirements. 
2.2. Orbit Considerations 
An 8 tol0-day repeating orbit maintained within a 2.50-m- 
diameter tube (determined by GPS), would provide 
visibility of most locations on Earth about once each day. 
The repeat period was defined to meet imaging 
requirements for glacier research. Flying within a 250-m 
tube is a challenging requirement that must be met in 
order to achieve global surface deformation 
measurements, with accuracies of a few millimeters, 
using repeat pass interferometry. For design purposes a 
sun-synchronous orbit at an altitude of 800 km, with an 
inclination of 97.8", was evaluated. Orbits at lower 
inclinations were also examined. Moreover, the orbit 
must be known with an accuracy of 4 0  cm radially and 
cross-track and 1 m along-track. Commercial 
requirements for the orbit control and precise orbit 
determination are less stringent. 
2.3 Spacecraft Bus 
Several aerospace companies offer spacecraft bus designs 
that could meet the L/X mission design. Bus adaptations 
required to accommodate the radar instrument include: 
attachment structures for the radar antenna, deployment 
structure, and latch mechanism; installation of radar 
electronics in the bus; provision for unique memory and 
data handling capacity; tailored downlink transmitter( s)/ 
antenna(s); tailored solar array and battery provisions; 
tailored attitude control provisions; and tailored GPS 
configuration. Figure 2 illustrates a generic bus 
mechanical configuration used for design and cost 
evaluation purposes to convey one of many possible 
designs. 
Table 2 summarizes the performance needed for a bus to 
support a radar mission. The current design requires that 
the bus be capable of rolling 70" (k3.5" ftom nadir) to 
perform high-latitude mapping near the poles (up to 80" 
N and 86" S). This capability also is required in order to 
provide maximum coverage and responsiveness to 
commercialimagingcustomers 
A ttitu d 
Figure 2. Spacecraft mechanical configuration. 
2-722 
Table 2. Bus Performance. 
~~ 
Peature 
Autonomy 
Mass 
Power 
Attitude Control 
Propulsion 
Data Storage 
CommandRelemetry 
Radar Data Link 
Subsystems 
Capability 
Operate w/o commands 24 hr (typical), 7-day max 
<710 kg (flight weight, without radar instrument, including 30% contingency 
50 Amp-Hr batteries; l-axis gimbaled solar array 
Pointing Accuracy: elevation O S ’ ,  azimuth 0.1’; knowledge: 0.01’ 
Perform 70 degree roll in 10 min. (for right and left looking) 
Maintain 250-m-diam. tube about the velocity vector 
256-Gbit solid-state recorder, radar data recording for -1 orbit (Spotlight mode), > 3 orbits 
(ScanSAR mode) 
S-band receiver/transmitter, with command encryption 
X-band transmitter, up to 620 Mbps 
Assumed design includes hot gas thrusters, reaction wheels, inertial reference unit(s), star 
tracker(s), sun sensors, magnetometer, and onboard (GPS) 
2.4. Ground Segment 
Commercial viability of the L/X SAR depends on the 
radar sensitivity and the ability to return data quickly. 
Commercial applications are dependent on fast 
turnaround of data products to meet commercial needs for 
oil spill response, storms, floods and other hazards. The 
ground segment architecture and operations concept have 
been tailored to provide unprecedented capability for 
responding rapidly to oil spills and other emergency 
management situations, and is based on a balance 
between leveraging existing capabilities and adding new 
facilities. 
lightweight materials to develop a high-performance 
radar system that will meet both NASA’s science goals 
and industry’s commercialization goals. A new set of 
working relationships and technologies will be applied, 
and existing spacecraft, launch vehicles and an operations 
infrastructure will be used to reduce costs and maintain a 
schedule that will bring this innovative concept to orbit 
years sooner than was previously achievable. 
4. REFERENCES 
1. J. E. Hilland, F.V. Stuhr, A. Freeman, D. Imel, Y. 
She& R. L. Jordan, and E. R Caro, Future NASA 
Spaceborne SAR Missions, IEEE Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, vo1.13, no. 11, Nov. 1998. 
To enhance the return of data products to commercial 
users an Environmental Data Center is envisioned as part 
of the architecture. This center will provide value-added 
processing to produce unique products needed for 
commercial applications. The space segment and ground 2. R. Jordan, B. Huneycutt, and M. Werner, “The SIR- 
segment architecture provides an average time between CK-SAR synthetic-aperture radar system,” IEEE 
observation opportunities of less than12 hours in most Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Vol. 
areas of interest, with over 95% probability of coverage 33, No. 4, July 1995. 
in under 24 hours. 3. F. Stuhr, R. Jordan, and M. Werner, “SIR-C/X-SAR a 
multifaceted radar,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems, Vol. 10, pp. 15-24, October 1995. 
The L/X SAR would be the first NASA 4. E. Rodriguez and J. Martin, “Theory and design of 
interferometric SARs,” IEEE Proceedings-F, Vol. 139, commerciallscience SAR mission. An innovative NASA- 
industry partnership has been proposed that is No. 2, April 1992. 
commercially viable, while reducing the government’s 
overall cost and increasing the capability. This 
partnership will utilize advanced MMIC devices and 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
2-723  
5. L. C. Graham, “Synthetic interferometer radar for 
topographic mapping,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 62, pp. 763-768, 
1974. 
6. H. A. Zebker and R. M. Goldstein, “Topographic 
mapping from interferometric synthetic-aperture radar 
observations,” J. Geophys. Res., 9 1, pp. 4993-4999, 
1986. 
7. R. M. Goldstein, H. A. Zebker, and C. L. Werner, 
“Satellite radar interferometry: two-dimensional phase 
unwrapping,” Radio Science, 23, (4), pp. 713-720, 1988. 
8. J. Hornsby, R. A. O’Neil and M. St.-Pierre, 
“Commercialization, user development, and data access 
in the Radarsat program,” Canadian J of Remote 
Sensing, Vol. 19, pp. 384-387, 1993. 
9. Interagency Ad Hoc Working Group On SAR,  
“Operational use of civil space-based synthetic aperture 
radar (SAR),” JPL Publication 96-16, p. 9-1, 1996.10. 
10. S. Bard, editor, “Synthetic Aperture Radar Mission 
Study Report,” JPL Publication D-18558, February 
200011. 
11. K. Tomiyasu, “Conceptual performance of a satellite 
borne, wide swath synthetic aperture radar,” IEEE Trans. 
Geosci. Remote Sensing, vol. GRS-19, no. 2, pp. 108- 
116,1981. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research described in this paper was carried out by 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. The authors 
would like to thank members of the LightSAR project 
and the SAR Mission Studies project for their 
contributions. 
2-724 
