YCH-60 Airborne Mine Counter-measures Proof of 
Concept Demonstration1 
LT Wade McConvey, USN 
LT Clay Michaels, USN 
Naval Rotary Wing Aircraft Test Squadron 
22755 Saufley RD, Hangar 11 1 
Patuxent River, MD 20670-1619 
301-342-5823 Commercial 
mcconveywa@navair .navy .mil 
michaelscw@navair.navy.mil 
342-5823 DSN 
Abstract-The investigation of transitioning the Airborne 
Mine Countermeasures (AMCM) mission to the H-60 
helicopter platform required the demonstration of the 
capability to tow water-borne weapon systems from a YCH- 
60 prototype aircraft. Naval Rotary Wing Aircraft Test 
Squadron (NRWATS) was tasked to conduct a multi-phased 
test during the concept demonstration. The purpose of the 
Phase I and 11 testing was to investigate the YCH-60 aircraft 
capability to conduct the AMCM tow mission under 
dynamic conditions. Specifically, the test was designed to 
evaluate aircraft performance and handling qualities, to 
evaluate adequacy of structural towing provisions, to 
evaluate design tow speeds and tensions, and to collect 
usage spectrum data. Flight tests were conducted during a 
joint Navy and Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation flight test 
from 17 November 1999 to 17 January 2000 at the Sikorsky 
Aircraft facility, Stratford, CT and at Naval Air Station 
PAS)  Patuxent River, MD. This paper addresses the 
results and evaluations of Phases I and II. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. 
3. SCOPE OF TESTS 
4. METHOD OF TESTS 
5. RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
DESCRIPTION OF TEST AIRCRAFT /EQUIPMENT 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Background 
The H-60 Airborne Mine Countermeasures (AMCM) effort 
was initiated by a Joint Assessment letter from the Director, 
Expeditionary Warfare Division (N85), Deputy Chief of 
Naval Operations, which directed a study of transitioning 
MH-53 AMCM capabilities to the H-60 helicopter. The 
study addressed the feasibility of outfitting the H-60 
helicopter with five weapon and sensor systems, including 
the improved towed sonar system (AQS-2O/X), the Airborne 
Mine Neutralization System ( A M N S ) ,  the Airborne Laser 
Mine Detection System (ALMDS), the Organic Airborne 
and Surface Influence Sweep (OASIS), and the Rapid 
Airborne Mine Clearance System (RAMICS). Because the 
AQS-20X and OASIS were designed as towed sensors, the 
response to the N85 directive was to establish a proof-of- 
concept demonstration of the H-60 as a tow platform. Due to 
the Naval helicopter force restructuring plan which called 
for a neck-down in current type/model aircraft to the H-60 
airhime, the focus of the N85 directive was on the usage of 
the CH-60s platform in the AMCM role. Therefore, 
Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation was contracted to team with 
Naval Air Systems Command and Naval Sea Systems 
Command to provide a multi-phased proof-of-concept tow 
test and evaluation using the YCHdO prototype aircraft as 
the test platform. Phase I included a ground tethered static 
tow demonstration. Phase 11 consisted of One Engine 
Inoperative (OEI) tests and a limited dynamic tow 
demonstration using the AN/SPU-l/W Magnetic Orange 
Pipe (MOP) system. Follow-on proof-ofkoncept testing 
will be conducted during Phase III. Phase III will include 
captive carriage, stream, tow, and recover operations of an 
AQS-20X representative towed sonar shape from a CH-60s. 
The CH-60 AMCM demonstration was conducted by 
Sikorsky Aircraft and the Navy. The Naval Rotary Wing 
Aircraft Test Squadron was tasked to participate with 
Sikorsky Aircraft Company in a joint test effort to 
investigate the potential for the YCH-60 aircraft to perform 
the AMCM mission. 
Purpose 
The purpose of this test was to investigate the capability of 
the YCH-60 aircraft to conduct the AMCM tow mission by 
establishing its ability to tow under dynamic conditions, to 
evaluate aircraft performance and handling qualities, to 
evaluate adequacy of structural towing provisions, to 
evaluate design tow speeds and tensions, and to collect 
usage spectrum data. 
~ ~ _ _ _ _ _  
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
5-2639 
DESCRIPTION OF TEST AIRCRAFT/EQUIPMENT 
Test Aircraft 
The YCH-60 aircraft was a twin turbine-engine powered, 
four-bladed helicopter manufactured by the Sikorsky 
Aircraft Corporation division of United Technologies. The 
YCH-60 was a prototype design which melded ari UH-60 
Blackhawk airframe with a SH-60 Seahawk power and drive 
train, flight control system, and dynamic components. The 
aircraft, depicted in figure 1, had an overall length of 64 feet 
10 inches and a maximum test operating weight o f  22,000 
lbs. AMCM modifications to the hybrid aircraft included 
airframe strengthening for a tow point addition and mission 
avionics to support the tow mechanisms. The test aircraft, 
YCH-60 BuNo 966673, was representative of the 
production AMCM CH-60s for the purposes of this test. 
Figure 1 
YCH-60 BUN0 966673 During Static Tow 
MCMAircrajl Modijkations 
The AMCM tow modification consisted of an airframe tow 
fitting, a rigid tow arm, a flexible link, and a tow hook as 
depicted in figure 2. The tow point location was determined 
through design optimization of aircraft pitch attitude and 
main-rotor flapping parameters during tow operations. The 
tow fitting was located in the transition area aft of the main 
cabin, in the lower airf?ame between stations 464 and 485. 
The tow fitting consisted of structural load bearing members 
integrated into the aircraft fuselage. The tow boom attached 
to the tow fitting and was joined to a braided steel flexible 
cable. The tow hook was fitted to the 5exible link and was 
designed to enclose two Cartridge Actuated Devices (CAD) 
and guillotine cutter assemblies for emergency cable shear. 
In addition, an avionics access door was fitted to the lower 
port side of the transition section. Manually adjustable, aft 
facing mirrors were installed forward of the lower portion of 
the pilot and copilot doors. 
I Tow hook 
Flexible link 
Figure 2 
YCH-60 AMCM Tow Configuration 
Test Aircraft Instrumentation 
The test aircraft was modified to include a 5ying qualities, 
performance, and structural data acquisition and recording 
system. An airspeed boom was attached to provide 
instrumeinted airspeed, angle of attack, and sideslip angle. 
Data was recorded in high-speed PCM format onto a HEM 
digital tape recorder. The system was designed to 
accommodate an airborne monitor mounted in.the cabin to 
provide xeal time display of selected parameters. The system 
was also capable of data telemetry for real-time monitoring 
at a remote site. 
Test Equipment 
The AN/SPU-lW Magnetic Orange Pipe (MOP), shown in 
figure 3, was a surface-running towed device used in anti- 
magnetic: mine warfare. The MOP was fabricated from 30 ft 
of ten-inch diameter schedule 20 steel pipe (10.75 in. 
outside diameter). Each MOP weighed 1,000 lbs. and was 
buoyant in water. MOPS were connected in series using 
braided nylon line. 
5-2640 
Figure 3 
ANISPU-1 Magnetic Orange Pipes 
AIRCRAFT CABLE SKEW STABILATOR 
GWICG TENSION ANGLE' MODE 
(1bs.Iin.) (lbs.) 
13,690 I 3,181 0" Auto 
~~~~ 
3. SCOPE OF TESTS 
Test and Test Conditions 
The evaluation of the YCH-60 tow capability was conducted 
jointly by the Naval Air Systems Command, Naval Sea 
Systems Command, and Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation. The 
flight test was conducted during daylight visual 
meteorological conditions (VMC) and consisted of 22 
flights totaling 21.5 flight hours. Qualitative and quantitative 
flight tests were conducted in assessing the aircraft 
structures, performance, and flying qualities during tow 
operations. Aircrew human factors were assessed 
throughout the test. With the exception of six flights, all test 
flights were conducted with a mixed cockpit crew of a 
Sikorsky test pilot and a Naval Rotary Wing Aircraft Test 
Squadron test pilot. Aircraft structures, performance, and 
flying qualities were tested against the requirements of the 
AQS-20X sensor tow envelope. Specific performance goals 
were to tow up to 6,000-lbs. tension and at speeds up to 24 
KGS. Human factors were tested against all applicable 
specifications listed in reference [ 11 through [5]. 
360.3 
17,588 I 
351.6 
Phase I Tests and Test Conditions 
The initial testing, Phase I, was conducted at the Sikorsky 
Heliport in Stratford, CT and consisted of ground-tethered 
static tow work and forward-flight tow-boom extended 
envelope development. The ground tether point was fixed to 
a 20,000-lb. block positioned centrally on the heliport and 
the tether cable was 450 ft. long. Ground-tethered testing 
U& conducted fkom 100 ft. AGL and consisted of critical 
azimuth, tension sweeps, skew angle sweeps, fixed stabilator 
angle variation, cable tension impulse tests, and four cable 
jettison tests. Table 1 presents the cable jettison conditions. 
2,534 20" right Auto 
17,445 I 
351.1 
359.2 
13,9401 I 2,546 I O0 I Fixed- 0" 
6,289 0" Auto 
15,700 I 
CUT (lbs.) 
3,000 3,100 AUTO 
Phase I .  Tests and Test Conditions 
Phase II was conducted at NAS Patuxent River, MD and 
consisted of One Engine Inoperative (OEI) height-velocity 
(H-V) investigation and dynamic tow using from 1 to 5 
ANISPU-1 MOPS. The OEI H-V tests were conducted both 
un-tethered and ground-tethered. Un-tethered OEI H-V tests 
were conducted first as a build-up to the more critical 
tethered conditions. The tethered conditions were used to 
simulate actual towing conditions. Table 2 details the 
tethered OEI test configurations. Five dynamic tow flights 
were flown, two in the test buildup configuration and three 
at the heavier mission aircraft gross weight. Dynamic tow 
operations were conducted in Chesapeake Bay from 95-100 
ft. AGL and in wind conditions ranging from 8 to 22 knots, 
with gusts to 25 knots. Dynamic tow testing consisted of 
critical azimuth, tension sweeps, skew angle sweeps, fixed 
stabilator angle variation, AMCM turns from various wind 
azimuths, and a maximum tow tension demonstration. A 
limited Automatic Flight Control System (AFCS) evaluation 
of the aircraft Doppler hover coupler feature was conducted 
under tow conditions. 
Table 2 
355.9 
18,958 I 
356.6 
18,668 I 
6,000 6,807 Fixed- 0" 
6,000 5,765 AUTO 
363.8 I 
AUTO 18,7501 1 3,000 1 2,223 1 
Notes: (1) All cuts were done at zero skew angle, into the 
prevailing wind (2) Maximum headwind for tethered OEI 
cable cuts was 5 KTAS 
Test Envelope 
Table 1 
Static Tow Cable Jettison Conditions 
5-2641 
The test aircraft was operated within the limits of the H- 
60Fm NATOPS Flight Manual, reference [6], imd the 
NAVAIRSYSCOM flight clearance. Ground tethered static 
tow tests were flown at tensions from zero to 6,200 Ibs. and 
skew angles from 20" right to 20" left. Dynamic tow tests 
were flown at ground speeds from hover to 4:! KGS, 
tensions to 8,915 lbs. 
CONFIG1 
Test Loadings and Contgurations 
Aircraft test loadings and configurations are presented in 
Table 3. Aircraft ballasting was accomplished by 
configuring the aircraft with the External Stores Support 
System (ESSS) and two 230 gal auxiliary fuel tanks each 
ballasted with 1,300 pounds of a water / alcohol mixture. 
Extemal ballasting was required for jettison capability in the 
event of an aircraft emergency. Intemal ballasting consisted 
of 250 pounds secured to troop seats located at lbelage 
station 282. 
TESTS 
Limitations to Scope 
The testing of the AMCM capability of the CH-60 was 
limited to tethered hover and towing of a surface towed 
AN/SPU-1 MOP. No submerged AQS shapes were 
deployed, towed, or retrieved. In addition, because the 
cockpit was not configured with production representative 
avionics, tactical navigation handling qualities or precision 
in the AMCM role were not evaluated. Aircraft tow and 
OEI performance was evaluated against test day conditions 
without engineering referral to higher density altitude 
conditions. 
CONDITION 
Build-up Test 
Weight 
15K Clean 
Build-up Test 
Weight 
Mission 
weight 
Table 3 
- inal Aircraft Test Loadings 
TAKEOFF 
GW/CG 
(lbs.)/(ins.) - 
15,2001365. 
0 long. 
Neutral lat. 
15,7001365. 
0 long. 
Neutral lat. 
19,5001357. 
0 long. 
1.7 left lat. 
NOTES:( 1) Aircraft configurc 
gunners windows open. 
4. METHOD OF TESTS 
General 
Basic 1 ziLdpm 
aircraft static tow 
ESSS I 
no stores i 1::; 1 OEIH-V 
2x230 Dynamic 
gal aux. L R  tow 
outboard sta. 
1bs.ltank - 
with the cabin doors closed, 
The YCI3-60 tow testing was conducted in a build-up 
fashion to establish a dynamic tow envelope based on the 
requirements of the AQS-20X towed sonar. Specific 
performance goals were to tow up to 6,000-lbs. tension and 
at speeds up to 24 KGS. To build-up to attain these 
performance goals, static testing preceded dynamic testing 
and un-tethered OEI H-V tests were conducted prior to 
tethered test events. All testing at the build-up aircraft test 
weights, configurations 15K clean and 15K dirty in Table 3, 
were conducted prior to comparative testing at the aircraft 
mission gross weight, configuration 19K. All test events 
used on-board data recording, capturing a 10-second 
mini", data collection for steady test conditions and the 
full duration of selected transient conditions between steady 
data points. Real-time data telemetry for the defined critical 
parameters was also implemented throughout the test with 
Navy and Sikorsky engineering staff monitoring abort 
criteria. Human factors data was collected from pilots during 
a post flight-test interview using a Human Engineering 
Performance Scale. Assessments were correlated to various 
flight parameters in each of the 10 rating areas. 
Ground and Preflight ChecklistdTests 
A proof load test of the aircraft and the tow point was 
conducte'd prior to flight test. In addition, a dynamic cable- 
cut test was conducted in a test fixture to assess tow boom 
and cable response to Cartridge Actuated Device (CAD) 
actuation. The proof load and cable cut results were 
published in a Sikorsky Engineering Report. A full 
Electromagnetic Compatibility Safety of Flight Test (EMC 
SOFT) was successfully conducted during the first ground 
turn. 
Static Tow 
The initial ground-tethered static-tow tests were conducted 
heading into the true wind while tension was increased 
incrementally from approximately 1,000 lbs. to 6,000 lbs. in 
approximately 1,000 lb. increments. Critical azimuth tests 
were conducted from a 2,000-lb. target tension to 6,000 lbs. 
in 2,000 lb. increments. Azimuths were sampled in 15" 
increments, starting oriented into the prevailing wind to 
180° lefit and right. All azimuths were sampled prior to 
increases, in tension. Static critical azimuth was also 
conducted in 90" increments to evaluate transients during a 
steady t'ension turn. All static tow turns were flown 
targeting constant tension, centered skew. Skew angle 
variations were investigated into the wind at 2,000, 4,000, 
and 6,0010-lbs. tension from centered skew to 20" left and 
right in 5" increments. Stabilator angle variations were 
investiga.ted at constant tensions and wind azimuths. 
Stabilatar variation effectiveness was compared by flying all 
test points with the stabilator in the AUTO mode and then 
by manudly fixing the stabilator angle at angles fiom full 
trailing edge down to full trailing edge up (in 10" 
increments) at the same tension/skew/wind conditions. 
Towed body surge effects were simulated from an initial 
5-2642 
tension of 4,000 lbs. using up to 1 inch cyclic and collective 
pulses building up in amplitude and rate. Static tow cable 
cuts were conducted with the aircraft aligned into the wind. 
Table 1 is the matrix of static cable cut parameters. 
One Engine Inoperative Height- VeIocity Investigation 
One Engine Inoperative (OEI) Height Velocity (HV) build- 
up consisted of run-on landings, power recovery 
autorotations, and un-tethered simulated single engine 
failures. Un-tethered OEI was conducted by simulating 
engine failures in forward flight at conditions emulating 
those found during worst case static tow testing. Airspeed 
for initiation of the un-tethered OEI events was reduced 
from 30 KTAS to hover in two 10 KT and then two 5 KT 
increments at a test altitude of 500 ft  AGL. From the hover 
condition at 5004  AGL, the test condition was lowered in 
altitude to 300 fi AGL in 100-ft increments. Each un- 
tethered OEI event was initiated by first setting the number 
one engine torque to a 102% target by retarding the number 
two engine Power Control Lever (PCL) from the FLY 
detent, or normal flight position, until the target torque was 
set on the number one engine. The engine torque of 102% 
was determined fi-om the dual engine power required during 
static tow at 6,000 lb. tension in the 19K confguration. 
When the engine and flight condition was set, flight controls 
were fixed open loop. Following a test event countdown, the 
number two engine was then retarded its remaining travel 
into the IDLE throttle stop. To characterize rotor system 
response initially, the PCL failure rate was increased, 
starting with a 3 second PCL reduction and building down to 
an instantaneous reduction. All subsequent test points used 
this instantaneous PCL reduction. Following the simulated 
engine failure, a 1.3-second delay, simulating AMCM pilot 
recognition and reaction time, was induced prior to pilot-in- 
the-loop response. Following the 1.3 second delay, cable 
shear and tow coupler departure was simulated by 
depressing the cyclic emergency shear and cyclic coupler 
depart pushbuttons, and the fly away was performed. The 
single engine fly-away was flown minimizing altitude loss 
less than 100 Et., maintaining NR 2 90% and establishing a 
positive rate of climb without exceeding single engine 
torque and temperature limits. Criteria for aborting the data 
point included NR less than 85% or altitude loss exceeding 
100 ft. The event was complete upon attaining a positive 
rate of climb under single engine conditions. 
Tethered simulated OEI tests were conducted in a manner 
similar to that used during the un-tethered build-up. Events 
were flown in the order presented in Table 2 for build-up. 
With the aircraft stable at the target tension, the number two 
engine was retarded to the IDLE throttle stop and the fly- 
away was executed using the procedure described above, 
with the cyclic emergency release actuation commanding the 
tow cable shear circuit. In addition, the fly-aways were 
flown using the repeatable technique determined during the 
un-tethered build-up. Following event completion, the tow 
boom was recovered from a hover by setting the tow hook 
on the ground and sliding laterally and descending to 
complete setting the tow hook and flexible link on the 
ground. The tow hook shear circuit and cable cutters were 
then inspected and de-armed prior to the next event. 
Dynamic Tow 
Dynamic tow of the ANBPU-1 MOP was conducted by 
targeting desired steady state tensions of 2,000, 4,000 and 
6,000 Ibs. and towing at the resulting ground speed. Data 
was measured in 45" increments around the azimuth. The 
MOPs were towed using two 4-sided turn techniques, one 
oriented to the true wind azimuth and one oriented 45" from 
this, and one eight-sided turn technique. All dynamic tow 
turns were flown targeting constant tension, centered skew 
and were made in both the clockwise and counter-clockwise 
direction. Data was taken during the stable portion of each 
leg and during the turns. Skew angle variations were 
investigated into the wind at 2,000, 4,000, and 6,000-lbs. 
tension from centered skew to 20"' left and right in 5" 
increments. Stabilator angle variations were investigated at 
constant tensions and wind azimuths. Stabilator variation 
effectiveness was compared by flying all test points with the 
stabilator in the AUTO mode and then by manually fUring 
the stabilator at incidence angles fiom full trailing edge 
down to full trailing edge up in 10" increments up at the 
same tension/skew/wind conditions. The number of MOPs 
connected serially was incrementally increased by flight to 
achieve higher tow tensions at lower groundspeeds. At the 
15K dirty confguration, 1 and 2 MOPs were towed. At the 
19K confguration 3,4, and 5 MOPs were towed. M a x i "  
steady state tow tension was demonstrated heading into the 
wind by building up in 1,000-lb. tension increments fi-om 
2,000 lbs. to 8,915 lbs. During each test event, data was 
collected on-board, via telemetry, and pilot workload 
assessments were made on kneeboard data cards. A limited 
Automatic Flight Control System (AFCS) coupler evaluation 
was conducted by capturing a tension where pilot workload 
was moderate (3,000 to 4,000 lbs.), noting the groundspeed 
(27-30 KGS), setting that groundspeed in the AFCS speed 
potentiometer, and engaging the hover coupler. 
Chronology 
The YCH-60 AMCM tow demonstration tasking was 
received on 18 March 1999. Test planning was conducted 
up until flight clearance approval on 17 November 1999. 
Phase I flight test was flown fiom 2 to 17 December 1999. 
Phase II flight test was flown fi-om 21 December 1999 to 19 
January 2000. A message report, was released on 25 
February 2000. Final data reduction was completed 15 
April 2000. 
5.  RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
Aircraji Peflormance 
5-2643 
Tow Power Required- The YCH-60 tow power required 
was evaluated throughout dynamic tow test. Power required 
for three aircraft weight configurations during steady tow 
upwind indicated that power requirements were non-linear 
with cable tension and with aircraft weight. The average 
dual-engine power required for towing at 6,000-lbs. tension 
and an aircraft gross weight of 18,775 lbs. was 97%. A 
maximum continuous torque limit of 120% torque was used 
for all tests. 
Power Margin During AMCM Tow Operations- The YCH- 
60 power margins were evaluated at the aircraft mission 
gross weight at tow speeds up to 40 KGS andl at tow 
tensions up to 6,000 lbs. during straight and tumirig towed 
flight under test day conditions. A minimum 20% dual- 
engine power margin for all tensions and flight conditions 
was demonstrated. Under the conditions tested, the YCH-60 
demonstrated the capability to perform the AMCM tow 
mission with sufficient power margin to perform tow 
operations in more adverse (hotter and higher) ambient 
conditions and at increased operational aircraft gross weight. 
Within the scope of this test, the 20% power margin 
available at tow tensions up to 6,000 lbs. is satisfactory. 
Safe Height for Recoveryfrom Single Engine Failure under 
Tow- The safe height for recovery from single engine 
failure under tow was evaluated during build-up to and 
during four ground-tethered simulated single engine failures 
from 300 feet AGL, one at the 15K dirty configuration and 
three at the 19K configuration. Tow tensions at engine cut 
initiation ranged from 2,223 to 6,807 lbs. with skew 
centered. Due to the limitations of the simulation, the 
engine-out audio warning was not activated. The OEI HV 
testing showed repeatable recoveries from engine failure 
under tow were possible with less than 85-100 feet of 
altitude loss at tensions less than 6,000 lbs. and ;at power 
required conditions less than 110% dual-engine torque. 
Consistent NR decay rates of 1-2% per second were found 
and single engine torque during the recovery phases ranged 
from 135 - 147 %. Recovery from the simulateld engine 
failure followed the set time delay and subsequent actuation 
of the emergency release switch on the cyclic. The recovery 
required an initial pitch over fiom the tow attitude to 16O- 
18" nose-down while maintaining collective position. At 
approximately 50 feet of altitude loss, the aircraft nose was 
pitched smoothly back to the horizon while collective was 
adjusted to maintain NR between 94-96 %. The f i a l  OEI 
event demonstrated a successful recovery with 85 feet 
altitude loss fiom a simulated engine failure under tow at 
19,000 lbs. ACGW / 5,765 lbs. of tension. 
The overall results of the buildup and subsequent tests 
underscored the criticality of a repeatable pilot technique 
and a minimum delay in releasing the tow cable. OEI 
flyaway performance was shown to be highly dependent on 
pilot technique and power required and less dependent on 
tow tension. The AMCM pilot will be able to recover from 
a single engine failure under zero relative wind conditions 
with approximately 100-ft. altitude loss. 
Recommend increasing minimum tow altitude to 125 ft. 
AGL. Additionally, recommend investigating automatic tow 
cable jettison logic and circuitry for single engine failure 
instances to minimize the time delay between engine failure 
and pilot response. Further, recommend investigating 
current engine failure warnings to optimize AMCM tow 
pilot cueing to engine failure. 
Flying Qualities 
Pilot Workload- Pilot workload maintaining centered skew 
and constant tow tension was evaluated throughout dynamic 
tow testing. The testing included tow at constant heading 
upwind, downwind, crosswind, and in constant rate turns 
fkom 2" to 4" per second. Workload was assessed with the 
hover caupler/Doppler velocity hold feature of the AFCS 
OFF. Skew stability in all regimes tested was positive in that 
it tended to return toward center when a left or right skew 
condition was encountered. Maintaining centered skew 
during upwind and downwind tow required small, 
occasional pedal inputs. Maintaining centered skew in turns 
and crosswind required small, continuous pedal inputs and 
resulted in moderate pilot workload. Lateral control at all 
tensions was precise and predictable. However, tension 
control at low tensions (500 to 2,500 lbs.) was difficult. 
Maintaining tension within 300 lbs. was difficult requiring 
small, continuous longitudinal control inputs, resulting in 
considerable pilot workload. At mid-tensions (2,500 to 
5,000 lbs.), the aircraft could be easily trimmed to constant 
tension within 300 lbs. or constant ground speed within 2 
KGS. The subsequent pilot workload was moderate. At high 
tensions (5,000 to 6,000 lbs.), the aircraft needed to be 
constantly re-trimmed. Maintaining tension within 300 lbs. 
at high tt:nsions required m a x i "  tolerable pilot workload, 
particularly during AMCM turns. 
The Ah4CM pilot will be required to devote full attention to 
tension and skew control during tow at low and high 
tensions, and will be unable to navigate the tow track. The 
high pilot workload at low and high tensions is a deficiency, 
which should be corrected prior to operational evaluation. 
Recommiend incorporating a tow coupler in the production 
aircraft to include, but not limited to, velocity, tension, 
skew, and track hold features. 
Altitude Control- Altitude control was evaluated 
throughout dynamic tow testing at 100 ft AGL upwind, 
downwind, crosswind, in turns from 2"-4"/sec, and with the 
radar-altitude hold feature of the AFCS both ON and OFF. 
The radar-altimeter system in the Seahawk series aircraft is 
configured with non-redundant receiver /transmitter 
components. With RADALT hold engaged, altitude control 
throughout the tension envelope required the pilot to simply 
monitor collective position. Conversely, a one minute long 
5-2644 
tow with W A L T  hold disengaged required full pilot 
attention to altitude maintenance and W A L T  hold was 
subsequently re-engaged. 
Within the scope of this test, altitude control with RADALT 
hold engaged is satisfactory for the AMCM tow mission. 
However, following a radar altimeter system failure, the 
AMCM pilot will not be able to navigate the tow-track while 
maintaining safe-altitude separation from the water. The 
poor altitude control following a radar-altimeter system 
failure is a deficiency that should be corrected prior to 
operational evaluation. 
Recommend incorporating increased redundancy in the 
radar-altimeter system. 
Control A4urgin.s- Aircraft control margins were evaluated 
under static and dynamic tow and during tethered dual- 
engine cable cuts simulating un-commanded cable 
separation. Static and dynamic tow conditions included 
upwind, downwind, and crosswind tow as well as &g 
fiom upwind, downwind, and crosswind tow at tow tensions 
up to 6,000 lbs. and tow speeds of 40 KGS'(dynamic tow). 
Dual engine cable cuts were performed at tensions up to 
6,000 lbs. (Table 1). The aircraft demonstrated the 
capability to tow up to 6,000 lbs. of tension and 40 KGS 
with greater than 10% control margin remaining in all axes 
during straight and level tow operations. However, during 
left turns from downwind conditions (winds 15-22 KTS), 
increased left pedal requirements were experienced resulting 
in transient excursions within 6% left tail rotor impressed 
pitch remaining. 
Within the scope of this test, the greater than 10% cyclic and 
tail rotor control remaining during straight and level tow 
operations to 6,000 lbs. tension was satisfactory. However, 
during AMCM turns from downwind conditions, the 
AMCM pilot will have insufficient left tail rotor control 
margin to counter higher wind conditions resulting in 
reduced AMCM track navigation precision. 
Recommend increasing the current tail rotor bias from 2.3" 
to 3" to allow for greater tail rotor impressed pitch margin 
during turns from downwind conditions. Additionally, 
recommend operationally reducing tow tension to less than 
5,000 lbs. when executing AMCM turns. 
Tow Boom Deployed Envelope- Sikorsky Aircraft 
evaluated the forward-flight tow-boom-deployed envelope 
for the test tow boom configuration. Maximum airspeed with 
the tow-boom deployed was established as 90 KTS indicated 
airspeed in straight and level, balanced flight. Maneuvering 
flight was limited to 30" angle-of-bank, left and right. 
Maximum balanced flight climb rate was established as 
3,000 fpm and the maximum rate-of-descent in balanced 
flight was determined to be 1,500 $m. Within the scope of 
this test, the tow-boom-deployed envelope is satisfactory. 
Aircraft Attitudes 
Aircraft Pitch Attitude during Tow Operutiom- The pitch 
attitude of the YCH-60 was evaluated throughout the test in 
tensions up to 6,000 lbs. for straight and maneuvering towed 
flight and with the stabilator in AUTO as well as at fixed 
angles. Average pitch attitudes for AMCM operations 
varied fkom level at 1,500 lbs. tension, to 5" nose down 
(ND) at 3,000 lbs. tension, to 8" ND at 4,000 lbs. tension, to 
10" ND at 5,000 lbs. tension, to 13" ND at 6,000 lbs. 
tension. For pitch attitudes down to 10" ND, the pilot felt 
no discomfort and the attitude was not noticeable. For nose 
attitudes greater than 10" ND there was notable pilot 
discomfort associated with the pilot leaning forward in the 
seat, the pilot weight being transferred to the shoulder 
straps, and the sensation of heavy foot pressure on the 
pedds. Aircraft attitudes encountered during skew-centered 
AMCM turns at higher tensions often exceeded 10" ND with 
bank angles greater than 15". These high-tension tow turn 
attitudes proved disorienting and induced mild vertigo. 
Fixing the stabilator at selected angles of incidence did not 
provide sufficient attitude relief, either quantitatively or 
qualitatively, to noticeably improve crew comfort. 
The notable aircrew discomfort at nose attitudes greater than 
10" ND will increase pilot fatigue and decrease crew 
effectiveness while performing the AMCM mission at high 
tow tensions. The uncomfortable seated position at nose 
attitudes greater than 10" ND should be corrected before 
operational evaluation of the AMCM system. 
5-2645 
Recommend investigation of seat and seat cushion 
modifications to relieve the pitched-forward seated position 
at nose down attitudes greater than 10". Further, 
recommend a maximum tow tension of 5,000 lbs. for 
AMCM turns greater than 30" of heading change. 
Pitch and Roll Attitude Envelope- The steady-state pitch 
and roll attitude envelope of the CH-60 was evaluated 
through out the demonstration under static and dynamic tow. 
The CH-60 attitude envelope is limited by lubrication 
requirements of the tail and intermediate gearboxes. 
Sustained steady-state attitudes outside the envelope limits 
can result in the tail and intermediate gearbox overhe?ting 
due to insufficient lubrication. Throughout the test, gearbox 
temperatures were also monitored for indications of 
lubrication failure. For all conditions tested in steady and 
maneuvering tow, the aircraft pitch and roll remained within 
the limits of the attitude envelope with the exception of 
occasional transient excursions during constant high tension, 
turning tow. The transient attitude envelope excursions were 
not accompanied by any observable increase in gearbox 
temperatures. Within the scope of these tests, the CH-60 
steady state pitch and roll attitude envelope is satisfactory 
for the AMCM tow mission. 
Human Factors:Situational AwarenessKrew Coordination 
Situational awareness and aircrew coordinatioin were 
evaluated throughout the dynamic tow test. Throughout the 
majority of the dynamic tow tests, the pilot at the controls 
was fully occupied performing flying duties and monitoring 
tow-parameters. The complete task saturation by basic 
flight tasks significantly reduced pilot situational awareness 
and crew coordination. When the pilot-at-the-controls 
attempted to communicate on the radios or aid in navigation, 
tow performance (cable skew and tension control) degraded. 
Crew coordination between the tow pilots was further 
degraded as the non-flying pilot was required to direct the 
test, communicate on two radios, maintain the primaxy 
outside lookout scan, and direct tow navigation. As a result, 
crew coordination was rated unacceptable. The AMCM tow 
pilot-at-the-controls will not be able to contribute to the 
interpretation of the tactical picture and aircraft systems 
decision-making during tow operations. 
Experience from other platforms indicates that dividing 
tasks uniquely by crewstation or overloading one of the 
pilots to the point of task saturation will result in rapid 
performance break-down and degraded reaction time to 
tactical andor aircraft emergency situations. The reduced 
crew coordination and situational awareness resulting ftom 
high pilot workload is a deficiency that should be corrected 
prior to operational evaluation. 
Recommend investigating the incorporation of a tow coupler 
to decrease the task loading of the AMCM tow pilot-at-the- 
controls. 
Structures 
Aircraft structural parameters were evaluated throughout the 
demonstration. Critical parameters identified prior to test 
were monitored via telemetry. All other structural data were 
recorded on-board. Tensions to 6,000 lbs., skew from 20" 
left to 20" right, and stabilator angle were varied at all tested 
azimuths and relative winds, statically and dynamically. The 
aircraft was subjected to longitudinal impulse inputs during 
static testing to produce tension surges plus/minus 1,000 lbs. 
to a maximum of 5,300 lbs. An up-wind tow to a m a x i "  
tension of 8,915 lbs. was demonstrated while towing five 
MOPS. Surge data was also collected dynamically during the 
maximum tension demonstration when a MOP connection 
line inadvertently parted between the first and second MOP 
resulting in tension surges fiom zero to 4,500 lbs. and zero 
to 2,500 lbs. caused by the broaching action of the 
remaining MOP. No working endurance or do-not-exceed 
@NE) limits were reached based on the critical structural 
parameters that were monitored via real-time telemetry. 
Final conclusions on the structure of the aircraft will be 
reported upon the completion of the Sikorsky Aircraft data 
analysis. 
Within the scope of this test and based on the analysis of 
telemetered data, the AMCM tow mission will have no 
adverse impact on the replacement times of the CH-60 
dynamic components. 
Recommend a maximum tow tension of 6,000 lbs. for 
straight imd level tow operations at all wind azimuths. 
Recommend investigating automatic tow cable jettison logic 
and circuitry for the instance of a cable snag, which would 
induce greater tension surges than aircraft design limit loads. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Within the scope of this test, the CH-60 demonstrated 
excellent potential for the AMCM mission by successfully 
towing dynamically at continuous tensions up to 6000 lbs. 
and ground speeds of up to 40 knots. 
The capability of the YCH-60 helicopter to conduct the 
AMCM mission with the AQS-20X towed body was 
evaluated throughout the test. The expansive tow envelope 
defined by the aircraft structure of 6,000-lbs. tension at skew 
angles ftom 20" left to 20" right in winds from all azimuths 
will a1lo.w the aircraft to tow the AQS-20X to its deepest 
operational depth and to its maximum operational 
submerged speed. The generous tail rotor and cyclic control 
margins coupled with a 20% power margin will allow tow 
operations throughout the structural envelope at ground- 
speeds to 40 KTS. The stout capability to recover from 
single engine failure at aircraft weights up to 19,000-lbs. and 
tensions up to 6,000-lbs. in zero relative wind conditions 
when operating at a minimum tow altitude of 125 ft. will 
" i z r :  tow operations in the single engine height-velocity 
diagram avoid region. The precise aircraft lateral response 
and positive skew stability will reduce pilot workload during 
manual tow operations. However, the high pilot workload 
maintaining constant tension at high and low tow tensions 
coupled with the uncomfortable seated position observed 
during high tension turns require the incorporation of a tow 
coupler to conduct routine AMCM Operations. With the 
incorporation of a tow coupler, the YCH-60 will make a 
precise and lethal mine countermeasure weapon system. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Military Specification MIL-H-46855B (2), Human 
Engineering Requirements for Military Systems, Equipment, 
and Facilities, of 5 Apr 1984. 
[2] Military Standard MIL-STD-411D (l), Aircrew Station 
Signals of 30 Aug 1974. 
[3] Military Standard MIL-STD-1472C (3), Human 
Engineering Design Criteria for Military Systems, 
Equipment, and Facilities, of 17 Mar 1987. 
5-2646 
[4] Military Standard MIL-STD-l472D, Human 
Engineering Design Criteria for Military Systems, 
Equipment, and Facilities, of 14 Mar 1989. 
[5] Military Standard MIL-STD-1478, Task Performance 
Analysis, of 13 May 1991. 
[6] Al-H60CA-NFM-000, NATOPS Flight Manual Navy 
Model H-60F/H Aircraft, dated 15 May 1995, change 2 - 7 
March 1997. 
[7] USN Test Pilot School Flight Test Manual Rotary Wing 
Performance, FTM-No.-106, dated 3 1 December 1987. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of 
LCDR Kevin Quinn, U. S. Navy, Mr. Edmund Dinsmore, 
Mr. Lew Fromhart, and Mr. John Petz towards Phase I and 
Phase II testing of the AMCM program. LCDR Quinn was 
the Project Officer and Lead Navy pilot. Mr. Dinsmore was 
the Sikorsky Lead pilot. Mr. Fromhart and Mr. Petz were 
the principal Navy Engineers. Mr. Petz is the Navy Lead 
Engineer for Phase III testing. Without their contributions 
to the Phase I and Phase 11 test efforts, this paper would not 
have been possible. The authors are thankful and 
appreciative of their hard work and professional dedication 
in this test effort. 
BIOGRAPHES 
Lieutenant Wade McConvey, U. S. Navy is a test pilot 
assigned to the Naval Rotary Wing Aircraft Test Squadron 
(NRWATS), based at Naval Air Station Patuxent River, 
MD. He graduated 6om the U. S. Naval Academy in 1991 
with a BSME. He was designated a Naval Aviator in the fall 
of 1993. After completing his initial operational tour with 
Helicopter Antisubmarine Squadron ELEVEN (HS- 1 1) in 
Jacksonville, FL flying the SH-60F Seahawk helicopter, he 
was accepted into the Naval Postgraduate School - Test 
Pilot School (TPS) Cooperative program. He graduated 
&om TPS with Class 116 in December 1999, earning a 
MSAE for completion of the Co-op program. LT 
McConvey is currently the SH-60F Seahawk Platform 
Coordinator at NRWATS and is a developmental test pilot 
for a number of ongoing projects, including the SH-60R and 
CH-60s Seahawk programs. 
Lieutenant Clay Michaels, U. S. Navy is a test pilot assigned 
to the Naval Rotary Wing Aircraft Test Squadron 
(NRWATS), based at Naval Air Station Patuxent River, 
MD. He graduated fiom Vanderbilt University in 1990 with 
a BEME. He received his commission through the Aviation 
Officer Candidate School in 1992 and was designated a 
Naval Aviator in 1993. After completing his initial 
operational tour with Helicopter Antisubmarine Squadron 
Light FIFTY-ONE (HSL-5 1) in Atsugi, Japan flying the SH- 
60B Seahawk helicopter, he was accepted into the Naval 
Postgraduate School - Test Pilot School (TPS) Cooperative 
program. He graduated fiom TPS with Class 114 in 
December 1998, earning a MSAE for completion of the Co- 
Op program. He was one of the two Navy test pilots 
assigned to the Phase I and Phase 11 AMCM test efforts. LT 
Michaels is currently the SH-60B Seahawk Platform 
Coordinator at NRWATS and is a developmental test pilot 
for a number of ongoing projects, including the SH-60R and 
CH-60s Seahawk programs. 
5-2647 
