The Development of a Hyperspectral Sensor: A Data 
Processing Viewpoint1 
Edwin M. Winter 
Technical Research Associates, Inc., 760 Las Posas Rd., Suite A-4, Camarillo, CA 93010 
eduinter!ihtracam .com 
Abstract-A large number of pushbroom imaging 
spectrometers have been developed over the past several 
years. Many of these sensors use a two-dimensional 
detector array to simultaneously record the spectra for a 
line of points on the ground. The second spatial dimension 
is built up over time by motion of the sensor. Since a 
large number of spectra are obtained simultaneously, the 
instantaneous data rate can be much higher than that 
achieved with a flying spot scanner (often called 
whiskbroom). The result can be both greater angular 
coverage and higher spatial resolution. There are many 
consequences of using this type of sensor. The two 
dimensional design of the optical system and, its effect on 
the data must be considered. In addition, since the same 
detector is not used to build up the image in each spectral 
band, there are new sources of pattern noise in the data that 
are not normally seen in data from a flying spot sensor. In 
this paper, the effect of some of these design 
considerations will be discussed from the point of view of 
their impact on classification and anomaly detection. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. OPTICAL CONSEQUENCES 
3. DETECTOR ARRAY CONSEQUENCES 
4. EFFECT ON MIXTURE ANALYSIS 
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
6. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Recently, pushbroom imaging spectrometer sensors that 
provide both high spatial resolution and high spectral 
resolution have become available. A typical instrument of 
this type uses a grating to disperse the spectra across one 
dimension of a two-dimensional focal plane array. The 
second dimension of the array is then one spatial dimension 
of the image. The platform motion generates the second 
spatial dimension. Successive frames from the focal plane 
will result in a two dimensional image with a large number 
of spectral bands at each ground pixel. The spectra from all 
scene pixels are collected simultaneously. Thus the post 
processing ideally does not require any registration of the 
spectral bands. The instantaneous data rate of a pushbroom 
instrument can be much higher than that of a flying spot 
sensor, and this allows both greater angular coverage and 
higher spatial resolution. These characteristics combined 
with high signal to noise ratio allow the differentiation of 
minerals as well as vegetation types based upon the spectra 
of small patches of the surface. These sensors differ from 
the flying spot type of instrument, such as the Airborne 
Visible Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) [ 11, which 
uses a single detector in each spectral band. The sensor 
must scan from side to side to build up one dimension with 
the second spatial dimension built up over time by motion 
of the sensor platform. It should be pointed out that there 
are several new sensors that use a two-dimensional array 
and pushbroom it fiom side to side as the platform moves 
forward. For the purposes of this paper, these whiskbroom 
array sensors will produce the same results as a pushbroom 
array instrument. 
There are several consequences of using a pushbroom , imaging spectrometer. The optical design is more complex 
since two dimensions must now be considered. Spatial 
variations in the optical modulation transfer function (mtf), 
a measure of optical blur, can occur. Also, since the same 
detector is not used to build up the image in each spectral 
band, there are new sources of pattern noise in the data that 
are not normally seen in data from a flying spot sensor. In 
this paper, optical consequences are discussed frst  
followed by a discussion of the impact of the use of a two- 
dimensional detector array. 
2. OPTICAL CONSEQUENCES 
Optical consequences of using a pushbroom array sensor 
can be categorized into two areas: the effect of spatial 
variations of the optical point spread function, more 
commonly expressed as the modulation transfer function 
(mtf), and the effect of two dimensional optical distortions 
on the data. 
The optical system mtf is just one portion of an overall 
system mtf, which includes the optics, the detector transfer 
function, the spectrometer slit and the scan motion of the 
sensor. Two of these components, the effect of the 
spectrometer slit and the scan motion, only affect one 
direction of the overall system mtf. This difference can be 
seen in Figure 1 for a typical pushbroom imaging 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 8 2001 IEEE 
4-1979 
spectrometer. This difference in overall system mtf in the 
both directions means that the spatial resolution will differ 
in both directions. While this difference in mtf is 
important for overall sensor image quality, it is of  little 
consequence to a classification or anomaly detection 
processor. 
1 ‘  I--\ - 
! 
Figure 1. Illustration of the Differing mtf (plotted against 
Spatial Frequency) in the Scan Direction (lower curve) and 
Cross-scan Direction (upper curve) 
There is, however, a major consequence for the processing 
if the mtf has a significant variation with wavelength. The 
result of any variation with wavelength will be seen at 
edges between materials. If, for example, the optical blur 
is greater at the longest wavelength, the edge will be ’ 
blurred at the longer wavelengths and that portion of the 
spectrum will contain contributions from both materials. 
These false spectra will not look like a mixture of the two 
materials, but will appear as a spectral anomaly. This 
effect is illustrated in Figure 2. In the first panel, the ideal 
edge between two materials (gray and white) is shown. In 
the second panel, the effect of optical blur on that edge is 
seen. While the ideal case would not have any 
contribution of the “gray” material in the second column, 
the realistic optical blur shows that the spectrum of the 
second column will be a mixture of the spectra of the two 
materials. However, if the optical blur is wavelength 
dependent and the blur of the edge is greater at the longer 
wavelength (as illustrated in the bottom panel of Figure 2), 
the contribution of the “gray” material would be greater at 
the longer wavelengths. The spectrum of the edge pixels 
will not be a mixture of the spectra of the two materials, 
but a new false spectrum. This false spectrum will be 
identified as a new material and not as a linear combination 
of the “gray” and “white” materials. 
Two-dimensional variations of the optical response also 
have a significant effect on the processing. There are two 
basic optical spatial distortions: smile and keystone. See 
Reference [2] for a discussion of these in the context of 
imaging spectrometers. Sensor smile is one two- 
dimensional effect. Ideally, the lines of constant 
wavelength in a spectrometer using a two-dimensional 
array are aligned with the detector grid All of the 
detectors in a row will see the same wavelength interval. 
There are many sources of potential misalignment of the 
lines of constant wavelength with the detector grid. 
Optical !smile caused by a true optical distortion is one 
possibility (see Figure 3), but more often it is caused by a 
misalignment between the slit (or its image) and the focal 
plane. ‘The effect is that for most two dimensional array 
spectromleters, each detector in the array has its own 
unique wavelength. 
The effect of this misalignment can easily be seen near 
atmospheric absorption lines, with the individual band 
image looking shaded, since one side of the array is seeing 
deeper into the absorption band than the other. Smile, or 
misalignment, can be a source of shading in the processed 
data. 
Figure 2. Effect of Varying System MTF. Ideal (no blur) 
case shown in upper. Edge with differing blur at two 
bands shlown at upper right and bottom.. 
Figure 3. Illustration of Smile Effect. Line of constant 
wavelength is not p:mllel to the detectors 
Keystone can be di:scribed as a variation of optical focal 
length (or magnification) with wavelength. The effect is 
greatest at the edges of the pushbrooim, where it may be 
possible for the same point to be imaged on the 
neighboring column (nominal spectral direction). The 
effect of this distortion is an error in l:he spectrum similar 
to that from mtf variation with wavelength. 
4-1980 
3. DETECTOR ARRAY CONSEQUENCES 
The detector array, and its calibration, is a common source 
of pattern noise in the instrument. A flying spot sensor can 
exhibit certain types of pattern noise. The most common is 
pattem arising from electrical interference, which is often 
seen as a diagonal striping or “herringbone pattern“. This 
same electrical interference derived pattern can occur in 
pushbroom imaging spectrometers. However, pushbroom 
imaging spectrometers are also susceptible to three other 
types of pattern noise: temporal, striping, and shading. 
While the effect of these defects can be mitigated by 
careful calibration, it is normally one or more of these 
pattem noise sources, not random noise, that is the 
limitation to sensor performance. Since there is no way to 
achieve the combination of area coverage, spatial 
resolution, and sensitivity without using pushbroom 
imaging spectrometers, it is important to understand the 
effect of these defects on the ultimate use of the data for 
classification or anomaly detection. 
While it is not the purpose of this paper to discuss the all of 
the sources of these defects, a potential source for each will 
be discussed briefly. Temporal noise can be either 
patterned or random and is caused by some slowly varying 
electrical or mechanical interference. Vibration of the 
interferometer slit is an example. Temporal noise is 
usually seen as cross-track stripes in the image. Along 
track striping has many different causes. Single stripes can 
often be traced to a bad or noisy detector. Irregular broad 
stripes are frequently due to local detector drift. Shading 
across the image can be caused by an alignment error 
between the grating and the slit, or an error introduced 
during calibration. None of these defects would be a 
problem if the effect were the same in all spectral bands. 
Unfortunately, the defects cause variations from band to 
band and are seen as color. 
It is important to point out that with most sensors, these 
defects cannot be seen in images made from a single band 
or in three band color composites. The pattern defects are 
normally minor and are only important because 
classification algorithms look for small differences in the 
spectra of pixels. Sensor pattem effects can usually be 
illustrated through the use of a Principal Components (PC) 
transformation. In the example shown below in Figure 4, 
Principal Components images are shown for a small 
section of data. The top row of images shows both along- 
track striping and shading in PCs past the first. The data 
in this case was calibrated using an older calibration file to 
show the effect of calibration. When properly calibrated 
using time coincident calibration, these stripes and shading 
effects were removed. Of course, any possible 
improvement to the sensor pattern through more careful 
and timely calibration should be attempted before any 
scene classification or anomaly algorithm is run. 
Figure 4. 
Showing Sensor Pattern in a Pushbroom Array Sensor 
First Four Principal Components Images 
4. EFFECT ON MIXTURE ANALYSIS 
In this section, the effect of some of the above sensor 
features on a linear unmixing algorithm will be discussed. 
Linear unmixing algorithms are based upon the assumption 
that the spectra are a linear combination of constituent 
spectra. These constituent spectra are called 
“endmembers”. Once these spectra are found, the image 
cube can be unmixed into a map of fractional abundances 
of each material in each pixel. The wavelength dependent 
mtf discussed previously results in an obvious violation of 
the linear unmixing basis. In this section the effect of 
several of the other sensor features are discussed 
Linear Unmixing 
Linear unmixing is based upon the assumption that the 
spectrum for a given pixel in an image is a linear 
combination of the endmember spectra: 
where pi, is the i-th band of thej-th pixel, eik is the i-th 
band of the k-th endmember, ckj is the mixing proportions 
for the j-th pixel from the k-th endmember, and E is 
Gaussian random error (assumed to be small). Since the 
pixel compositions are assumed to be percentages, the 
mixing proportions are assumed to sum to one. 
If the above mixing model is correct, and the number of 
image bands is exactly one less than the number of end- 
members, the pixels in an image occupy a space formed by 
4-1981 
a simplex. (see Figure 5). Figure 5 shows a conceptual 
scatter plot of the reflectance in band j plotted against the 
reflectance in band i for every pixel in an image. In the 
case shown there are three endmembers (A, B and C). 
Mixtures of materials A and B will be on mixing line 
between .4 and B in the diagram. Mixtures of all three 
endmembers will be in the interior of the triangle. The 
simplex i!; the simplest geometric shape that can enclose a 
space of a given dimension. Examples include a line (one 
dimension), triangle (two dimensions) and tetrahedron 
(three dimensions) [3]. The vertices of a simplex are the 
endmember spectra. Given the number of pixels in a large 
image, it is likely that some pixels will be unmixed, or 
pure. These pixels are assumed to be composed of only 
one of the endmembers. 
A 
C 
I b 
Figure 5. Ideal Simplex in Feature Space for a Mixture of 
Three Endmembers 
An algorithm to determine the endmembers can therefore 
be reduced to finding the pure pixels in an image, or by 
analogy, finding the points in the data that represent the 
vertices of the simplex containing the data. The 
assumption that a hyperspectral image can be represented 
as a simplex forms the basis of the geometrical 
interpretations of hyperspectral data sets. The core of the 
N-FINDR procedure is the autonomous determination of 
spectral endmembers [4]. The input to this process is. the 
full spectral image cube. The procedure must examine the 
full data set to find those pure pixels that can be used to 
describe the various mixed pixels in the scene. This 
algorithm finds the set of pixels with the largest possible 
volume, by “inflating” a simplex inside the data. If sensor 
spectral errors (from mtf variation, keystone or detector 
defects) result in spurious spectra, these spurious spectra 
will be ffound as endmembers. These spurious end- 
members certainly make spectral anomaly detection much 
more difficult and can confuse scene classification. Once 
the endmembers have been determined, the data is 
unmixed1 by a non-negative least squares procedure to 
derive the fractional abundances. 
Pattern Noise Effect 
The situation is <complicated by the patterned sensor 
defects. Consider the case of spectrally dependent shading 
across the image. h the simplest case the response of the 
sensor varies across the scene. The ideal case with three 
endmembers is shown in Figure 5.  The situation with 
sensor induced spectrally dependent s,hading is illustrated 
in Figure 6. Because of shading in ihe sensor, the same 
material will fall at different locations in the scatter plot 
depending on what part of the sensor is measuring it. In 
general, this means that measurements of the same material 
will fall on a line in Feature Space, rather than occur at a 
point. The problem, originally described as a mixture of 
three materials, now has increased in dimensionality, and 
more bands will be required to lbe able to unmix. 
Fortunately, a hypempectral sensor a a y  still have enough 
spectral bands to allow a solution. For a commonly 
occurring material, it is common for ithe same material to 
be found as multiple endmembers in a shaded 
measurement leading to “complementary” abundance 
maps. In the simplest shading case there will be two 
endmembers for scene-wide materials. The unmixed 
abundance maps will be shaded in one direction (e.g. left to 
right) for one of the complementary endmembers and the 
opposite direction for the other. The images in Figure 7 
show shading produced fractional abundance planes. By 
examining the endmember spectra, it is possible to 
determine that these fiactional abundance maps correspond 
to the same material. However, splitting the endmember 
by shading is more than an inconvenience since the spectra 
of one or more of the split endmembers can now be 
confused with other materials. 
+ Bl 
c 
Figure 6. 
Caused ‘by Sensor Pattern 
Illustration of the Increase in Dimensions 
4-1982 
Soil Endmember 
Figure 7. Examples of Fractional Abundance Planes that 
are Traceable to the Same Scene Material but Have Been 
Split by Sensor Shading 
While the cases discussed have emphasized the effect of 
sensor shading, the other common sensor defects will also 
increase the dimensions of the data. Broad stripes can 
affect the data in a similar way to shading. If the effect is 
simple, and the result is two or even three complementary 
fraction planes, the problem can be handled in a manner 
similar to shading. However, in many cases, the result is 
the creation of multiple endmembers on a single material, 
corresponding to each of the broad stripes. Unfortunately 
in this case, the situation may be too complex to allow a 
useful unmixing [5 ] .  
Vegetation Endmember 
Point Defect 
Single line defects (narrow stripes) are very troublesome 
and usually result in multiple useless endmembers, since 
the individual spectra are very different from the true 
spectra in the scene. Ofien the scene can be still unmixed, 
but these endmembers can consume the dimensionality of 
the data, and it is best to exclude such bad lines from the 
data before attempting a solution. Examples of three 
fractional abundance planes formed using linear unmixing 
from a hyperspectral data cube formed from a sensor with 
uncorrected bad detectors is shown in Figure 8. Note that 
the abundance plane corresponding to the point defect has 
a line and has captured some of the other background 
material. 
Figure 8. Fraction Planes Resulting from a Bad Detector 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
The sensor impacts discussed here were presented 
principally from the concept of an algorithm that finds 
endmembers using an automated approach, and then uses 
linear unmixing to form class maps of materials in the 
scene. The conclusions based on the optical errors hold for 
any processing that uses the full data cube. Valid spectra 
are the most important requirement. The conclusions on 
the focal plane array have been shown to be true for a 
totally statistical approach using the Stochastic Estimation 
Method algorithm that uses a local Gaussian assumption 
[ 5 ] .  Some of these array related defects (stripes and 
4-1983 
shading) will be less of a problem with operator 
interventi’on. For example, if the bad detector that results 
in the stripe and classification errors in Figure 8, is 
removed early from the processing, the proper assignment 
of abundance planes is achieved. 
Based upon the possible processing impact, the following 
are some recommendations for the design of a pushbroom 
array hyperspectral sensor. Keystone and system mtf 
wavelength variations are the most serious problem, since 
they destroy the integrity of the collected spectra. If a 
small amount of keystone error (less than 10 to 20% of a 
detector) acannot be achieved in the optical design, it may 
be necessary to resample the focal plane image (in 
spectral-spatial coordinates). For this to be legitimately 
performed, the focal plane image must be oversampled at 
all wavekngths. This is usually not a desirable system 
concept, !Since valuable focal plane array area is being 
effectively wasted. If the keystone requirement can be 
met, then the most desirable condition will be to have the 
optics a minor contributor to the system mtf at all 
wavelengths. This means that even if there is an optical 
mtf variation with wavelength, it will have no real effect, 
since, the wavelength variation of the system mtf will be 
small. The optical system smile is usually less of a 
problem because, in many current hyperspectral systems, 
there is more than enough spectral resolution, and the 
spectral direction is binned to reduce resolution. Even with 
binning, small smile effects will show up in spectral 
regions where the spectrum changes rapidly with 
wavelength, such as on the edges of water bands in the 
SWTR. 
The most important consideration for the focal plane is 
good and fkequent calibration. This should serve to reduce 
pattern noise. This is not as important for VNIR 
spectrometers since the silicon detector material is both 
stable and. linear. Aggressive removal of bad and noisy 
detectors will mitigate the stripe problem. 
6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author acknowledges the support of Michael 
Schlangen of Technical Research Associates, Inc., Dr. 
Michael Winter of the University of Hawaii, Dr. L. E. 
“Skip” Hoff of Hoff Engineering and Dr. Scott G. Beaven 
of Space Computer Corp. In addition, helpful discussions 
on design trade-offs for array hyperspectral sensors with 
Christopher Simi of the Army NVESD are also 
acknowledged. 
7. REFERENCI3S 
[l]. Vane, G., R. 0. Green, T. G. Clden, H. T. Enmark, 
E.G. I-Iansen, W. M. Porter, “The Airborne 
Visible/lnfrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS),” Remote 
Sensing of the Environment, Vol. 44, pp. 127-143. 1993 
[2]. Mourourlis, Pantazis, “Spectral arid spatial uniformity 
in pushbroom imaging spectrometers”., SPIE Proceedings, 
Vol. 3753 pp. 133,-141 1999 
[3]. Boardman, JoeEph W., “Analysis, understanding and 
visualization of hyperspectral data as convex sets in n- 
space”, SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 2480. pp. 14-22, 1995 
[4]. Winter, Michael E. “Fast Autonomous Spectral 
Endmemiber Deteirmination In Hjperspectral Data”, 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Intemational Conference on 
Applied Geologic Remote Sensing, Vol. 11, pp 337-344, 
Vancouver, BC , Canada, 1999 
[ 5 ] .  B’eaven, S.. L. E. Hoff, and E. M. Winter, 
“Comparison of SIiM and Linear Unmixing Approaches 
for Classification of Spectral Data”, SPIE Proceedings. 
Vol. 3753, pp 300-307, 1999 
BIOGRAPHY 
Ed Winter is Research Director 
for sensor systems at Technical 
Research Associatlzs, Inc. He 
received his Ph.D. in Geophysics 
from the Universio, of California, 
Los Angeles in 1972 and has been 
active in remote sensing for 
twenty-eight year:;. He has 
presented papers at SPIE, IEEE, 
ERIM, EXJROPTO, IRIS and other technical meetings and 
has publiished papers in the Physical Review, Remote 
Sensing of the Environment, Applied1 Optics as well as 
numerous conference proceedings. 
4-1984 
