\ Evolutionary Mechanisms for Smart On-board Adaptive 
Sensing applied to the MECA Electrometer 1 
Didier Keymeulen, Adrian Stoica, Martin Buehler, Ricardo Zebulwn and Vu Duong 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
didier.keymeulen@jpl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-4280 
Abstract- In-situ exploration as required for example by 
missions to comets and planets with unknown 
environmental conditions, has recently been approached 
with new ideas, such as the use of biology-inspired 
mechanisms for hardware sensor adaptation. The 
application of evolution-inspired formalisms to hardware 
design and self-configuration lead to the concept of 
evolvable hardware (EHW). EHW refers to selg 
reconfiguration of electronic hardware by 
evolutionaqdgenetic reconfiguration mechanisms. In this 
paper we describe the initial development of efficient 
mechanisms for smart on-board adaptive sensing, 
adaptively controlling the reconfigurable pre-processing 
analog electronics using evolvable hardware, which will 
lead to higher quality, lean data. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
ADAPTIVE SENSOR ARCHITECTURE 
EVOLUTION-ORIENTED DEVICES AND ENVIRONMENT 
CONCLUSION 
ELECTROMETER SENSOR ARRAY ' 
ADAPTIVE SENSORS EXPERIMENT 
1. INTRODUCTION 
High data rates provided by modem sensors surpass on- 
board real-time processing capabilities. This is addressed 
by imposing large on-board storage memory and high 
communications bandwidth; there is however no godd 
solution to using the data in real-time control situations 
such as fast entry, descent and landing, or within sensor 
webs. Only a small fraction of the data carries quality 
information, yet current pre-processing electronics is not 
smart enough to eliminate uselesdredundant data. In fact 
more information could be obtained from the sensor if the 
electronics would adapt to incoming signals and the context 
of the measurement. 
The concept of reconfigurable and adaptive electronics for 
signal conditioning has led to a series of recent chips that 
allow programmable adjustment of amplifier gains, 
memory-based compensation of sensor nonlinearity, etc 
[25] .  However, the flexibility of these programmable 
devices is limited by the high level of reconfiguration 
granularity, and require that all compensation data is 
predetermined through lab experiments and then stored in 
ROM; also no later changes in sensor characteristics or 
electronics itself could be considered once the sensor is in 
operation. 
A complementary technique, called evolvable hardware 
(EHW), allows the automatic determination of optimal 
electronic circuit configurations. In particular a chip 
designed for evolvable hardware experiments, the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Field Programmable 
Transistor Array (FPTA) has high flexibility by 
reconfiguration at transistor level [28]. Evolutionary 
algorithms allow for automatic determination of optimal 
configuration. In the narrow sense EHW refers to self- 
reconfiguration of electronic hardware by 
evolutionaqdgenetic reconfiguration mechanisms as in our 
application. In a broader sense EHW refers to various forms 
of hardware, from antennas to complete evolvable space 
systems that could adapt to changing experimental 
environments and, moreover, increase their performance 
during the mission. 
In this paper we describe the initial development of 
efficient mechanisms for smart on-board adaptive sensing, 
adaptively controlling the reconfigurable pre-processing 
analog electronics using evolvable hardware, which will 
lead to higher quality, lean data. The target is to 
demonstrate the mechanisms on an adaptive electrometer 
providing the same or more information content than the 
MARS01 MECA (Mars Environmental Compatibility 
Assessment) Electrometer with a significant reduction in 
the total amount of transmitted data. The electrometer was 
part of MECA project and has as objective of the project to 
gain a better understanding of the hazards related to the 
human exploration of Mars. 
In the paper we identify one application of adaptive sensor 
0-78034599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
5-2309 
array device for which the reduction of the data can be 
considerable: discrimination task of materials with different 
triboelectric properties. The discrimination task requires a 
sophisticated analysis of the multiple responses in order to 
extract differences in signal as well as an adaptation 
mechanism to deal with the high sensitivity of the sensor 
array to ambient conditions. The analysis and sensitivity 
are translated to requirements and fitness evaluation 
metrics that are used by an evolutionary algorithm to 
determine the optimal adaptation mechanisms. 
This paper reports on experiments that illustrate how 
evolutionary algorithms can design analog circuit 
integrated in the sensing elements and adapted to the 
experimental conditions. The search for an electronic 
circuit realization of a desired transfer characteristic can be 
made in software as in extrinsic evolution, or in liardware 
as in intrinsic evolution. In extrinsic evolution, the final 
solution is downloaded to (or becomes a blueprint for) the 
hardware. In intrinsic evolution the hardware actively 
participates in the circuit evolutionary process and is the 
support on which candidate solutions are evaluated. In this 
paper we will only look at the extrinsic approach . 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a 
description of the electrometer sensor array. Section 3 
presents the adaptive sensor architecture. Section 4 presents 
an evolution-oriented architecture for reconfigurable 
hardware based on the concept of FPTA and the details of 
the evolutionary design tool. Section 5 presents the 
experiments and results obtained for the adaptive 
electrometer for a discrimination application in a changing 
environment. Section 7 presents some lessons learned from 
the experiments and section 8 concludes the paper. 
2. ELECTROMETER SENSOR ARRAY 
The electrometer is part of MECA project. The objective 
was to gain a better understanding of the hazards related to 
the human exploration of Mars. The MECA project also 
has a material patch experiment to determine the effects of 
dust adhesion, a wet chemistry laboratory with ion selective 
electrodes to characterize the ionic content of the soil, and 
microscopy station with optical and atomic force 
microscopes to determine particle size and hardness. 
The electrometer was built into the heel of the Mars 01 
robot arm scoop as seen in Fig. 1. The instrument has four 
sensor types: (a) triboelectric field, (b) electrbfield, (c) ion 
current, (d) temperature. The triboelectric field sensor 
array contains five insulating materials to (determine 
material charging effects as the scoop is dragged through 
the Martian regolith. The insulating materials were chosen 
after Earth-based tests in Mars simulant soils. 
During digging operation the electrometer is out of the 
way. After digging, the scoop is rotated so the electrometer 
head is pointing down toward the Martian soils allowing it 
to be rubbed against the Martian soil. 
Temperature 
Sensor: TMP (Inside) 
Electiic Field 
Sensor Array 
16.5cm A 
Figure 1. Electrometer sensor suite mounted in the heel of 
the Mars'Ol scoop 
In the rubbing sequence, depicted in Fig. 2, the scoop is 
first lowered against the Martian soil. During the start of 
the traverse, the electrometer is zeroed by closing a switch 
which will be discussed later. After reaching the end of its 
traverse, the scoop is abruptly removed from the soil at 
which time the triboelectric sensor response is measured. 
I 1  
I CHARGED 
A- 
X 
7 
U 3  = ZERO 
Figure 2. Operational scenario for the scoop and charge 
distribution in the electrometer during rubbing (le ft) and 
after removal from the surface (right). 
As seen on the left in Fig. 2, charge'is generated 
triboelectrically across capacitor C3 as the insulator is 
rubbed on the Martian surface. Since the charges are in 
close proximity across C3, no charge appears across 
capacitors C1 or C2. As the insulator is removed from the 
surface, the charges redistribute themselves across C1 and 
C2 according to the charge relationship Q1 = 4 2  and 
provide the signal for the amplifier. 
This electrometer is an induction field meter [19] operated 
in a direct current mode, where the operational amplifier 
input ciurrent charges C1. The electrical schematic of the 
non-adaptive component of the triboelectric sensors is 
shown in Fig. 3. The design of the electric field sensor 
follows fiom the traditional electrometer [20]. The 
instrument is composed of a capacitive divider where C2 is 
the field sensing capacitor and C1 is the reference 
capacitor. The point between the capacitors is connected to 
the positive terminal of the first stage amplifier (terminal 
5-2310 
t5 of U3) operated in the follower mode. The sensing 
electrode is protected by a driven guard that is connected to 
the negative terminal of the first stage amplifier (terminal - 
6 of U3). A second operational amplifier (U4) is added to 
provide additional amplification., At the beginning of the 
measurements, C1 is discharged using the solid-state 
switch, S1 which has very low leakage. In the TRI sensor, 
C2 has an insulator dielectric which acquires charge during 
rubbing. 
c2 
V I 1  
8 JS1 
Figure 3. Schematic circuit representations for the non - 
adaptive component of the Triboelectric sensor (TRI) fully 
characterized before field use. 
Four different insulating materials were loaded into the 
titanium triboelectric sensor head. A typical experiment 
consists of manually rubbing a wool felt on the triboeletric 
head at room temperature. The results are shown in Figure 
4. The falling period between 10 and 20 seconds represents 
the rubbing period. The large negative response is for the 
Rulon-J which is to be expected for RulorrJ rubbed on 
wool. 
Tek 5.00 S/S 1 ACqS 
[-> __ ] 
1 
200mv it32 L O O ~ V  m 10.0s Chl f 500mV 31 oct 2000 
200mv < I ? . ?  Ifmw: 12:43’19 
3. ADAPTIVE SENSOR ARCHITECTURE 
The triboelectric sensor array is an example of a hybrid 
integrated array devices where the sensors are grouped on 
the same devices but where the signal processing is done on 
a separate device as we will describe later [21]. This sensor 
array employs similar sensors (in terms of the measurand) 
but sensors have subtle differences (i.e. partially correlated 
outputs) related to the triboelectric properties of materials, 
known as the triboelectric series. The triboelectric sensors 
have poor specificity and so respond to a very wide range of 
materials. The signal processing must then carry out a 
sophisticated analysis of the responses to extract the subtle 
differences in signals. The approach we have chosen, as 
shown in Fig. 5 ,  is to use an evolvable hardware classifier 
connected to the triboelectric sensor array and that will be 
able after evolution to discriminate with high precision the 
response of different materials. 
Another important reason to use an adaptation mechanism 
is to be able to do in-situ self-calibration [22]. Indeed the 
sensors are very sensitive to ambient conditions, such as 
temperature, humidity, atmospheric and contact pressure, 
ambient gas, materials. They are also sensitive to the 
material and surface condition of the sensors. For example 
the dust cling on the insulator surface affect considerably 
the response of the triboelectric sensor arrays. Finally the 
array sensor has poor ageing characteristic, that is the 
triboelectric sensing element is slowly corroded and thus 
changes its response characteristics with time. To remedy 
this high sensitivity to the ambient conditions and sensors 
conditions, we performed an in-situ self-calibration: 
calibrate the sensors right at site with the current 
environmental conditions and a set of given sensor 
materials. 
Fig 5 shows the basic arrangement of an adaptative 
electrometer array sensor system for discriminating 
different materials. The triboelectric property of the 
material is sensed by an array of sensors, each with its 
response which is converted to an electrical signal via 
suitable transduction circuitry. The voltage signal VAi is 
then injected to the evolvable hardware specially designed 
for the current environment and a set of materials. The 
prediction of the triboelectric property of the material is 
given in terms of voltage. In the next section, we describe 
the evolvable hardware developed by JPL, called FPTA and 
the mechanism to find the best circuit configuration to 
perform the ‘classification task. 
Figure 4. Response of triboelectric sensor array to white 
wool felt (For all figures: response C1 is ABS (TRIl), 
response C2 is Polycarbonate (TRI2), response C3 is 
Teflon (TRI3) and response C4 is Rulon-J (TRI4)). 
5-2311 
1 
p v a b l e  Hardware I 
OUTPUT 
MATERIAL e DISCRIMINATOR 
SAMPLES 
Current 
output 
Configuration 
bits 
v 
Genetic 
Algorithm 
Current Functionality: 
Discnmination Material 
I I 
Figure 5. Schematic arrangement of am adaptive 
electrometer sensor array device 
4. EVOLUTION-ORIENTED DEVICES AND 
ENVIRONMENT 
The idea of a FPTA was introduced first by Stoica in [ 1 11. 
The FPTA is a concept design for hardware reconfigurable 
at the transistor level. As both analog and digital CMOS 
circuits ultimately rely on functions implemented with 
transistors, the FPTA is a versatile platfonn for the 
synthesis of both analog and digital (and mixed-signal) 
circuits. Further, it is considered a more suitable platform 
for synthesis of analog circuitry than existing FPGAs or 
FPAAs, extending the work on evolving simulated circuits 
to evolving analog circuits directly on the chip. 
The FPTA module is an array of transistors 
interconnected by programmable switches. The status of the 
switches (ON or OFF) determines a circuit topology and 
consequently a specific response. Thus, the topology can be 
considered as a function of switch states, and can be 
represented by a binary sequence, such as “1 0 1 1.. . ”, where 
a 1 represents an ON switch and a 0 represents a OFF 
switch. The FPTA architecture allows the implementation 
of bigger circuits by cascading FPTA modules with external 
wires. To offer sufficient flexibility the module has all 
transistor terminals connected via switches to external 
terminals (except for power and ground). Issues related to 
chip expandability were treated in elsewhere [ 111. Figure 6 
illustrates an example of a FPTA module consisting of 8 
transistors and 24 programmable switches. In this example 
the transistors P1-P4 are PMOS and N5-NS are NMOS, 
and the switch-based connections are in sufficient number 
to allow a majority of meaningful topologies for the given 
transistor arrangement, and yet less than the total number 
of possible connections. Programming the ON and OFF 
switches defines a circuit. The effects of non-zero, finite 
impedance of the switches can be neglected in the first 
approximation. One FPTA module was fabricated as a Tiny 
Chip through MOSIS, using 0.5-pm CMOS technology. 
We build a testbed for future development with a test board 
with four chips mounted on it and connected with the 
electrometer (Fig. 7). 
s7 
s3 
SI 1 
s20 
7 t N*l  
V ’  
Figure 6. Module of the Programmable Transistor Array 
5-2312 
Figure 7. Module of the Programmable Transistor Array 
connected to the electrometer. 
In the context of electronic synthesis on reconfigurable 
devices such as the FPTA, the architectural configurations 
are encoded in ”chromosomes” that define the state of the 
switches connecting elements in the reconfigurable 
hardware. The main steps in evolutionary synthesis of 
electronic circuits are illustrated in Figure 8. First, a 
population of chromosomes is randomly generated to 
represent a pool of circuit architectures. The chromosomes 
are converted into control bit strings, which are 
downloaded onto the programmable hardware. In the 
particular case of the FPTA cell, the chromosome has 24 
bits that determines the state of the 24 switches (Figure 6). 
Circuit responses are compared against specifications of a 
target response using as fitness the root mean square error. 
The individuals are ranked based on their fitness; that is, 
how close they come to satisfying the target. Preparation for 
a new iteration loop involves generation of a new 
population of chromosomes from the pool of the best 
individuals in the previous generation. Individuals are 
selected probabilistically based on their fitness. Some are 
taken as they were and some are modified by genetic 
operators, such as chromosome crossover and mutation. 
The process is repeated for a number of generations, 
resulting in individuals with increasingly better fitness. The 
genetic algorithm is usually ended after a given number of 
generations, or when the closeness to the target response 
has been reached. In practice, one or several solutions may 
be found among the individuals of the last generation. 
In addition to the procedure described above, which is 
called intrinsic Evolvable Hardware or hardware evolution, 
Figure 8 also shows an alternative way to carry on 
evolutionary circuit synthesis, by the use of simulators 
instead of reconfigurable chips. In this particular case, the 
chromosome is mapped into a SPICE circuit model, which 
is simulated and evaluated. This later procedure is called 
extrinsic Evolvable Hardware or sofmare evolution. The 
mapping of the chromosome into the circuit netlist is 
accomplished by examining the chromosome values bit by 
bit. According to each bit value (0 or l), the state of its 
corresponding switch will be set in the circuit netlist. After 
all the switches’ states are determined, the circuit is 
simulated. The extrinsic approach’has been used for the 
experiments of the adaptive electrometer sensor array. The 
intrinsic approach is currently under development. 
An evolutionary design tool EHWack (Figure 8) was 
developed to facilitate experiments in hardware and 
software evolution [lo], as defmed in the previous section. 
This tool incorporates the public domain Parallel Genetic 
Algorithm package PGAPack as genetic engine running on 
a UNIX workstation. Referring to software evolution, we 
incorporated in the EHWPack, the SPICE 3F5 as circuit 
simulator. In the case of hardware evolution, the tool 
proved very useful in testing architectures of reconfigurable 
hardware and demonstrating evolution on FPTA 
reconfigurable chips. An interface code links the GA with 
the hardware where potential designs are evaluated, while a 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) allows easy problem 
formulation and visualization of results. At each generation 
the GA produces a new population of binary chromosomes, 
which get converted into configuration bits downloaded 
into the 4 FPTAs reconfigurable chips or into Netlists that 
describe candidate circuit designs, and are further 
simulated by SPICE. 
A variety of circuits have been synthesized through 
evolutionary means. For example, Koza used Genetic 
Programming (GP) to grow an ‘kmbryonic” circuit to one 
that satisfies desired requirements [l]. This approach was 
used for evolving a variety of circuits, including filters and 
computational circuits. An alternative encoding technique 
for analog circuit synthesis, which has the advantage of 
reduced computational load was used in [2] for automated 
filter design. On-chip evolution was demonstrated by 
Thompson [3] using an FPGA as the programmable device, 
and a Genetic Algorithm (GA) as the evolutionary 
mechanism. More details on current work in evolvable 
hardware are found in [4], [5], [6],  [7]. Current 
programmable analog devices are very limited in 
capabilities and do not support the implementation of the 
resulted design (In principle, one can test their validity in 
circuits built from discrete components, or in an ASIC). 
More recently, evolutionary experiments were performed on 
COTS FPAA [18] and an ASIC [I I]. 
5-2313 
~~ ~ 
Evolutionary Hardware Environment 
Extrinsic Intrinsic 
PGAPACK 
Genetic Algorithm 
I I;; 
Desired Data 
VAI, VA2. VA3 and VA4 
from electrometer for 
materiail, material2 8. material3 
Inputs Signals: 
Desired Output Signals: 
Voutl (materiall), Vout2 
.c 
t Fl 
simulation 
t 
Fitness of 
individual 
devicfddrcuit 
+ 4  
1 of256pmcesors 
U e s h  supemmputer 
(Hp =ww 
t 
t 
individual 
eontrolled by LabVicv 
Comuectedu, 
Elemomtor 
Figure 8. Environment for evolutionary desip. 
5 .  ADAPTIVE SENSOR EXPERIMENT 
Two experiments were conducted. The first experiment 
shows that the evolvable hardware approach finds a FPTA 
circuit that is able to discriminate between the responses of 
the electrometer to three different materials. The second 
experiment shows that the same evolvable hardware adapts 
the FPTA circuit to the changes in the electrometer 
responses due to a modification of the environmental 
conditions. 
The experiments used three rubbing material samples (wool 
felt, Teflon and Polyester) and used only two insulating 
materials of the electrometer (Teflon and Rulon-J). The 
experiments start by an initialization procedure which puts 
the electrometer in a known state: the five electrometer 
insulators were cleaned by brushing followed by Am241 
alpha particle deionization. The deionization process was 
observed by running a trace and noting when the response 
no longer changed. After cleaning and deionization, the 
samples were placed in the apparatus as seen in Figure 7. 
The data acquisition was started and five points were 
acquired every second. The first fifty points are baseline 
points. During the next 200 points, the samples were 
rubbed by the apparatus from left to right. During the final 
data points, the rubbing was stopped and the rubbing 
material was no longer in contact with the electrometer 
insulating materials. 
At this stage of the research, the response of the 
electrometer to three materials was obtained by rubbing the 
materials on the electrometer. The resulting data 'was used 
to find a circuit able to discriminate between the response 
of the electrometer to the different materials by extrinsic 
evolution using the SPICE simulator. 
First Eqeriment: Learning Discriminating Circuit 
The first evolutionary experiment was conducted in air at a 
pressure of 970mb, relative humidity of 33 percent and a 
temperature of 21OC. The evolvable hardware system used 
one FPTA cell. The circuit had two inputs and one output. 
At the two inputs, we injected the sensor responses of the 
insulating material TR13 (Teflon, response C3) and TR14 
(Rulon-.I, response C4) to the three rubbing materials in 
addition to the baseline as shown in Fig.4, 9 and 10. The 
outputs are collected as a voltage signal. 
Tek m l 5 . 0 0  S/s 1 ACqS ' $ 1  [ "  r---- 1 '  
c1 LOW - 
l - i w k  1 72mV 
31 OCt 2000 
16:33:35 Ch3 
Figure '3. Response of triboelectric sensor array toTeflon 
(C1 is ABS, C2 is Polycarbonate, C3 is Teflon, C4 is 
Rulon-J). The four material samples are rubbed after 15[s]. 
Tet Run: 5.00 S/s Sample 
1 3  1 
t 
Cl LOW 
-56mV 
histogram unstable 
5 2  LO% 
i UnIV 
c3 LOW - 124mV 
i 4 I O'V 
272m\> 
k 2OOmV C.liZ 203m; M 1 0 . 0  s ' Chl 2 5 OOmV ' 31 oct 2000 
15:44:07 Ch3 200mV 2O:nV 
Figwe 10. Response of triboelectric sensor array to 
Polyester (C1 is ABS, C2 is Polycarbonate, C3 is Teflon, 
C4 is Rulon-J). 
The following GA parameters were used: Population: 40, 
Chromosome size: 24 bits for 1 FPTA, Mutation rate: lo%, 
5-2314 
Crossover rate: go%, exponential Selection, Elite Strategy: 
20% population size. The fitness function seeks to 
maximize the voltage difference at the output when 
different materials are used for rubbing. It can be described 
by the following equation: 
2.6 
1 Fitness = ; IClvi<t> - vj(t)l 
- 
1 i#j  
where the indexes i and j sweep the four patterns of the 
three materials and the baseline and Tis the period of time 
used to evaluate the fitness. 
The main task of evolution is to synthesize a circuit able to 
discriminate among the three materials and the baseline by 
amplifying the voltage differences among the materials 
measured by the sensors. Figure 12 depicts the evolved 
circuit: 
i i I 
Figure 12. Evolved circuit able to discriminate among 3 
materials and 1 baseline. 
3 
2 4  
1 8  
FPTA 
output (v) 2 1 2  e 
a 0  
8 Q6 
Input (V) 1 responses) (sensor 0 6  
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
-1 8 
"e (SI 
Figure 13. Response of the evolved circuit for 3 materials 
and 1 baseline. The time starts when the material sample is 
rubbed on the isolating materials of the electrometer. 
Figure 13 shows the response of the evolved circuit. In the 
negative part of the graph are the responses of the 
electrometer to the 3 materials and the baselines. Before 
being applied to the FPTA, they pass through a unit gain 
inverter stage (Fig. 12). In the positive part of the vertical 
axis the circuit response for the four pattems is shown. 
There is an average separation .of 0.6V between the 
adjacent materials, except for the wool felt and teflon 
materials, for which the difference is 1.2V. The overall 
output range achieved a value around 2.3V, whereas the 
input range given by the responses of the sensor is around 
0.7V. Thus the circuit improved the discrimination margin 
for different materials. 
To assess the generalisation of the circuit solution we have 
tested the evolved circuit with sensor responses with 
slightly different environmental conditions which resulted 
in a decrease in the response of the sensors. As expected, 
the difference in response of the evolved circuit was smaller 
but it still captured the correct order of the pattems 
corresponding to the triboelectric series [26,27] (Figure 14). 
2.4 
E 
1 c 
2 2.2 
a - 
s 2  - 
0 c 1.8 - 
Wml fen "in) 
1 6  
i A  ... 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Time (s) 
Figure 14. Response of the evolved circuit for 3 materials 
for slightly different environmental conditions than for 
experiment of Figure 13. The output measures the output 
current I,,, at the drain of transistor P4. 
Second Experiment: Adaptation to Environmental 
Conditions 
The second evolutionary experiment was conducted in air 
at 970mb, relative humidity of 33 percent and 21C but the 
ambient atmosphere was artificially ionized using an air 
ionizer having an effect to rapidly discharge the insulators 
of the electrometer. 
The evolvable hardware used one P T A  cell. The circuit 
had two inputs and one output. At the two inputs, we 
injected the sensor responses of the insulating material 
TRI3 (Teflon, response C3) and TRT4 (Rulon-J, response 
C4) to the three rubbing materials in addition to the 
baseline as shown in Fig. 15, 16 and 17. 
5-2315 
TeK 5.00 s/s 1 ACqS 
[ :  1 
I 1 
- 
c1 LOW 
-20mV 
1-1 
c3 LOW 
-4oinv 
\Instable 
histogiam 
t i 
Tek 5.00 S/s 1 AcqS 
1 .  I 
c1 LOW 
-84mV 
. . . . . . . 
1 2OOmV C l i L  ZObriiV M 1 0 . 0 5  Chl f 5 oomv 
Ch3 ZOOmV *'i 8lnzr 
3 Nov 2000 
00:55:04 
Figure 16. Response of triboelectric sensor array to Teflon 
in ionized atmosphere. 
Tek 5.00 S/s 1 ACqS 
r r  1 
20l\rlIti M 10.0 5 Chl J SOOmVj To Ref4 
2 1011: active 
t I 
Save File U osave 
&$e OFF seq p : ~ ~ ~ ~ c e  utilities 
In contrast to the first experiment, the output was now 
taken as a current signal. The fitness function differed from 
the one used in the first experiments: in this case the ratio 
between the average current at the output was maximized 
by this evaluation function: 
where Iii(t) and Ij(t) are the currents at the drain of transisto r 
P4 of the FPTA resulting from the application of the sensor 
signals for two materials i andj. We point out that the ratio 
of the average currents is always checked to be greater than 
or equal to 1 (otherwise the fraction is inverted). 
I 
K 
Figure 18. Evolved circuit able to discriminate between 3 
materials and 1 baseline in new environemtal condition 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Time@) 
Figure 19. Response of the evolved circuit for 3 materials 
and 1 baseline in new enviromental condition. The output 
measures the voltage at the drain of the second transistor of 
the current mirror. 
Figure 17. Response of triboelectric sensor array to 
Polyester in ionized atmosphere (C1 is ABS, C2 is 
Polycarbonate, C3 is Teflon, C4 is Rulon-.I). 
Figure 18 shows the best circuit evolved. The GA 
parameters were the same as in the first experiment, but the 
number of generations was reduced to 20. As can be seen 
from Figure 18, the current output of the FPTA is applied 
5-2316 
to a current mirror of gain 4. The current mirror output 
goes to an integrator stage. The role of the FPTA in this 
system is to perform voltage to current conversion and to 
increase the discrimination margin of the system by 
providing gain. The current mirror gain provides an 
additional increase of the discrimination margin. As the 
sensors’ signals are not constant in time in this case, an 
integrator is necessary to give the final answer of the 
system. Figure 19 shows the current mirror output (voltage 
at the drain of the second transistor of the pair) for the 
three materials and base line. After being integrated, the 
final response is displayed in Figure 20. 
0 
4.4 
0 .8  
-1.2 
E 
O -2 
- 
$ -1.6 
-2.4 
-2.8 
-3.2 
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 
Time (s) 
Figure 20. Response of the evolved circuit for 3 materials 
and 1 baseline in new enviromental condition after 
integration. The output measures the voltage V,,, at the 
output of integrator 
From Figure 20 it can be seen that at 30 seconds, the 
integrater output reaches around -0.8V for the polyester 
material, -1.7V for the wool felt material, -2.5V for the 
teflon material and -2.9V for the base line. Thus the 
evolved circuit improved the discrimination margin for 
different materials. Moreover it kept the correct order of the 
pattems corresponding to the triboelectric series [26,27]. 
6. CONCLUSION 
These initial experiments, while illustrating the power of 
evolutionary algorithms to design analog circuit for 
sophisticated analysis of responses of sensor array and to 
maintain functionality by adapting to changing 
environments, only prepare the ground for further 
questions. Examples of further questions include addressing 
how the evolutionary mechanism can be implemented in 
hardware such that it can be integrated in the sensor, or 
how should the sensors responses be stored to avoid 
repeating the experiments for evaluating each circuit 
configuration. 
The long term results of the proposed research would allow 
sensor electronics to adapt to incoming data and extract 
higher quality data, making available information 
otherwise not accessible. It will make sensor systems 
adaptive and intelligent. It will increase the amount of 
information available from sensors, while actually 
decreasing the amount of data needed for downlink. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research described in this paper was performed at the 
Center for Integrated Space Microsystems, Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology and was 
sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA) under the Adaptive Computing Systems 
Program and the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 J. Koza, F.H. Bennett, D. Andre, and M.A Keane, “Automated 
WYWIWYG design of both the topology and component values of 
analog electrical circuits using genetic programming”, 
Proceedings of Genetic Programming Conference, Stanford, CA , 
[2] J. Lohn, J. and S. Colombano, “Automated Analog Circuit 
Synthesis using a linear representation”, M. Sipper, D. Mange 
and A. Perez-Unbe (Eds.) Evolvable Systems: From Biology to 
Hardware, Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
Berlin 1998, pp. 125-133 
[3] A. Thompson, “An evolved circuit, intrinsic in silicon, 
entwined in physics”. In Intemational Conference on Evolvable 
Systems. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
1996, pp. 390405. 
[4] E. Sanchez and M. Tomassini (Eds.) Towards Evolvable 
Hardware, LNCS 1062, Springer-Verlag, 1996 
[5] T. Higuchi, M. Iwata, and W. Liu (Eds.) Evolvable Systems: 
From Biology To Hardwarq Proc. of the First Intemational 
Conference, ICES 96, Tsukuba, Japan, Springer -Verlag Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, 1997. 
[6] M. Sipper, D. Mange, A. Perez-Uribe (Eds.) Evolvable 
Systems: From Biology To Hardware Proc. of the Second 
Intemational Confeence, ICES 98, Lausanne, Switzerland, 
Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1998. 
[7] J. R Koza, F. H. Bennett m,, D. Andre and M. A. Keane, 
Genetic Prog”ing  IJi - Darwinian Invention and Problem 
Solving, Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco, 1999 
[SI E. Vitoz, Analog VLSI Processing: Why, Where and How, 
Joumal of VLSI Processing, Kluwer, 1993 
[9] Stoica, A. On hardware evolvability and levels of granularity. 
Proc. of the Intemational Conference ‘Tntelligent Systems and 
Semiotics 97: A Leaming Perspective, NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, 
Sept. 22-25, 1997 
[lo] Stoica, A. Klimeck, G. Salazar-Lazaro, C. Keymeulen, D. 
and Thakoor, A. Evolutionary design of electronic devices and 
pp. 28-31,1996 
5-2317 
circuits, Proc. of the 1999 Congress on Evolutionary 
Computation, Washington, DC, July 6-9, 1999 
[ 111 Stoica, A. Toward evolvable hardware chips: experiments 
with a programmable transistor array. Proceedings of 71h 
International Conference on Microelectronics for Neural, Fuzzy 
and Bio-Inspired Systems, Granada, Spain, April 7 -9, IEEE Comp 
Sci. Press, 1999. 
[12] Layzell, P. “ A New Research tool for Intrinsic Hardware 
Evolution”, ICES98 , Lausanne, Switzerland, 1998 
[13] P. Marchal et al. Embryological development on silicon. In 
R. Brooks and P. Maes, editors, Artificial Life ZV, pages 365-366. 
MIT Press, 1994. 
[14] White R. and Miles F. Principles of Fault Tolerance. In 
Proceedings of Eleventh Annual Applied Power electronic 
Conference and Exposition, pages 18-25, Vol.1. IEEE Press, 
1996. 
[15] Thompson A. In Proceeding of the First Intemtional 
Conference on Genetic Algorithms in Engineering Systems: 
Innovations and Applications, page 524-529. IEEE Press, 1995. 
[16] Layzell, P. In Proceedings of the First NASA/DoD Worshop 
on Evolvable Hardware, pages 85-86. IEEE Computer Society 
Press, 1999. 
[17] Stoica A., Keymeulen D., Tawel R., Salazar-Lazar0 C., Li W. 
In Proceedings of the First NAWDoD Worshop on Evolvable 
Hardware, pages 76-84. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1999. 
[18] Zebulum, R. et al., “Analog Circuits Evolution in Extrinsic 
and Intrinsic Modes” In Proc. of the Second International 
Conference, ICES 98, Lausanne, Switzerland, Springer -Verlag 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1998, pp 154-165. 
[ 191 J. A. Cross, Electrostatics: Principles, Problems and 
Applications, Adam Hilger (Bristol, UK). 
[20] “Electrometer Measurements”, Keithley Ins truments 
(Cleveland OH), 1972 
[21] Julian W. Gardner, Microsensors: Priimjdes and 
Applications. New York John Wiley & Sons, 1994. 
[22] Gert van der Horn and Johan L. Huijsing, Zntegrded Smart 
Sensors: Design and Calibration. New York: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1998. 
[23] M. Buehler, Rocking Mineral Experiments, Intemal 
Technical Report, JPL. 16 January 2000. Pasadena, CA. 
[24] M. Buehler et al., MECA Electrometer: Initial Calibration 
Experiments. In Proceedings of the I Oth Intemaltional Conference 
(Electrostatics 1999). Institute of physics Conference Series No 
163, pp 189-196, Institute of Physics ublishing, Bristol, UK, 
1999. 
[25] B. Schweber, Programmable analog ICS: designer’s delight or 
dilemma ?. In EDN. April 2000. Cahners Publication. 
[26] O.J. McAteer, Electrostatic Discharge Control. McGraw- 
Hill, 1989. 
[27] N. Jonassen, Electrostatics, Chapman & Hall, 1998. 
[28] A. Stoica et al.. Reconfigurable VLSI Architectures for 
Evolvable Hardware: from Experimental Field Programmable 
Tmnsistcbr Arrays to Evolution-Oriented Chips. In IEEE 
Transaclions on VLSI. April 2001, IEEE Press. 
~ 
5-2318 
Didier Keymeulen is a Research 
Engineer at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory of the California Institute 
of Technolog.. His interests are in 
complex dynamical systems applied to 
the de,.sign of adaptive embedded 
systems. He obtained his M.Sc. and 
Ph.D. in Computer Science from the 
ArtiJicial Intelligence Laboratory of 
the VriJe Universiteit Brussel, Belgium. 
Adrian Stoica is a Senior Member of 
Technical Stafs at Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, Califomia Institute of 
Technor’ogy, Pasadena, CA. His 
research interests include reaming 
and adaptive hardware, evolvable 
hardware, sensor fusion processors, 
robot learning, and humanoid robots. 
He has published more than 50 
papers in these areas. He has a Ph.D. i 
University of Technology, Melboume, 
MSEE j>om Technical University of Iasi 
n EEJi-om Victoria 
Australia, and a 
, Romania. 
Martin Buehler is a Senior Research Scientist at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory of the Califomia Institute of 
TechnoZogy. He received the BSEE and MSEEfiom Duke 
University in 1961 and 1963, respectively and the Ph.D. in 
EE from Stanford University in 1966 specializing in Solid 
State Electronics. He workd at Texas Instruments for six 
years, ,at National Bureau of Standards (now NIST) for 
eight years. At JPL he has developed p-FET radiation 
monitors for CRRES, Clementine, TELSTAR and STR V,  E - 
nose which jlew on STS-95, and an electrometer for the 
Mars 01 robot arm. Martin is a member of the IEEE, Tau 
Beta Pi, and Sigma Nu. He holds I2 patents and has 
published over 100papers. 
Ricardo Zebulum is Research Engineer at the Jet 
Propu1:rion Laboratory of the Califomia Institute of 
Technology. He received his Bachelor degree in Electronic 
Engine<ering in 1992, his Msc. in Electrical Engineering in 
1995, and his PhD in Electrical Engineering in 1999, all of 
them at the Catholic University of Rio, Brazil. He stayed 
two years at Sussex University, from I997 to 1999, as a 
visiting PhD student. He has been involved with research 
in Evor‘vable Hardware since 1996. His research interests 
also include fault-tolerant systems, low power electronics 
and anlalog VLSI design. 
Vu Duong is a Master Student at U.C. Imine. He got his 
BS in Computer Science from UCSD. During his internship 
at JPL he programmed the evolutionary hardware test bed 
using Lab View and integrated measurement instruments. 
5-2319 
