Automated Event Classification for Multi-Gigabyte per 
Day Data Streams’ 
Donald S. Frankel, Kevin .J. Tibbetts 
Photon Research Associates, Inc., 1320 Centre St., Suite 201, Newton, MA 02459,617-527-0054 
Capt. David L. Cowan 
National Air Intelligence CenterDXMI, 41 80 Watson Way, WPAFB, OH 
Abstract-Multiband and hyperspectral scanning and staring 
remote sensors can generate dozens of gigabytes of data each 
week. Manually searching through so much data for short- 
lived, transient events is prohibitively expensive. The goal of 
our data exploitation program is to develop real-time 
processing algorithms to identify and classify such events for 
data streams of this magnitude. In this paper we describe a 
Bayes classifier that can assign identified events to known 
broad categories and can designate a confidence for correct 
classification based on the measurement conditions. Events 
that do not fit known categories are marked for the analyst’s 
attention. We have developed a graphical user interface to 
allow an analyst to process large numbers of events at a time. 
Our data exploitation program has developed classifiers in 
addition to those discussed here. When classifiers working in 
parallel disagree on the assignment of an event to a category, 
some means is needed to decide which to choose. To make 
the decision, we have .devised a “Committee of Experts” 
approach that arrives at a final classification by taking into 
account the confidence of the individual classifiers under the 
given measurement conditions. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................. 1 
1.0 INTRODUCTION ....................................................... 1 
2.0 APPROACH ................................................................. 2 
2.1 CLASSIFICATION E G INE ............................................ 2 
2.2 CLASSIFICATION ......................................................... 2 
2.3 MULTI-DIMENSIONAL C ASSIFICATION ...................... 3 
2.4 BAYES IS OPTIMAL, IF.. ............................................. 3 
2.5 PRIMER‘S GRAPHICAL USERINTERFACE .................. 3 
3.0 PRIMER FEATURES ................................................. 4 
4.0 RESULTS ..................................................................... 4 
4.2 LONGER DURATION EVENTS CLASSIFIED WITH SHORTER 
EVENTS ............................................................................. 4 
5.0 FUTURE WORK ......................................................... 5 
6.0 CONCLUSIONS .......................................................... 6 
7.0 REFERENCES ............................................................. 6 
8.0 BIOGRAPHY ............................................................... 7 
4.1 BRIEF TRANSIENTS ..................................................... 4 
1 .O INTRODUCTION 
Remote sensors create a massive data stream. A class of 
multispectral, fast fi-aming, staring, non-imaging sensors can 
collect hundreds of events per day. Analysis of so much data 
is a daunting task, requiring much skilled labor and often 
results in valuable data going unexamined for long periods of 
time. The needs of the users of remotely sensed data are 
entirely the opposite. As sensors become more capable, the 
users of the data demand interpreted results with ever-shorter 
latency. Systems are needed that can transform raw data into 
user messages on time scales from a few minutes to a few 
seconds. Furthermore, many facilities that process remote 
sensing data undergo personnel turnovers at regular intervals. 
It is important for such facilities to capture the experienced 
analyst’s expertise for use by new personnel. 
One approach to addressing these needs is to create a 
software system that serves as a bulk filter for known events. 
The filter would assign events to known event classes. It 
might also recognize collects that are just noise, flag events 
that do not fit into known classes, and provide summaries of 
the number of events of each type collected. In this way, 
single event classification would become the first step in 
analysis of the larger events of which the single events 
comprise. A system to perform rapid, single event analyses, 
called BERT (Brief Event Recognition and Typing) [l], is 
currently being developed by several independent 
collaborating investigators. BERT will include classifier 
algorithms embodying several different approaches. Each 
version of BERT will be tested at a remote sensing facility. 
An additional system, described below, will reconcile 
disagreements among the classifiers. We call the additional 
system a “Committee of Experts” (CoE) [2] .  The BERT 
system will be hosted initially in a remote sensing reporting 
system. 
A host of numerical classification schemes have been 
investigated over the course of many years [3]. Previously we 
have used a neural network approach with supervised 
learning to perform classification or prediction in a number 
of problem domains [4-91. The neural network approach has 
been highly successful in these cases, including remote 
0-7803-6599-2/01/%10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
4-1945 
sensing event classification [ 10-141. Other investigators have 
developed alternative approaches to this remote sensing 
classification problem, as have we. One group has developed 
a feature-based approach with a set of if-then rules to classify 
events [15, 191. This could be considered an expert system 
approach. Another investigator has used a Bayes classifier 
whose class boundaries are explicitly set by the user [16, 171. 
This can be thought of as a Bayes rule classifier with 
supervised learning. The purpose of this paper is to report on 
results using a self-organizing (unsupervised) Bayes 
classifier technique for rapid classification of transient 
events. “!j.elf-organizing” means that the system creates its 
own classes based on the distribution of the measurements of 
each parameter and the measurement’s expected uncertainty. 
The goal of the effort is to develop a layered recognition 
system fcir these transient events in which the first layer 
provides the most general identification of the event, while 
successive layers provide increasingly fine-grained 
discrimination. The rest of the paper describes our technical 
approach, its user features, the results obtained, and our 
conclusions and recommendations for future development. 
2.0 APPROACH 
2.1 Classtfication Engine 
Classification of unknown objects usually involves 
comparison with known objects. A number of mefhods for 
making such comparisons have been developed over the 
years. Many of these methods are “statistical”, in the sense 
that they explicitly recognize that even known objects 
belonging to the same class are not all identical. Rather, there 
is variability in the objects’ properties, even if they are 
manufactured items. In the statistical classifiers, the 
variability is expressed by a “distribution”, which 
sum mar in:^ the fraction of known objects whose property 
values lie within some range of values. Histograms are a 
familiar approximate representation of these distributions. 
For example, consider the data shown in Figure 1. Here we 
see two intensity measurements of an event as a function of 
time, one plotted in red, the other in blue. For simplicity, let 
us consider just the maximum intensity as a “descriptor” of 
the data. We cannot expect that all events of the same type 
would have identical intensities, even if they were created 
with that intent, which they are not. Rather, if we could 
measure the intensity of a large number of events of two 
different size classes, their intensity would vary, forming a 
distribution that might resemble the hypothetical distributions 
shown in Figure 2. 
In Figure 2, the peak intensity value of Large events is 
distributed according to the red curve, while Small events 
generate the green curve. The horizontal axis is the peak 
intensity, while the vertical axis is the relative fraction of the 
events having the corresponding peak intensity. In this 
example, the relative widths of the distributions indicate that 
the peak intensity of Large events is far more variable than 
that of Small events. Moreover, the most likely peak intensity 
for Large events (-5) is greater than that of Small events 
~ 
4-1946 
(-1). We can say with a high degree of confidence that the 
two most likely peak intensities of the distributions are 
different. Furthermore, if a great nunnber of events were 
observed, we would be able to say with high confidence that 
events of two sizes occurred. 
field Te5l July 1998 
Time 
Figure 1. Plot of intensity versus time For two measurement 
systems observing the same event. 
U 8 0.6 
I .-  (U 
0 0.4 i 
Z : Event with peak 
I 
assified as “large” i -
4 6 8 10 12 
Peak intensity (arb. units) 
0 
Figure 2. Hypothetical distributions of the peak intensity of 
two size classes of one type of event. Note that there is 
overlap of the distributions, implying that some large events 
will be calnfused with small events if peak intensity alone is 
used as the basis for tliscrimination. 
2.2 Classification 
But the task of a classifier is to assign each new single 
measurement to a class. For example, the vertical arrow and 
dashed line in Figure 2 symbolize a new measurement whose 
peak intensity is near 2.5. What can we say about the size of 
event that produced this new measurement? 
We cannot be definitive, because some events of either size 
have this peak intensity. The best we can do is to estimate 
which is the most likelv size for this event. The distribution 
curves illlistrated in Figure 2 give us an important piece of 
information, namely the fraction of events of each size that 
produce the measured intensity. This quantity is symbolized 
Po( I i), the probability of the measurement X, given that it is 
derived from class i, where i = 1 or 2 for large or small 
events, respectively. For the case illustrated in Figure 2, we 
can see that p(x I 1)> P(x 12). But what we want to 
estimate is p(i 1 x) the probability that the event belongs to 
class i, given the measurement, X. These two quantities are 
not the same thing. The Bayes Rule allows us to relate the 
latter probability to the former if some additional information 
is available. 
That other information used by a Bayes Rule classifier is the 
likelihood that there are Large events to be observed. This is 
often referred to as the "prior" probability. In the previous 
example, Large events might be rare in the area of 
observation. This fact would affect our estimate of the 
probability that the new measurement was a Large event. The 
effect is very direct: to estimate the probability that our 
measurement of 2.5 was caused by a Large event, we first 
multiply the fraction of Large events having this peak 
intensity by the fiaction of all events that are Large. Let us 
call this result PI. We have then P, = P(x I 1) x P(1). 
We apply this procedure to all of the possible event types that 
could have produced our measurement. The Bayes Rule then 
says that the likelihood that the event was a Large event is PI 
divided by the sum of all terms like PI for each of the n event 
types, i.e.: 
Likelihood that event is a Large event = 
n 
P ( l I X ) = P , t p i  
i= 1 
This procedure may be repeated for all n classes being 
considered, the denominator being the same in each case. 
The classification step then simply assigns the event to the 
class, i, having the largest value of P(i I x). A further test 
should be applied however, because the largest probability 
could still be very small. A small probability might indicate 
that the event belongs to an unknown class. 
2.3 Multi-dimensional Classijkation 
The Bayes Rule approach can be easily extended to cases in 
which several measurements are made on each event. 
Referring to Figure 1, the integrated area of the measured 
waveform (shown in color) could be used in addition to the 
peak value. The resulting probability distribution is then 
three-dimensional. Figure 3 shows contours of equal 
probability for these distributions. Additional measurements 
are often very helpful in making class assignments. Figure 3 
shows that even though the one-dimensional distributions are 
strongly overlapped, the two dimensional distributions are 
only weakly overlapped. 
2.4 Bayes is Optimal, if.... 
It can be shown that a classifier constructed fiom Bayes Rule 
as described above is optimal in that it makes fewer wrong 
classifications than any other approach. Why then are other 
classifiers often used? The answer is that the assumptions 
underlying the Bayes Rule are seldom satisfied in practice. 
The distributions of the measured parameters must be 
estimated from sparse data and are often inaccurate. Often, 
not even the functional form of the distribution is known. 
Furthermore, the prior probability distribution is almost never 
known. For this reason, equal prior probabilities are often 
assumed. The Bayes Rule classifier then simplifies to finding 
the highest value of P(x I i). 
' (training) ,,/r 
Peak intensity 
Figure 3. Contours of equal probability for 2-D distributions 
of two sizes of events. 
Figure 2 illustrates one of the unfortunate facts of life: classes 
we like to think of as distinct often overlap when we try to 
quantify them with remote sensing measurements. 
Furthermore, we might be in the unenviable situation in 
which the quantities we are able to measure have little direct 
connection with the property that defines the classes. 
Imagine, if you will, trying to classify an organism as male or 
female if we were allowed to measure only its mass. 
Measurement conditions also make a difference. Imagine 
further that we don't know for sure how many organisms are 
being weighed, nor whether they have one foot on the scale 
and the other on the floor. 
2.5 PRIMER'S Graphical User Interface 
4-1947 
Despite these difficulties, we have developed a Bayes 
classifier called PRIMER to provide a rapid, first-cut analysis 
capability for remotely sensed data. PRIMER'S graphical user 
interface (GUI) allows the user to process individual collect 
files, entire directories, or files from a list of file names. The 
latter feature is convenient when collects matching a user's 
criteria have been identified using a database application we 
have developed. The GUI supports ingesting files in all of the 
time vs. intensity formats used for the sensor. Buttons and 
dialogs allow the user to choose the signal duration to use, 
the upper limit of computer time to use, and several data 
processing options. Once the user has made these processing 
choices, PRIMER displays thumbnail plots of all of the 
selected data. The Bayes classification engine currently used 
by PRIMER viz. Autoclass, was developed by NASA [18, 
191. PRIMER creates all of the input files required by 
Autoclass and displays the results either in text or graphical 
format. 
3.0 PRIMER FEATURES 
PRIMER is an unsupervised classifier; i.e. it can find its own 
classes based on the distribution of the measurements of the 
events and the estimated measurement uncertainty. The 
models developed can then be used to classify new data. 
PRIMER uses Gaussian data distribution models, either with 
or without allowing missing data values. Since the sensor is 
capable of many different sampling rates, the data are re- 
sampled onto a common time grid. Intensities can be 
normalized or used as is. 
We have made no attempt as yet to develop feature detectors 
given the appearance of the remotely collected signals. 
Indeed, the events in each class strongly resemble each other 
and differ from those in other classes. The most salient 
features seemed to he peak intensity and duration. The class 
labels entered in the second column of Table 1 were coined 
by one of the author:; (DSF) and are reasonably descriptive of 
the events in each class. 
Table 1. PRIMER analysis results of a field test conducted in 
1998 of small, medium, and large events. Class 
characteriizations, e.g. “Tinyhhort” were invented by one of 
the authors and are descriptive of the original data in each of 
the classes found by PRIMER. 
that would provide attributes for PRIMER to use in 
classification. Instead, we have adopted a straightforward 
approach in which such features are included implicitly. Each 
measurement time sample is treated as an event attribute. 
PRIMER then uses the data samples directly to produce its 
classifications. Principal component analysis can be applied 
prior to PRIMER analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the 
data if desired, although this may not be convenient in daily 
use. We have used principal components, but have found that 
the results have been very similar to those obtained using the 
original measurements. 
The events of interest may last anywhere from a few seconds 
to several minutes. Because we use the data samples rather 
than attributes such as peak intensity or rise time, it is crucial 
to have a method for aligning the signals in a reproducible 
way. Two methods are now available in PRIMER. The first 
is to align the events at their first sample. This method is 
sensitive to the degree of skill with which the sensor’s data 
were processed before PRIMER’S analysis. The other is to 
align the signals at their peak intensity sample. When an 
event is shorter than the user’s chosen duration, the input is 
padded with “missing data” values. Another way of lo’oking at the data is given in Figure 4, 
which shows a principal component plot of the field test data. 
In Figure 4, Types 2, 3, and 4 correspond to the “small,” 
“medium,” and “large” classes in Table 1. This is a case like 
that mentioned above; we can not measure the quantity that 
defines o’ur classes. Instead, we can 01dY observe a quantity 
that iS an unintended side effect O f  what distinguishes the 
classes. Besides that, we have litlle Control over the 
conditions that applied when the evenis occurred. As Figure 
4 shows., we can e:xPect overlap of the classes as Well as 
OUtlierS, i.e. items that are far removed from Others Of any 
class. This picture is consistent with the PRIMER results 
shown in Table 1. 
4.2 Longer duration atentS classiJed With shorter eVentS 
4.0 RESULTS 
4. I Brief Transients 
The first test of PRIMER used remote sensing data collected 
a field test conducted in 1998. Twelve small, three 
medim, and thee large events were observed in desert soil 
T~~ sensor configuations were used to observe the 
events. The results obtained by PRIMER indicated that the 
remotely sensed event data more properly belonged in nine 
classes rather than three. 
The results are summarized in Table 1. The classes found by 
PRIMER do not comespond to medim, arid large”, 
which are the “true” classes. Indeed, “small” events-are 
found in five different classes for each sensor configuration. 
Similar results are obtained for the “medium” and “large” 
events. Looked at in another way, we find several classes that 
contain events from more than one of the “me” size classes. 
To further test the usefulness of the PRIMER approach, we 
then tumled our attention to classifying signals of other types 
of event:s. Our aim in this case was to be comprehensive, 
including as many events as possible: into broadly defined 
Classes ,4 and B. In  addition to “small, medium, and large” 
4-1948 
PRIMER. Generally speaking, Class B events are much more 
variable in duration than Class A. Class B events can be 
about as long as Class A events, or they can be as much as 
100 times longer. Nevertheless, this frrst test was restricted to 
the same brief time period used in the analysis of the well- 
documented Class A events described in Table 1. This choice 
simplified comparison with the previous results, but more 
importantly it allowed us to assess the degree to which these 
data can be used to generate rapid recognition and messaging 
for users desiring near-real time results. To assess how much 
information could be derived just from the shape of the 
signals; thus avoiding any calibration or atmospheric 
transmission uncertainty, the signals were normalized by 
dividing each by its largest value. Furthermore, the 
classification was done without regard to the sensor 
configuration. A later test will exploit the calibrated data. 
I 
Figure 4. Principal component plot of remote sensing data of 
three sizes of event: Type 2 is small, Type 3 is medium, and 
Type 4 is large. Note that on these two axes there is overlap 
of all of the sue groups, plus an outlier. 
True Class 
Consistent with the previous test set, PRIMER found 
nineteen classes rather than two. Such a result is not 
unreasonable in this case, since Classes A and B are broadly 
defined, and the ensemble of Class A and Class B events 
derived from a considerable number of sources. When 
PRIMER’S classes were examined, the majority of them were 
dominated by either Class A or B. This result permits the 
output to be mapped easily into Class A or B provided that 
we add a layer of post-processing logic to combine the 
classes found by PRIMER appropriately. The output to the 
user includes the uncertainty in the class assignment. 
Found A 
Class B 
In cases where PRIMER’S classes contain a mix of Class A 
and Class B events, PRIMER’S output is the probability of 
being Class A or B. Lacking a true “prior” distribution, we 
estimate the probability from the fraction of A and B events 
in the training set. For the purpose of assessing PRIMER’S 
reliability, however, it is useful to label each of the found 
A B YO correct 
75 25 75% 
10 166 94% 
classes as being either A or B. Observations can then be 
scored as either correctly or incorrectly assigned. The results 
for this data set are shown in Table 2. The fraction of correct 
classifications is well above the threshold expected from a 
useful bulk filter classifier of these data. This is remarkable 
considering that only the first five seconds of normalized 
data have been used. 
Table 2. Results of PRIMER classification of 276 remotely 
sensed events are displayed in a contingency matrix. 
Normalized data aligned at the first sample were used 
without regard to sensor configuration. The events are 
categorized into broad classes A and B for purposes of 
evaluating classifier performance accuracy. Diagonal 
elements (bold) are correctly classified, while off-diagonal 
events have been misclassified. The “true” class of several 
“misclassified events is in fact doubtful, implying that 
classifier accuracy may be better than indicated. 
The maximum amount of computation time allowed for 
developing a new statistical model is a user-controlled 
parameter. Using a Sun Ultra1 computer, generally 2 hours 
were allowed to create the class models described here. 
When a satisfactory model has already been developed and is 
suitable for new data, classifying one hundred new files 
requires a few seconds. 
5.0 FUTURE WORK 
The results shown in Figure 4 and summarized in Table 1 
indicate that discrimination of small, medium, and large Type 
A events cannot be done reliably under the conditions of the 
field test. We recommend that the events be observed against 
other types of terrain and under other circumstances. Even 
though “small, medium, and large” events might not be 
discriminated, it is possible that other useful information 
could be extracted. 
So far, all of our results have been obtained using the first 
five seconds of each data collect. The logical next step will 
be to apply PRIMER to classification of Class B events using 
longer durations. It will probably be advantageous to 
introduce a preprocessing step in which collects are stratified 
into a few separate groups based on their duration. Separate 
models would be used for each duration group. This 
approach would be the first step in developing a real-time 
classifier that updates and improves the confidence of its 
output as an event progresses. Other simple extensions of the 
current work include exploiting the calibrated intensity 
measurements rather than using normalized data and 
performing peak alignment. 
As discussed in the introduction, PRIMER is intended for use 
as a component of the BERT system. BERT will incorporate 
several classification and discrimination algorithms. Several 
4-1949 
are already in development, while others may emerge later. 
Having multiple classifiers will simply be redundant rather 
-than advantageous if they all make the same mistakes. Our 
hope is that some classifiers will perform better than others 
under sonme circumstances and for some types of events. 
The CoE system will be needed to resolve disagreements 
among classifiers. Figure 5 depicts the architecture of the 
BERT system including the CoE. Its “open” architecture 
allows additional algorithms to be introduced in the future as 
needed. Sensor data and collection condition data are 
ingested by the BERT classifier algorithms. Collection 
condition data and classifier outputs are ingested by the CoE. 
As part of this effort, an interface control document (ICD) 
will be developed in consultation with the other current 
BERT algorithm developers. The ICD will assure that the 
algorithm outputs will be uniform and readable by the CoE. 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the BERT system including 
the Committee of Experts (CoE) functioning within the 
remote sensing reporting system. The remote sensing 
reporting system supports the input data, the operation of the 
various BERT classifiers, the graphical user interface (GUI), 
and the production of text reports that will be formatted for 
user messaging systems. A common interface for the 
classifiers assures uniform output formats and facilitates 
input to ithe CoE. The CoE consists of a processor that 
reconciles conflicting classifier output and an easily updated 
Confidence Matrix used by the processor. 
The CoE consists of both an algorithmic processor and a 
“Confidence Matrix” file. While the algorithm processor will 
not necessarily be modifiable in the field, the Confidence 
Matrix can be updated and will be easily replaceable as more 
experience is gained in the performance of BERT algorithms, 
or when algorithms are added. The Confidence Matrix 
reflects tlhe reliability of each classifier’s output under the 
given dat,a collectiori conditions. The CoE uses this matrix to 
estimate the conl3de:nce level of each classifier and choose 
the most reliable as the fmal classification. The output of the 
CoE is tlhe classification of the even1 and the confidence 
associated with the classification given the measurement 
conditions and the classifier technologies used. 
6.0 CONCLUSIONS 
PRIMER’S results demonstrate the consistency of the 
intuitive ]picture that emerges from visual inspection of the 
data on one hand and a statistical analysis of these data on the 
other. This result gives us confidence that PRIMER can be 
used effectively as a classifier of remote sensing data. 
On the strength of the results shown in Table 1 and Figure 4, 
we conclude that small, medium, and large events of this type 
cannot be characterized reliably by remote sensing under the 
desert soil circumstances of the test protocol. This result is a 
consequence of the nature of the events rather than a failing 
of the remote sensor or classification technique. PRIMER 
grouped ithe events in much the same way that a human 
analyst would, based solely on the observations. It is 
probably more worthwhile to observe these events in 
different terrain or under other conditions, to see if some 
useful information can be inferred even if the “small, 
medium, or large” distinction cannot. 
The results shown in Table 2 are for events that differ from 
each other by more than just size. Unlike the discrimination 
task discussed above, the results presented in Table 2 indicate 
that PRIMER can classify remotely sensed data when the 
data support it. This result is all the mo’re encouraging when 
we recall that only the fxst five seconds of normalized data 
have been used. PRXMER is clearly ready to be used on 
additional types of remote sensing eveints using longer data 
segments. 
’7.0 REFERENCES 
111 SPORT Kickofl meeting notes, EJ #98-64, classified 
report. 
[2] See, for example, V. Tresp, M. Taniguchi, “Combining 
Estimators Using Non-Constant Weighting Functions,” 
Advances in Neurul Information Processing Systems 7, 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995. 
[3] See for example, K. Varmuza, “Lecture Notes in 
Chemistry, vol. 21,” Pattern Recognition in Chemistry, New 
York: SpIinger Verlag, 1980, and K. FLkunaga, Introduction 
to Statistical Pattein Recognition, New York: Academic 
Press, 1972. 
[4] D. Frankel, S. Frankel, B. Binder, R F. Vogt, 
“Application of Neural Networks to Flow Cytometry Data 
Analysis :and Real-Time Cell Classification,” Cytometry, 23, 
p.290, 19!J6. 
4-1950 
[5] D.S. Frankel, M.R Loken, G.T: Stelzer, K.E. Shults, C.B. 
Bagwell, “Neural Network Frequency Distribution Analysis 
of Flow Cytometric Data for Normal and Leukemic Human 
Bone Marrow,” Cytomety, Supplement 7, p.46, 1994. 
[6] D.S. Frankel, M.R. Loken, G.T Stelzer, and K.E. Shults, 
“Neural Network Analysis Of Flow Cytometric Data For 
Normal And Leukemic Human Bone Marrow.” Cytomev, 
Supplement 6, p.44, 1991. 
[7] D. S. Frankel, S. L. Frankel, “Real Time Neural Network 
for Flow ’ Cytometry Analysis,” Cytometry, Supplement 5, 
p.63, 1991. 
[SI D, Frankel, I. Schiller, J. S. Draper, and A. A. Barnes, Jr., 
“Use of Neural Networks to Predict Lightning at Kennedy 
Space Center,” Proceedings of the IJCNN ’91, Seattle, WA, 
June 1991. 
[9] D. S. Frankel, R. J. Olson, S. L. Frankel, and S. W. 
Chisholm, “Use of a Neural Network Computer System for 
Analysis of Flow Cytometric Data of Phytoplankton 
Populations,” Cytometiy, 10:540-550, 1989. 
[ 101 D. Frankel, KI #97-69, classified report 
[ 1 13 D. Frankel and D. Sene, IRIS Targets, Backgrounds, and 
Discrimination Symposium, 1998, classified paper. 
[12] D. Frankel, KI #98-94, classified report. 
[13] D. Frankel, M. Hanson, K. Tibbetts, R. Wohlers, D. 
McKay, KI #99-63, classified paper. 
[14] D. Frankel, J. S. Draper, H. E. Evans, R. L. Cody, W. T. 
Caldwell, National Military Sensing Symposium, November, 
1999, classified paper. 
[15] Ritter, A. Weisberg, T. Slusarchyk, J. Lisowski, B. 
Hibbeln, “Transient Event Characterization,” 1999 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference Proceedings, March, 1999. 
[[16] S. Hagerty, C. Hilliard and A. Haralson, “Real-time 
Discrimination of Battlefield Ordnance Using Remote 
Sensing Data,” 2000 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, March, 2000. 
[17] S. P. Hagerty, K. B. Ansari, A. E. Haralson, J. S. Draper, 
K. Blankenship, “Comparison of Correlation, Distance, and 
Bayes Classifiers for the Near Real-Time Discrimination of 
Battlefield Ordnance,” I999 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, March, 1999. 
[18] R Hanson, J. Stutz, P. Cheeseman, “Bayesian 
Classification Theory,” NASA Technical Report FIA-90- 12- 
7-01, NASA Ames Research Center, Artificial Intelligence 
Branch, May 1991. 
[ 191 P. Cheeseman, J. Stutz, “Bayesian Classification 
(Autoclass): Theory and Results,” Advances in Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining, Usama M. Fayyad, Gregory 
Piatetsky-Shapiro, Padhraic Smyth, Ramasamy Uthurusamy, 
Eds. AAAI PressMT Press. 1996. 
[20] A.B. Ritter, T.J. Slusarchyk, J.J. Lisowski, B.A. Hibbeln, 
”Enhancement and Assessment of a Transient Event 
Characterization Algorithm,” 2000 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, March 18-25,2000 
8.0 BIOGRAPHY 
Dr. Donald Frankel, Senior Scientist 
Manager at Photon Research 
Associates, has more than 20 years of 
experience in the area of analyzing 
data under government sponsorship. 
He plays a key role in developing 
technologies to exploit COBRA BRASS 
orithms based on neural networks and 
Bayes cIassiJiers for rapidly recognizing a variety of militaT 
targets. He was thefivst to demonstrate ranging to a boosting 
missile from space using MPR techniques. Dr. Frankel is 
currently the Project Manager for PRA’s M S I N T  work in 
support of the National Air Intelligence Center. Dr. Frankel 
pioneered the application of neural network techniques to a 
variety of classijkation and prediction problems, including a 
lightning predictor for Kennedy Space Center, a predictor of 
off-flavors in farm-raised catfish, and a classi$er of 
phytoplankton and blood cells, respectively, using optical 
measurements from flow cytometers. As part of these 
projects, he designed a data acquisition system and 
developed software for performing the cell classifications in 
real time. He has a BA in Chemistyfrom Haverford College 
and received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from MIT in 
I9 74. 
Kevin Tibbetts, an engineer at 
Photon Research Associates for two 
years, is involved in writing and 
developing code for IMPRESS, PRA’S 
Monocular Passive Ranging ( W R )  
software written in IDL code and 
PRIMER, an earIy ID software which 
provides a rapid scheme for analyzing 
sensor data and offers accurate missile and bomb 
identijkation. In addition, Mr. Tibbetts is processing and 
analyzing the intensity data for Low Intensity Conflict 
analysis, a project reporting, tracking and analyzing specific 
ordnance event collects from a new sensor. Mr. Tibbetts 
received his BS in Engineering Physics in May of 1998from 
the University of Maine. While attending the University of 
Maine he worked at the Laboratory for Surface Science and 
Technology on campus as an Engineer Assistant. 
Capt. David L. Cowan, National Air Intelligence 
Center/DXMJ, graduated from the University of North 
Texas with a Bachelor’s in Human Resource Management in 
December 1994. He was Commissioned, Distinguished 
Graduate, through Air Force ROTC in August 1995. Since 
then his assignments have included Goodfellow AFB Sep 95 - 
Jun 96: Intelligence School Student, ElmendorfAFB Jul96 - 
Aug 99; I1 AF Intelligence Watch Of$cer, I1 AHAlaska 
NORAD .RegiodAlaska Command Special Security OfJicer. 
Since On' 99 he has served at Wright-Patterson AFB as the 
Thermal IR Program Manager and COBRA BRASS Program 
Manager 
4-1952 
