The Wide-Field Imaging Interferometry Testbed 
Xiaolei Zhang, 
Raytheon ITSS / NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Lee Feinberg, David Leisawitz, Douglas B. Leviton, Anthony J. Martino, and John C. Mather 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 
zhang@stars.gsfc.nasa.gov 
30 1-477-3 562 
Abstract-We are developing a Wide-Field Imaging 
Interferometry Testbed (Wa) in support of design studies 
for NASA's future space interferometry missions, in 
particular the SPIRIT and SPECS far-infraredhbmillimeter 
interferometers. WIIT operates at optical wavelengths and 
uses Michelson beam combination to achieve both wide- 
field imaging and high-resolution spectroscopy. It will be 
used chiefly to test the feasibility of using a large-format 
detector array at the image plane of the sky to obtain wide- 
field interferometry images through mosaicing techniques. 
In this setup each detector pixel records interferograms 
corresponding to averaging a particular pointing range on 
the sky as the optical path length is scanned and as the 
baseline separation and orientation is varied. The final 
image is constructed through spatial and spectral Fourier 
transforms of the recorded interferograms for each pixel, 
followed by a mosaidjoint-deconvolution procedure of all 
the pixels. In this manuer the image within the pointing 
range of each detector pixel is further resolved to an angular 
resolution corresponding to the maximum baseline 
separation for fringe measurements. 
We present the motivation for building the testbed, show the 
optical, mechanical, control and data system design, and 
describe the image processing requirements and algorithms. 
WIIT is presently under construction at NASA's Goddard 
Space Flight Center. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
INTRODUCTION 
WIDE FIELD IMAGING MICHnSON BEAM 
COMBINATION MODE 
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN AND OBJECTZVES OF 
WlIT 
MATHEMAnCAL FORMULATION 
AND CONSTRUCTION OF 
STATUS OF THEi DESIGN 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUC~ON 
The proposed Submillimeter Probe of the Evolution of 
Cosmic Structure (SPECS, see Mather et al. 2000) and 
Space WaRed  Interferometric Telescope (SPIRIT) 
missions are intended to observe the predominant far- 
infrared and submillimeter emissions in the universe, and to 
study how the first galaxies and structures formed and 
evolved. Ideally, we would like to obtain images in the far- 
infrared covering the same spatial extent (- several 
arcminutes) and with the same angular resolution (- tens of 
milliarcseconds) as the Hubble Deep Fields. This 
corresponds to roughly 10,000 x 10,000 resolution elements 
per image. Furthermore, to support high spatial resolution 
interferometry and to study line emissions in galaxies, we 
will need spectral resolution capability. 
The coming of age of large-format, background-limited far- 
infrared detector arrays calls for an exploration of the 
interferometer configurations that are best coupled to the 
characteristics of the detectors for acquiring wide-field, high 
spatial- and spectral-resolution images. The SPECS and 
SPIRIT instruments, as currently envisioned, are both 
Michelson spatial-spectral interferometers with 2 or 3 
collector mirrors surrounding a central hub, and are capable 
of varying baselines so as to achieve full spatial frequency 
coverage. In order to establish the feasibility of using this 
configuration to achieve high-fidelity wide field imaging, a 
laboratory testbed is proposed for construction at NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center (Leisawitz et al. 1999). This 
testbed will be a scaled-down version of the future SPIRIT 
and SPECS in size, operating at optical wavelengths, and 
using the same kind of detection schemes as will be used for 
the space interferometers. In what follows, we describe the 
principles, the design and the objectives of the testbed, and 
report the progress to date on its construction and on 
understanding its expected performance. 
2. WIDE FIELD IMAGING IN MICHELSON BEAM 
COMBINATION MODE 
In the practice of radio interferometry, the correlation and 
interference of signals from the different antennas are done 
post-detection. In optical interferometry, however, the 
interference of signals from the different optical paths are 
done naturally by overlapping the beams in space, followed 
by the detection of the resulting h g e s  either in space or in 
'0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 @ 2001 IEEE 
3-1453 
time. Of the two widely used image-plane optical beam 
combination schemes, i.e. the Fizeau and the Michelson, the 
conventional view is that the Fizeau should be used for wide 
field applications, since the off-axis performance of a 
Fizeau-type interferometer is limited only by the aberrations 
in the optics. The so-called Michelson stellar interferometer, 
on the other hand, has been shown to have a much more 
limited field-of-view, due to the fact that its off-axis point- 
spread-fimction is in general different from the on-axis one, 
resulting from the different rates with which the fringe- 
.envelope and the fringes themselves move as the off-axis 
angle increases (Traub 1986; Labeyrie 1996). 
The field-of-view limitation of the Michelson stellar 
interferometer, however, does not ,afflict the so-called 
traditional Michelson spatial intederometer which 
implements a pupil-plane beam combination scheme. In this 
scheme, a beam splitter is used to combine pupil images at 
zero spatial separation. Furthermore, an imaging lens 
following the beam combiner can be used to map the rays 
from different sky directions into the different spatial 
locations on the focal plane. In this scheme the fringes 
corresponding to each sky direction arc: actually formed in 
time, or in the delay direction as the path length between the 
two interferometer arms changes. In this way the different 
(Paraboloid) 
L 
Rotate bl8 
Source 
TB~SGGIP~?~ 
Beam Reducer 
‘I 
t 
I 
Deisy 
Line 
2 Cats’ Eyas 
Figure 1: WIIT Optics 
Spectrometer 
3-1454 
rates for fiinge-movement and fringe-envelope-movement 
no longer cause problems, since the fringe-movement is now 
recorded in the temporal direction for each sky direction. It 
is such a pupil-plane beam combination, image plane 
detection scheme that we plan to adopt for WIIT (Figure l), 
and eventually also for SPECS and SPIRIT. 
In Figure 1, the schematics of the WIIT optics design is 
shown. A parabolic collimator produces parallel beams 
from a source located at its focus, simulating the “infinity” 
condition corresponding to a source on the sky. Two flat 
mirrors collect two parcels of the collimated wavefront, and 
after beam size reduction by the beam-reducer optical train 
and path length compensation by the cat‘s eye delay line, 
these pupil plane beams are combined through a beam 
splitter to produce two output beams. Each is further 
imaged by a dielectric lens before fmal detection at the focal 
plane of the imaging lens. The spatial frequency (the so- 
called u - ~ )  plane is sampled through the combination of the 
variation of the baseline length by the two linear translation 
stages carrying the collector mirrors, and the variation of the 
effective baseline orientation by the rotary stage carrying the 
source. 
We plan to place a CCD array detector at the focal plane of 
the lens, with the focal length of the lens properly chosen to 
match the spacings of the CCD pixels such that the pixels 
Nyquist sample the primary beam of the collector mirrors. 
As the more rigorous analysis later will show, this 
arrangement allows the interferometer images acquired by 
individual detector pixel to be ‘’mosaiced” together. It also 
allows the recovery of a portion of the low spatial frequency 
flux that is not directly measured by a single pixel 
interferometer. The final linear resolution corresponds to 
the maximum baseline separation, and the linear resolution 
element per image is given by the number of linear CCD 
pixels times the number of interferometry resolution 
elements per CCD pixel. For the actual WIIT design (Zhang 
2000a), this number is comparable to what is intended for 
SPECS, i.e. 10,000 linear resolution elements. 
The main objectives of the testbed are the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
To establish the feasibility of the basic design 
confguration. The actual demonstration of wide-field 
imaging using a Michelson interferometer has never 
been previously attempted, so the validity of this 
approach needs to be shown. 
To study the optical performance of the design. The 
optics needs to be either aberration free both on- and 
off-axis over a wide field of view, or else an effective 
aberration compensation scheme needs to be devised in 
the optical setup or in the data reduction procedure. 
To study the many technical issues of data acquisition 
such as metrology, absolute phase reference, long stroke 
delay and on-the-fly data taking. Effective calibration of 
the data also needs to be investigated. 
4. To explore the various data analysis algorithms, 
especially the mosaic image-reconstruction and joint- 
deconvolution procedures developed by the radio 
astronomy community over the past decades. 
To study the effective management of the large amount 
of data obtained by the wide-field, high resolution 
Michelson spatial and spectral interferometer, and to 
compare the eficiency of various data analysis 
5. 
algorithms. 
During actual measurement, we will record h g e s  measured 
by each detector pixel as we vary the delay-line length. The 
white-light fiinge peak for each sky direction will occur at 
different delay-line settings, the actual offset depending also 
on the baseline used for the particular measurement. The 
fiinges are recorded at least twice per cycle for the shortest 
wavelength of interest. The absolute phase of the acquired 
fiinges is referenced to a point source on axis. A spatial and 
spectral Fourier transform followed by a mosaicljoint- 
deconvolution procedure produces high-resolution wide- 
field images for each spectral channel. 
4. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION 
Apart from the order of beam combination and signal 
detection, the method we use for interferometric data 
acquisition is very similar to that used in radio astronomy. 
In particular, both the optical and radio versions of the 
Michelson interferometers are designed to measure the so- 
called complex visibility function V, or the correlation 
between two complex signals u1 and 9. In radio, the 
correlation function <ul.u2> is measured by a complex 
correlator. In optics, the detector measures effectively 
<(~l+u2)~> = < U ~ ~ + U ~ + ~ U ~ . U ~ > ,  and after subtracting the 
DC component <uI2+u2>, the correlation function <ul .u2> 
again results. Therefore, many useful mathematical tools 
developed in the practice of radio interferometry can be 
adapted to the optical case. 
For a source confined to a small region of the sky 
surrounding coordinate center lO ,O) ,  the source brightness 
distribution B(1,m) near (0,O) and the visibility function 
V(u,v) measured by a Michelson interferometer with 
pointing and phase reference centers both at (0 ,O)  can be 
shown to satisfy a two-dimensional Fourier transform 
relation 
m m  
A(Z, m).B(Z, m) = j jV(u,  V)eZld(d+m) dudv (1) 
-m -m 
where A(1,m) is the primary beam response of the collector 
mirror, and, in our case, it also incorporates the detector 
pixel fimction which produces an effective illumination on 
the collector mirror. In the above expressions I,m are 
coordinates on the sky, and u,v are the coordinates in spatial 
3-1455 
frequencies (baseline divided by wavelength). Detailed 
derivation of the above relation can be found in Clark 
(1989). 
The spatial Fourier transform relation (1) holds for 
monochromatic radiation of a particular frequency. 
Therefore, in processing the measured fringe data, a 
temporal Fourier transform with respect to delay is often 
performed before the spatial Fourier inversion, making use 
of that fact that the fringe intensity in the delay direction 
satisfies a relation I(t) = 2 [ 1 k V1 cos (2 n: vo t/h+ cp)] for 
uniform delay line scan velocity vo, where V1 is the 
normalized visibility amplitude and cp the visibility phase. 
The wavelength-dependent phase shift allows the 
disentanglement of the various spectral components. 
A two-element interferometer of baseline separation B in 
principle can measure spatial frequencies in the rarige (B-D, 
B+D), where D is the diameter of the single collector mirror. 
However, for a single-pointing observation, the spatial 
frequency obtained by a two-element interferometer is only 
that corresponding to baseline B. As shown in Ekers ind 
Rots (1979), if one observes instead a series of pointings (lo, 
m,,) and stamps the measured visibility by both the pointing 
and baseline coordinates, i.e. V=V(u,v,&,m& then in 
principle one can obtain the flux in the entire range (B-D, 
B+D) through the use of the following Fourier transform 
relation with respect to the pointings (lo,m,,): 
= [FT(A)(u,v)] .  [FT(B)(uo - u,vo - v)], 
where FT(A)(u,v), FT(B)(u,v) are the Fourier transforms of 
A(1,m) and B(l,m), respectively, and where V(u,v,lo,mo) is 
defined through the familiar relation between sky brightness 
and visibility, with the relevant quantities stamped by the 
pointing location of the primary beam 
V(U,v,Zo,mo) = 
aom 
jA(Z, m,Zo, mo)B(Z, m)e-*"'"'+"' dZdm. (3) 
-m-m 
In the measurement defined above, the visibility is measured 
with the interferometer having delay and phase reference 
center (O,O), and primary beam pointing center (l, m,,). 
Equation (2) can be used to evaluate FT(B) over an annulus 
around the baseline (q,,vo). 
In practice, scanning for the continuous pointing range is not 
required, because the Fourier transform of the primary beam 
is band-limited. The Nyquist criterion tells us that 
V(yv,lo&) is fully specified by its values sampled on a 
regular grid in (l0,m) with the grid spacing equal to W2D. 
In the applications for SPECS, SPIRIT and WIIT, the 
multiple pointings are equivalently accomplished by a 
Nyquist-spaced large-format detector array on the focal 
plane, as long as delay is properly compensated for each 
pixel location. 
The above scheme due to Ekers and Rots (1979) for a two 
element interferometer is often replaced in practice by the 
following altemative mosaic joint-deconvolution scheme for 
measurements using an interferometer array (Cornwell 
1989). In this approach we maximize ihe entropy 
Bk H = -'x Bkln- 
k Mk-e (4) 
subject to the constraint of x2: 
where Bk represents the model kmage brightness, Mk 
represents the default image incorporating one's best prior 
knowledge of the recovered image, e is the base of the 
natural logarithm, V(q, v,, lor, Q) is the observed visibility 
hctiori  at the baseline location (q, v,) and sky location (lor, 
Q), V"(q,vr,lor,mor) is the model visibility distribution, and 
crv is the rms noise of the measurement. 
In this scheme, deconvolution is per€ormed simultaneously 
with the untangling of information available at the various 
spatial frequencies. Since the required deconvolution is 
nonlinear, this approach yields betteir results especially for 
image points located near the overlapiping boundaries of the 
different pointing positions. This approach also allows the 
addition of flux near zero spatial frequency measured in an 
autocorrelation mode. Mosaicing algorithms other than 
described above also exist in literature. We plan to 
evaluated the relative merit of each algorithm for dealing: 
with a particular image reconstruction problem during the 
testbed operation. 
5.  CURRENT STATUS OF THE DESIGN AND 
CONSIRUCTION OF WIIT 
W T  has received full funding front NASA. We have by 
now completed the optical, mechanical, control and data 
system design, and this design has passed an internal peer 
review. The details of the testbed design is described in 
zhang (2000a). Currently, the procurement process is 
essentially complete and the hardime components have 
mostly arrived. We are beginning, the assembly process 
presently. In the mean time, data reduction and analysis 
software is being developed as a joint effort between 
Goddard and the University of Mayland (Zhang, Mundy 
and Teuben 2000). 
3-1456 
subplate section 
fat V q n g E a s e l i n e  L 
InCmqL1& 
h m  Cdlimatm 
_____LI 
er 
Figure 2: WIIT Layout 
In Figure 2, we show the layout of the testbed. Since the 
ray-trace result (Zhang 2000b) showed that the curved 
design with beam reducers and Cars eye delay lines did not 
introduce significant off-axis aberration, at least for the 
design parameters adopted for WIIT, we decided to start 
with an all-flat design as shown on this figure, which 
eliminated all curved mirrors (but kept the imaging lens). 
Investigations into how to deal with off-axis optics 
aberrations (which might well be present for the SPJRIT and 
SPECS design which involve much larger beam reduction 
ratios) will be left to the future when we upgrade the system. 
In the design that is chosen, we will have about 16 inches of 
usable baseline and 1 inch diameter collector mirrors. The 
focal length of the collimator paraboloid is about 2.4 meters. 
We will be using 100x100 - 400x400 detector pixels, and 
each pixel is further resolved by the interferometer into 
-16x16 sub-pixels. The field of view ranges fiom 4 to16 
arcminutes. We intend to achieve a spectral resolution on the 
order of lo3. The operating wavelength is about 0.6 pn. 
The mechanical tolerances of this optical wavelengths 
testbed exceed that of the fiture infrared interferometers. 
The experience gained here will help us understand the 
corresponding requirements for the space instruments. 
In Figure 3, we show the schematics of the WIIT control and 
data systems. The testbed itself is controlled through a 
Labview interface by an industrial PC situated next to the 
optical bench. We will add remote-control and data 
monitoring capabilities as we pass the initial setup stage. A 
more sophisticated metrology system will be added if initial 
test results show a need for it. We expect to obtain the first 
fiinges and show results of one-dimensional interferometry 
at the time of the conference. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the rest of the WIIT team at NASA’s GSFC and at 
the University of Maryland for their contributions to the 
design and implementation of the testbed and the data 
analysis algorithms. 
7. REFERENCES 
Clark, B.G. 1989, “Coherence in Radio Astronomy”, in 
Synthesis Imaging in Radio Astronomy, ASP Conf. Ser. vol. 
6, eds. RA. Perley, F.R Schwab, & A.H. Bridle, p .1 
3-1457 
Building 5 Other Sites 
Testbed TmikFferometry Group Server 
*I Pass w o cd-protected 
** Cali bration 
*bFlTS file production 
3’ Data analysis 
-* Data archive MIRlAD 
project web site 
AI PS ++ 
IDL 
Data analysis - Remote testbed 
data 
Building 21 
Figure 3: WIIT Control and Data System 
Comwell, T.J. 1989, “Wide Field Imaging III: Mosaicing”, 
in Synthesis Imaging in Radio Astronomy, ASP Cod. Ser. 
vol. 6, eds. RA. Perley, F.R Schwab, & A.H. Bridle, 
p.277 
Ekers, RD., & Rots, A.H. 1979, “Short Spacing Synthesis 
from a Ikhnary Beam Scanned Interferometer”,’Proc. IAU 
Coll. 49, Image Formation @om Coherence Functions in 
Astronomy, C. van Schooneveld, Ed. (Dordrecht: Reidel), p. 
61 
Labeyrie, A. 1996, “Resolved Imaging of Extra-Solar 
Planets with Future 10-100 km optical Interferometer 
Arrays”, Astro. Astrophys. Supp. Ser., 118, p. 517 
Leisawitz, D. et al. 1999, “Wide-Field Imaging 
Interferometry ”, NASA proposal NRA-99-0 1-SPA-020. 
Mather, J., Moseley, S .  H., Leisawitz, Zhang, X., Dwek, E., 
Harwit, M., Mundy, L. G., Mushotzky, R F., Neufeld, D., 
Spergel, D., & Wright, E. L. 2000, “The Subndlimeter 
Probe of’the evolution of cosmic structure”, submitted to the 
Review of Scientific Instruments. 
Traub, W. 1986, “combing Beams from Separated 
telescopes”, Appl. Opt., Vol. 25, No. 4, p.528 
Zhang, X. 2000% “The Wide Field finaging Interferometry 
Testbed: Objectives and Design”, SPE,CS technical memo 
Zhang, X. 2000b, “Diffraction and Aberration 
Characteristics of the WIIT Optics”, SPECS technical memo 
Zhang, X., Mundy, L., and Teuben, P. 2000, “The 
Application of Radio Astronomy Algorithms to Imaging 
Interferalmetry for SPECS SPIRIT and WILT”, in the 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Optics, ed. 
R Lyon 
Dr. Xiaolei Zhang is Chief Scientisa at Raytheon ITSS’s 
Department for Astronomy and Solar Physics. Her research 
interests and experience include radio and far-idrared 
astronomical instrumentation, as well as the theoretical and 
observational studies of the formaiion and evolution of 
galaxies. She currently works at NASA’s Goddard Space 
Flight C!enter on the design study of the space far-infrared 
interferometry missions. 
3-1458 
Lee Feinberg was the Assistant Chief for Technology at 
the Instrument Technology Center of NASA’s Goddard 
Space Flight Center. He had served as the co-lead 
engineering coordinator and technologist for the SPECS 
study team at GAFC. He had spent eight years in the 
instrument office for the Hubble Space Telescope Project, 
including serving as Instrument Manager for the Space 
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Cosmic Origin 
Spectrograph. He has led the design of the Wide Field 
Camera 3 and co-developed the Detector Characterization 
Laboratory for WFC-3 at the GSFC. He was the technical 
lead responsible for interferometric verification of 
COSTAR and WFPC-II corrective aspheric optics. 
Dr. David Leisawitz is Deputy Project Scientist for the 
COBE project at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center. 
He is experienced in the fields of millimeter-wave 
molecular spectroscopy, radio astronomy, infi-ared 
photometry and IR data analysis. He conducts research on 
the interaction of massive starts with the interstellar 
medium. He leads the Far-IR Interferometry Mission 
Study Working Group and is the PI for WIIT. 
Douglas B. Leviton is a senior optical scientist, who 
began his career at GSFC in 1983, has developed a wide 
variety of optical technologies and test methods for E W  
through IR wavelengths for instruments for NASA science 
missions including the Cosmic Background Explorer, the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, and the Hubble 
Space telescope. His patented ultra-high resolution, 
absolutee, optical encoder technology won the NASA 
Government Invention of the Year for 1999. 
Dr. Ahthony J. Martino received his BS degree in 
physics from Xavier University in 1983, and his PhD in 
optics from the University of Rochester in 1990. Since 
1990, he has been at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight 
Center, where he is currently a group leader in the Lasers 
and Electro-optics branch. He splits his time between 
electro-optical technology development projects and the 
design and construction of electro-optical instruments for 
space flight missions. Among the projects to which he has 
contributed are the Composite m a r e d  Spectrometer for 
Cassini, the COR1 coronagraph for STEREO, and the 
Geoscience Laser Altimeter System for ICESat. 
Dr. John C, Mather is a senior astrophysicist at NASA’s 
Goddard Space Flight Center. He has led the Cosmic 
Background Explorer satellite science effort from its 
proposal in 1974. As PI for the Far IR Absolution 
Spectrophotometer, he showed that the cosmic microwave 
background has a blackbody spectrum to 50 ppm. As the 
NASA Study Scientist for the Next Generation Space 
Telescope, he co-leads the science team with P. 
Stockman. He has many awards, and is a member of the 
National Academy of Sciences. 
3-1459 
