In-situ Chemical Imager 
Dmitri A. Kossakovski Gregory H. Bearman Joseph L. Kirschvink 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
MS 306-336,4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
MS 306-336,4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Division of Geology and Planetary Sciences 
California Institute of Technology 
MS 170-25 Pasadena, CA 91 125 
Pasadena, CA 9 1 109 Pasadena, CA 9 1 I09 626-354-6136 
818-354-9575 818-354-3285 kirschvink(ii),caltech.edu 
dmitri.kossakovski(ii)ipl.nasa.gov gregorv.h.bearman@,iphasa.gov 
Abstr-act-A variety of in-situ planetary exploration tasks 
such as particulate analysis or life detection require a tool 
with a capability for combined imaging and chemical 
analysis with sub-micron spatial resolution. In our 
instrument, spatially resolved chemical imaging is achieved 
by augmenting a fiber optic scanning probe microscope with 
laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Elemental 
composition of surfaces can be mapped and correlated with 
topographical data. Experiments are conducted in ambient 
conditions or under vacuum with minimal sample 
preparation. A sharp fiber optic probe is used as a means for 
topographical analysis and as a delivery tool for pulsed laser 
radiation that vaporizes material below the probe. Optical 
emission from the ablation plume is analyzed withd a UVNIS 
spectrometer equipped with an intensified CCD detector. 
The ablation crater size is controlled by the amount of laser 
power coupled into the probe. Sampling areas with sub- 
micron dimensions are achieved by using reduced laser 
power. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. INSTRUMENT DESIGN 
3. PRELIMINARY DATA 
4. DISCUSSION 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
What are the signatures of fossil life and how do we detect 
them? Our knowledge of these is predicated upon 
experience with terrestrial life as well as some basic 
chemistry that is expected to apply everywhere. For 
example, terrestrial life widely uses phosphate groups for 
energy [ATP], since the superphosphate bond can store a 
convenient amount of chemical energy. 
Extraterrestrial life may use other approaches, but the 
chemistry is universal and phosphorus is a likely choice. 
Similarly, other important elements for biological organisms 
are carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur. Figure 1 shows the 
elemental distribution in the earth’s crust and terrestrial life. 
It is the diyerential elemental composition that is most 
useh1 as a biotic signature. Comparison of the composition 
of an object with its background matrix provides a clue of its 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 Q 2001 IEEE 
origin. Trace element enrichment by biological processes 
can be in excess of 100 ppm [I]. 
Doraanisms 
earth’s crust 
11,.1 
H C 0 N C a N a  P Si 
and andK 
Mg 
Fig. 1. Relative abundance of elements in biological organ- 
isms and the crust of the earth. Differences in elemental 
abundance between an object and its background matrix are 
possible indicators of a biotic origin. 
A third biotic signature is a fossilized structure 
(morphology) or the remains of biomineralization. Earth 
provides many examples of such microfossils [2] in which 
morphology can be tied to an organic origin. However, it is 
not always clear that a microstructure pattern or regularity 
can be tied to a biogenic origin. It is possible for 
geochemical processes to effectively mimic such structure 
and produce analogous objects that are very difficult to 
differentiate from biotic ones [3,4]. In fact, there is a class of 
imposters known as “dubiofossils” (pseudofossils, artifacts, 
or contaminants) to fool the unwary [ 5 ] !  In 1996 Grotzinger 
and Rothman [6] demonstrated that an abiotic growth 
process could reproduce the morphology of fossil 
stromatolites that “combines chemical precipitation of the 
growing interface, fallout and diffusive rearrangement of 
suspended sediment”. 
We are not claiming that this or any other instrument system 
will be able to unambiguously detect any and all biomineral 
products produced by 1iving.organisms. However, we will be 
able to determine which samples are worth a second look or 
perhaps should be returned to Earth for detailed study. 
1 - 3 7 Q  
How do we use these potential signatures as part of an 
organized search for extraterrestrial life? We must use 
multiple criteria for a convincing demonstration of a 
biogenic origin for an object. Since imaging of morphology 
alone can lead to identification errors, we combine imaging 
with measurements of chemical composition. In turn, 
chemical composition alone without an imaging context is 
also only part of the pi'cture. Knowledge of elemental 
enhancement for a sampled spot is misleading since imaging 
may show that one is sampling a thermally processed 
inclusion. The combination of both spatial and chemical 
information provides complementary information that yields 
a much more complete picture than either technique does 
alone. 
Our approach to spatially resolved chemical imaging is to 
combine scanning probe microscopy with chemically 
sensitive techniques. Technologies already exist to obtain 
either information set individually but not together. For 
example, AFM and other scanning probe microscopies will 
provide topographical information but nothing on chemical 
composition. Conversely, laser desorption or ablation 
methods can provide chemical data but at the expense of 
imaging and topography for provide context. For example, 
when pulsed laser radiation is delivered to a sample it will 
ablate and atomize material in a plasma plume. 
Spectroscopic analysis of the plasma is generally referred to 
as Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, LIBS [7]. 
Emissions from the pulsed plasma can be analyzed to 
discern the chemical composition of the surface. 
We are developing an instrument that combines LIRS with a 
scanning probe microscope to perform topographical and 
chemical imaging of surfaces and particles. In the Chemical 
Imager a sharp fiber optic probe coupled to a pulsed laser is 
scanned across the sample to study topography. The probe is 
then positioned above features of interest in the 
topographical image and LlBS data recorded to provide 
chemical information to further characterize the sample. 
When specific chemical signatures are observed they can be 
monitored during a rescan of the surface to generate an 
image of the identified species. 
2. INSTRUMENT DESIGN 
The instrument is based on the concept reported previously 
[SI. Instrument diagram is shown in Figure 2. 
Scanning Probe Microscope 
Our scanning probe microscope uses uncoated heat-pulled 
fiber optic probes and tuning fork position feedback. The 
fibers were pulled with a modified Sutter micropipette puller 
made by Sutter Instruments (Novato, CA). We have utilized 
multimode W transparent fiber HFS-50 from Radiant 
Communications (South Plainfield, NJ), with fiber core and 
cladding diameters of 50 and 125 pm, respectively. A 
photograph of a pulled probe is shown in Figure 3a. 
CONTROLLER 
E l  
WTH ICCD 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram showing major components of the 
Chemical Imager. 
Fig. 3. (.a) Picture of a pulled fiber optic probe. The starting 
cladding diameter is 125 p. The radius of curvature at the 
end of the taper is less than 1 micrometer. Most of the light 
efficiently propagates to the very tip of the taper. (b) Optical 
fiber glued to a high quality piezo resonator, piezo tuning 
fork, which in turn is attached to a larger piezoelectric plate. 
The plate is driven at the resonance frequency of the tuning 
fork. 
Shear force feedback was implemented using piezoelectric 
tuning forks as a sensor element following Karrai [9]. In this 
methodology the probe is attached to the tuning fork which 
is a high quality resonator. Mechanical vibration of the 
probe at the resonance frequency of the fork is excited by a 
separate piezo element. The voltage output of the piezo fork 
is propartional to the amplitude of probe vibration. When 
the probe approaches the sample at a distance less than -40 
nm, this vibration is damped by probe-sample interaction. 
The amplitude of the electrical signal from the fork is also 
reduced. This signal is used for the distance feedback loop 
control. 
Tuning forks with fundamental frequency of 32.768 kHz 
from Epson Electronics America (El Segundo, CA), part 
C-001R 32.768K-A, were used for the experiment. After the 
plastic coating was removed, fibers were heated and pulled 
so that aL sharp taper is created, and then glued to the fork by 
cyanoacrylate. An assembled tiplprobe system is shown in 
Figure 3b. 
The operation of the scanner is controlled by a PScan2 SPM 
controller from Pacific Scanning (Pasadena, CA). The signal 
access console of the PScan2 controller is used to feed the 
output of the tuning fork circuit into the controller and also 
to provide master TTL pulses for the LIBS system. 
The sample was mounted horizontally on a modified PTrak3 
scanner from Pacific Scanning. The range of scanning is in 
excess of 90x90 pm in lateral directions (designated XY) 
and 12 pm in vertical direction (designated Z). Inductive 
sensors are used for scanner linearization along X and 
Y axis. This is essential for reliable positioning of the probe 
for chemical study of specific features. The scanner was 
suspended on bungee cords to reduce mechanical vibrations. 
Laser Induced Breakdown Spectrometer 
A pulsed nitrogen laser from Laser Science Inc. (Franklin, 
MA), model VSL-337, was used to perform LIBS 
experiments. The laser emits at 337 nm and delivers laser 
pulses of 120 pJ with duration of 3 ns, at a repetition rate of 
20 Hz. The non-Gaussian beam is rectangular shaped with 
-1x8 mm beam cross-section. 
The beam was coupled into the fiber with a coupler from OZ 
Optics (Canada). . Transmission efficiency of the uncoated 
tapered fiber was 5% or less, measured in far field. . 
It is difficult to measure surface power density of laser 
radiation delivered to ablation spot through a fiber probe 
since not all light emitted from the probe contributes to the 
plume formation. Our experiments employ uncoated probes, 
from which a fraction of the light escapes through the 
tapered sidewalls near the probe tip. Without knowing the 
percentage of the light lost through sidewalls, we can only 
estimate an upper limit of the surface power density in the 
TOPOLIBS experiment. Assuming 5% transmission through 
the fiber and 3 pm spot size, the surface power density is 
about 1.25~10’ W/cm2 which is above a typical threshold 
value for LIBS [7]. This range of values is consistent with 
power densities required for observation of LIBS spectra. 
The issue of the spot size is considered in more detail in the 
Discussion section below. 
Optical emission from the plasma plume was collected with 
a standard 20-power microscope objective, coupled into a 
400 pm fiber and delivered to the 25 pm entrance slit of an 
MS125 spectrograph from Oriel (Stratford, CT). 
The spectrograph was equipped with an intensified CCD 
(ICCD) detector from Andor Technology (Belfast, Northern 
Ireland). The ICCD can be triggered and gated with 25 ns 
resolution. This feature is very important for acquisition of 
good quality LIBS spectra because the plume emission has 
short lifetime and should be separated from the original laser 
pulse. 
The timing scheme for the experiment is as follows. A TTL 
pulse from the PScan2 controller is delivered to digital delay 
generator DIG535 from Stanford Research Systems 
(Sunnyvale, CA). The delay generator supplies separate 
TTL pulses to the laser and ICCD, the delay between these 
pulses is adjustable. 
Spectra were analyzed with GRAMS132 package by 
Galactic Industries (Salem, NH). Tables of Spectral Line 
Intensities by W.F.Megger [lo] and FindEM software 
package from Multichannel (Stockholm, Sweden) were used 
to assign spectral features. 
3. PRELIMINARY DATA 
Topography: Tool for Finding Interesting Features 
In order to gain experience with diverse samples potentially 
interesting for in-situ analysis, we have collected a number 
of scientifically relevant samples, including fossils, 
planetary material analogs and meteorites. 
For example, Figure 4 shows micro topography of an 80 
Million year old aragonitic shell, Bacculites rex. The shell is 
iridescent in visible light which is explained by quazi- 
periodic deposits on the shell. These deposits act as a 
diffracton grating. Topographical scan with a pulled fiber 
probe clearly shows these ordered structures on the shell 
surface. Getting such data from an unknown sample would 
prompt further investigation with a need for chemical 
analysis of different regions, both structured and 
unstructured. 
Fig. 4. Topography of the Bacculites rex aragonitic shell. 
The shell is iridescent in visible light. Quazi-periodic 
deposits on the shell surface are responsible for this 
dieaction effect. The ordered deposits are well resolved in 
this topographic scan obtained with a sharp fiber optic 
probe. 
Spatial resolution of topographical imaging is determined by 
the sharpness of the probe. Typically, our probes have an 
end radius of curvature of about 100 nm when fresh. The 
1-281 
probes however may be damaged in the course of the 
experiment effectively lowering spatial resolution. 
LIBS: Tool for Chemical Analysis 
Chemical analysis of the sample is performed after 
topographical study. The probe is positioned in the region of 
interest and laser pulse is fired. Figure 5 shows LIBS 
spectrum generated by a single laser pulse delivered to the 
Bacculites rex shell surface through the same fiber optic 
probe with which the topography analysis was performed. 
‘ The probe was about 20 nm above the sample. 
Ca 
f l . . . , , . . . .  
380 420 460 500 540 
WAVELENGTH, NM 
Fig. 5. LIBS spectrum generated by a single laser pulse 
delivered to the Bacculites rex shell surface through the 
same fiber optic probe with which the topography analysis 
was performed. The probe was about 20 nm above the 
sample. 
Multiple strong calcium lines are identified in the spectrum. 
Enhanced levels of Sr are commonly present in unaltered 
Ca-biominerals produced by marine organisms [ 11. 
At the time of the writing we do not have a capability for 
localized chemical analysis correlated with topographical 
map, which is the ultimate goal for Chemical Imager. This 
capability will be implemented shortly. 
On The Way to Chemical Imaging 
Among the issues that are critical for obtaining useful data 
with the Chemical Imager are: 
8 
High-resolution LIBS spectra: every emitted photon is 
valuable since single laser pulses are used to produce 
plasma. 
High sensitivity and fast detectors: majority of 
biologically important elements are weak LIBS emitters. 
High-efficiency collection optics for LIBS signal 
acquisition: once again each photon is precious, 
especially if small laser powers are used to minimize 
sample damage. Reduced laser power leads to reduced 
amount of LIBS signal. 
Probe reliability and robustness: single probe should be 
able to serve long time for high quality scanning and 
laser radiation delivery. Mechanisms for probe exchange 
should be developed for remotelautonomous operation. 
Sections below address the issues of spectrum signal-to- 
noise ratio and sample damage by laser pulses. 
Time-resolved LIBS Spectra 
In the iinitial stages of plasma formation the peaks from 
elemental emissions are masked by broadband 
bremsstrahlung radiation. Later in the plasma plume lifetime 
the background dies out and sharp spectral peaks from 
excited neutral species start dominating the spectra. This is 
the reason for having a fast, gateable detector such as ICCD. 
Figure 6 shows two spectra from the same sample, one 
acquired without time delay between plasma generation and 
spectruni acquisition, while another with 40 ns delay. 
0 1 
400 450 500 550 600 p 
v) c 
380 
2.0 
10 
- 
n 
I 
400 450 500 550 600 
Emission wavelength, nm 
Fig. 6. Comparison of LIBS spectra acquired with and 
without delay after the laser pulse. No delay for top 
spectrum translates into high background and low signal to 
noise ra.tio, SNR. Bottom spectrum was acquired with a 
delay of 40 ns after the laser pulse. SNR is dramatically 
better. Stainless steel is a sample in both cases. 
The top spectrum was acquired by triggering the 
spectrometer before laser pulse, while the bottom one was 
acquiredl with a 40 ns delay after the laser pulse. The major 
emission lines are present in both spectra but the 
background signal is much lower in the “delayed” spectrum. 
Crater sizes 
LIBS is a destructive technique on a micro-scale. The size of 
a crateir formed when laser pulse evaporates material 
depends on a number of factors such as: 
0 Laser pulse characteristics-power and wavelength; 
0 Size of the area on the sample where surface power 
density exceeds threshold value; 
0 Material properties. 
1-282 
Figures 7 and 8 show different size of craters created by 
similar power laser pulse delivered to the surfaces of basalt 
and aluminum, respectively. Very clean, compact crater is 
created on basalt, while in case of aluminum the crater is 
much larger due to low melting point of the material. 
These data indicate that in an experiment with unknown 
substance the laser power should be kept initially low and 
then gradually increased in order to produce detectable 
spectra with minimal sample damage. 
4. DISCUSSION 
As was stated in the beginning of this paper, the goal of our 
study is to produce an instrument that would be useful for 
planetary exploration and life detection in particular. 
Keeping this in mind, we need not only to characterize the 
device by doing experiments with a host of samples, but also 
to put these studies in context of current global strategy for 
astrobiological exploration. 
Presently, all principal components of the laboratory 
prototype of the Chemical Imager are in place. We are 
evaluating system components from several manufacturers 
such as different types of lasers and optical spectrometers. 
The goal is to maximize sensitivity while minimizing sample 
damage. 
Once the instrument is fully operational, the plan is to 
perform a series of head-to-head comparison experiments on 
a same set of samples with other instruments considered for 
life detection. We believe that complex astrobiological tasks 
cannot be addressed by a single instrument but rather by a 
suite of complementary tools. A broad comparison of 
different tools on a same sample set will allow defining the 
best instrument combination for tackling the life detection 
problem. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
We are in the process of development and characterization 
of a new tool for spatially resolved chemical analysis. 
Ultimately, the Chemical Imager will be able to provide 
topographical and chemical maps of samples with sub- 
micron spatial resolution. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Grace Credo and Steve Buratto from 
the University of California, Santa Barbara, for their help in 
fiber probe manufacturing. The research described in this 
publication was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This 
project is funded by the JPL Grand Challenge and NASA 
PIDDP programs. 
n m  ,) Length = 10.9 pm P t =  85 nm Scale = 70 nm 
60 
40 
20 
0 
B 
2 4 6 # 10 pm 
Fig. 7. (a) Topography of a small crater created by a single 
laser pulse delivered through fiber probe to the surface of 
polished basalt. (b) Cross section of the crater shows -2 pn 
diameter at the top. 
0 5 I O  15 20 25 30 35 pm 
B 
Fig. 8. Topography (a) and cross section (b) of a large 
crater formed by a single laser pulse delivered through fiber 
probe to the surface of polished aluminum. Large crater rim 
was formed by melted metal. 
1-283 
REFERENCES 
H. A. Lowenstam, “d016/d018 ratios, and Strontium 
and Magnesium Contents of Recent and Fossil 
Brachiopods and Their Bearing on the History of the 
Oceans.” Joumal of Geology 69,241-260, 1961. 
J. W. Schopf and M. R. Walter, “Archean Micro- 
fossils: New Evidence of Ancient Microbes,’’ in 
Earth ’s Earliest Biosphere, J. William Schopf, ed., 
Princeton University Press, 1983. 
M. F. Glaessner, The Dawn of Animal Life: A Bio- 
historical Study, Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
R. Buick, “Carbonaceous Filaments fiom North Pole, 
Western Australia: Are They Fossil Bacteria in 
Archean Stromatolites?”, Precambrian Res. 24, 157- 
172,1984. 
H. J. Hofman, “Megascopic Dubiofossils,” in The 
Proterozoic Biosphere: A Multidisciplinaiy Study, 
413-419, ed. J. Schopf and C. Klein, Cambridge 
University Press, 1992. 
J. P. Grotzinger and D. H. Rothman, “An Abiotic 
Model for Stromatolite Morphogenesis,” Nature 383, 
423425,1996. 
For a recent review of LlBS applications see K. Song, 
Y-I. Lee and J. Sneddon, Appl. Spec. Rev. 32, 183- 
235,1997. 
D. Kossakovski, J. L. Beauchamp, “Topographical 
And Chemical Microanalysis of Surfaces with Scan- 
ning Probe Microscope and Laser Induced Breakdown 
Spectroscopy,” Anal, Chem., 72,473 1-4737, 2000. 
K. Karrai, R.D. Grober, Appl.Phys.Lett., 66, 1842-44, 
1995. 
W. F. Megger, C. H. Corliss, B. F. Scribner, ‘Tables of 
Spectral Line Intensities, Part I, National Bureau of 
Standards, 1975. 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Dmitri Kossakovski is a Member 
of Engineering Staff in the In-situ 
Experimental Science Group in 
Imaging and Spectrometry Section 
at NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. He received his Ph.D. 
in Physical Chemistry from the 
California Institute of Technology 
in 1999. He has pioneered several 
methods for chemical imaging with high spatial resolution 
based on a combination of Scanning Probe Microscopy with 
chemically sensitive techniques. Currently, Dmitri is 
working on a prototype Chemical Imager for astrobiological 
tasks for topographical and elemental sample mapping with 
sub-micron spatial resolution. He is also involved in projects 
on autonomous sample handling, real-time aerosol analysis 
and biological microarray analysis. 
Gregorj Bearman is supervisor of 
the In-Situ Experimental Science 
Group in the Imaging and - - 
spectrometry Section at NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. His interests 
and work has recently been a 
combination of photonics technolo- 
gies applied to biomedical problems 
and in-situ instrument technologies. 
Recent biomedical research includes work on retinal 
imaging spectroscopy in collaboration with Cedars-Sinai 
and corrieal fluorescence with the University of California- 
Irvine and Cedars-Sinai. Dr. Bearman is a visiting scientist 
at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and St. Lukes Hospital in 
Houston, and he sits on the editorial board of the Journal of 
Biomedical Optics. He is conference chair for the SPIE 
BIOS tolpical meeting on biological spectroscopy. 
Joseph Kirschvink is a Professor of 
Geobiology at the California Institute of 
Technology. He is a Magnetogeobiolo- 
gist, with research interests that include 
geomagnetic reversals, paleomagnetism, 
and magnetostratigraphy, geomagnetic 
sensitivity in animals, the biological 
effects of electromagnetic fields, biomin- 
eralization of ferrimagnetic materials. He is in charge of the 
Caltech Paleomagnetism and Biomagnetism Laboratories. 
1-284 
