GPS Micro Navigation and Communication System 
for Clusters of Micro and Nanosatellitesl 
Raymond G. Zenick, Jr. 
AeroAstro, Inc. 
P.O. Box 502 
Solana Beach, CA 90275 
ray@aeroastro.com 
858-481-3785 
Abstract- Formation flying will quickly revolutionize the 
way science, remote sensing and surveillance missions are 
performed in space, enabling a whole new range of 
applications for small satellites. Currently, there are 
numerous missions in the planning stages involving 
formation flying of a constellation of micro or nanosatellites. 
However, to truly achieve the goals of these formation- 
flying missions, an accurate means of relative ranging, 
determining time and position measurements, inter-satellite 
communications, and controlling the formation states is 
becoming critical. 
Today, while there are very expensive products available for 
positioning and attitude determination, none of them are 
capable of meeting the precise positioning accuracy and 
attitude determination requirements of formation flying, let 
alone the mass and power restrictions of these tiny space 
vehicles. 
This paper addresses the needs of future formation flying 
missions by discussing a technology with integrated 
capabilities for communicating, relative ranging, and 
exchanging precise timing among spacecraft within the 
constellation. This system is being developed by integrating 
a Carrier Phase Differential GPS (CDGPS) navigation 
sensor with a low power, inexpensive, compact ranging and 
communications system. The result of this integration is a 
low-cost, robust, secure GPS micro navigation and 
communication system for micro and nanosatellite 
constellations. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. BACKGROUND 
3. MARKETDEMAND 
4. THE SOLUTION: STAR RANGER 
5. STAR RANGER CAPABILITIES 
6. CONCLUSION 
7. REFERENCES 
8. BIOGWHIES 
Kimberly Kohlhepp 
AeroAstro, Inc. 
327 A Street, 5" Floor 
Boston, MA 022 10 
kim@aeroastro.com 
617-451-8630 ~ 1 2  
1. INTRODUCTION 
AeroAstro is developing an inter-satellite navigation, 
communications and ranging system to meet the needs of 
future micro (approximately 10 to 150 kg) and 
nanospacecraft (approximately 1 to 10 kg) missions. This 
system, named Star Ranger, will enable a variety of future 
formation-flying constellation missions. 
Although formation-flying missions are continuing to 
become a more intriguing option for mission planners, an 
accurate means of determining relative range and position 
measurements, providing inter-satellite communications, and 
controlling the formation states (i.e., the relative attitude and 
positions of the vehicles) is critical to meet mission goals. 
Currently, there are little or no options available to meet 
these mission requirements. 
AeroAstro's Star Ranger technology addresses the needs of 
future formation flying missions by providing a low-mass 
(less than 2 kg) system with integrated capabilities for 
communicating, relative ranging, and exchanging precise 
timing among spacecraft within the constellation. The Star 
Ranger system leverages existing technologies developed for 
use in power-efficient and lightweight communications 
techpology. 
2. BACKGROUND 
Since its inception, AeroAstro has been actively involved in 
developing a variety of low-cost technologies to exploit the 
use of space for scientific and commercial applications. i In 
recent years, much of this development has been focused on 
components and technologies to be used on the AeroAstro 
BitsyTM spacecraft kemel, a fundamental nanospacecraft 
core module which enables flexible, affordable (less than 
$5M, and sometimes less than $1M) missions. 
Over the past few years, formation-flying missions have 
begun to gain appeal as mission designers began to 
recognize the benefits of combining multiple small assets to 
meet larger mission goals. This approach is typically more 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 Q 2001 IEEE 
cost effective in the long term, due to the economies of scale 
enabled by large production runs of the small satellites, the 
adaptability of the system, and the ability to reduce launch 
costs through use of smaller secondary launch oppo'rtunities. 
Through years of experience in the small satellite industry, 
AeroAstro recognized that there was a need for a variety of 
subsystems to support these new formation-flying missions. 
Star Ranger is just one of the low-cost components that 
AeroAstro is developing to meet the requirements of 
upcoming small multi-spacecraft missions. 
The Bitsy spacecraft kernel and AeroAstro's Small Payload 
Orbit Transfer (SPORT) vehicle are two other examples of 
technologies being developed for multi-spacecraft missions. 
SPORT is specifically designed for low-cost orbital transfer 
fiom a less desirable orbit to the preferred orbit. In the 
application of formation flying, multiple spacecraft could be 
launched simultaneously, each utilizing a SPORT vehicle to 
achieve its designated location within the formation. In 
addition, AeroAstro is currently actively involved in the 
design of a highly integrated, power-efficient, X-Band 
telemetry transponder for nanospacecraft. This technology 
is baselined for the New Millennium ST-5 mission, the 
Nanosatellite Constellation Trailblazer. As it is inexpensive 
(less than $250,000 for production units) and lighhveight (a 
total mass of 250 grams), this radio is ideal for missions 
requiring multiple small spacecraft. 
Recently, the opportunity arose to develop the Star Ranger 
concept for flight on the Air Force Research Laboratory 
TechSat 21 demonstration mission. This develolpment is 
allowing AeroAstro to leverage the technology and design 
concepts from on-going communication development 
programs, the X-Band transponder development in 
particular. This AeroAstro experience will be combined 
with emerging RF component technology being developed 
for digital wireless communications, VSAT, and Direct 
Broadcast Entertainment. Use of this new, lovv-voltage 
technology will enable considerable reductions in 
complexity. Further reductions in both mass and cost, by 
almost a factor of ten over present technology, vvill offer 
future missions innovative yet low-cost options for 
communications and navigation products. 
3. MARKETDEMAND 
As satellites continue to grow smaller, a whole new range of 
applications becomes feasible, formation flying missions in 
particular. Formation-flying spacecraft will revolutionize 
the way that science and surveillance missions are 
performed in space. Rather than using a single, large, 
expensive satellite to perform a given mission, many small, 
inexpensive satellites can be flown in a constellation more 
effectively. In the constellation configuration, significantly 
larger quantities of science data can be obtained, providing 
greater return on the overall investment. 
In general, the concept of a constellation or formation flying 
mission is to replace a large satellite with a "virtual 
satellite," a cluster of smaller satellites, typically flying in 
very precise relative positions. In the case of TechSat 21, 
formation flying will be used to demonstrate the application 
of a sparse aperture for remote sensing. In this 
configuration, each satellite has sufficient autonomy and 
collaborates effectively with its companion satellites in the 
cluster, but from the users' standpoint, the cluster appears as 
one single satellite and sensor. 
Through the deployment and management of clusters, 
constellaltions, or formations, the virtual satellite will be able 
to use multiple spacecraft to achieve distributed sensing of 
the space environment, or an overall larger aperture for 
monitoring low-power terrestrial sensors or remote sensing. 
The distributed aperture provides increased angular 
resolution, greatly offsetting the disadvantages of large 
clutter spread arising from each satellite's smaller aperture. 
Having many satellites in the cluster offsets the small signal 
to noise ratio of each satellite by the square root of N, where 
N represents the number of independent apertures within the 
constella.tion. By providing highly accurate angular 
information, the ambiguity in Doppler between "stationary" 
ground clutter and moving targets can also be resolved. 
Planned Missions 
Currently, there are numerous missions in the planning 
stages involving formation flying of a constellation of micro 
or nanosatellites. NASA is developing the Nanosatellite 
Constellation Trailblazer mission, designed to validate 
technologies for future nanosatellite constellation missions, 
such as the Magnetospheric Multi-Scale (MMS), Geospace 
Electrodynamics Constellation (GEC) and the 
Magnetosphere Constellation (MagCon) missions. The U.S. 
Air Force Research Laboratory is currently developing a 
demonsbration for its future TechSat 21 mission. The 
TechSat 21 concept is a revolutionary approach to space- 
based surveillance systems, which will construct a cluster of 
small satellites (ultimately 8 to 16 satellites per cluster) 
orbiting in formation to demonstrate and validate distributed 
aperture radar algorithms. This mission will exploit a multi- 
static radar approach in which each satellite receives its own 
and other satellites' radar pulses. These are separable, 
permittirig rangeDoppler processing as well as angle of 
arrival processing to be performed. 
These new missions will require integrated capabilities for 
communicating, relative ranging, and exchanging precise 
timing among spacecraft within the constellation to make 
them usable tools. Applying optical solutions to these 
problems, even at baselines (distance between sensors/ 
satellites) of 10 km, presently requires demanding pointing 
requirements, placing severe burdens on mass, power, 
volume, attitude control, and fuel of very small satellites. 
Whereas with radio ranging most applications require only 
omni-dixectional antennas, pointing is not an issue, and 
5-2516 
neither are mass, power or volume. In both applications, 
however, individual clock timing requirements will remain 
the most critical requirement to formation flying and 
constellation missions. To maintain two-way, centimeter- 
level accuracy at ranges of 10 km requires short-term clock 
accuracy of le-1 1. While this is achievable today, there are 
issues in maintaining short-term accuracy over extended 
periods of time which must be addressed. 
On the other hand, some missions will not need the precision 
of optical or radar interferometric measurements, but are 
likely to require less precise ranging and communications 
capabilities over longer ranges. In these instances, it will be 
necessary to have knowledge of the distance or spacing 
between the constituent satellites and transfer information 
fiom one satellite to another in a multi-access method. 
These applications place significant burdens on metics, 
which in the case of optical and RF applications requires the 
distance between each satellite in the constellation or 
formation to be held to a fraction of a wavelength in order to 
achieve high-precision measurements over large ranges. 
While each of these missions has its own unique 
requirements, many of the basic needs are the same, 
permitting similar techniques to be used to achieve mission 
goals. 
Key Technologies 
In order to enable future formation-flying missions, such as 
the ones described above, a number of key technologies 
need to be developed. First, a method of accurately 
determining range and relative position among the 
constellation's satellites is required in order to precisely 
control the formation states. Next, a method of enabling 
inter-satellite communications is necessary to allow the 
transfer of engineering data among the spacecraft. 
Minimizing the dynamics of the formation is also critical to 
reduce the fuel necessary to maintain the formation. 
Regardless of the specific requirements of a given mission, 
to achieve the goals of formation flying spacecraft, the inter- 
satellite ranging and communications system must be 
inexpensive, lightweight, and power-efficient. 
As these needs become more apparent, inter-satellite ranging 
and communications is becoming an area that is gaining 
interest in the government organizations that are responsible 
for these missions as well as commercial organizations, such 
as AeroAstro, who are interested in helping to make these 
micro and nanospacecraft constellations a reality. 
Today, while there are very expensive products available for 
positioning and attitude determination, none of them are 
capable of meeting the precise positioning accuracy and 
attitude determination requirements of formation flying, let 
alone the mass and power restrictions of these tiny space 
vehicles. In order to efficiently deploy a constellation 
mission, the cost of each individual spacecraft needs to be 
kept low, or else total mission costs can spiral out of control. 
While some of the ranging products currently available 
might be acceptable for larger, more expensive satellites, 
they are prohibitive for nanosatellite constellations, in terms 
of both cost and mass. 
4. THE SOLUTION: STAR RANGER 
AeroAstro is currently developing Star Ranger, a technology 
that will meet the inter-satellite ranging and communications 
needs of future formation flying missions. This work is 
being done through funding from the Air Force Research 
Laboratory, in anticipation of their TechSat 21 
demonstration mission. Star Ranger development is 
leveraging work currently underway at AeroAstro on low- 
cost, lightweight communications components, baselined for 
flight on the ST-5 mission, as well as advances in 
commercial technologies such as wireless communications. 
The goal of the Star Ranger effort is to develop a flexible 
system, capable of performing a number of different 
functions. It will provide capabilities for relative ranging to 
sub-centimeter accuracy, centimeter-level relative 
positioning, and attitude determination to within 0.5". It will 
also provide a duplex 128 'kbps engineering data link 
between satellites to pass GPS differential correction 
information and to serve as an emergency uplink path 
through companion satellites to both communicate with or 
reboot the spacecraft Command and Data Handling (C&DH) 
system. Star Ranger will also exchange precise timing 
among the spacecraft in the constellation. 
Design Features 
There are a few key design features that enable Star Ranger 
to meet its requirements. Due to a requirement by AFRL to 
have a robust yet secure link between satellites, Star Ranger 
uses Ku-Band for its operation. At this frequency, path 
attenuation is high enough and the transmitting power used 
in the link between satellites is low enough that the 
probability of intercept on earth is extremely low, rendering 
the signals from the individual satellites relatively secure. 
The Star Ranger transponders utilize direct sequence spread 
spectrum (DSSS) for precise ranging. A two-PN code 
technique will be used to assure rapid acquisition of signals 
among the three satellites within the formation. Bi-phase 
modulation (BPSK) will be used for modulating the 
engineering data link onto the PN code. Carrier-phase 
Differential GPS (CDGPS) has been chosen for the 
determination of relative position and attitude between the 
formation flying satellites. 
The DSSS ranging system operates in the same manner as 
wodd a communications system based on the same 
technology. PN codes modulate the carrier while the 
engineering data is bi-phase modulated onto the PN code. 
5-2517 
MHz 1 
s L1 
Y 
and DnYemnba Communications 
A.... . .._.. 
15 GHz 
..... A 
..... 
Telemetry Tracking i'"--'.. 
Command (1TaC) Command (mac) 
Figure 1 - Star Ranger Conceptuid Diagram 
Despite the fact that both the ranging function and the 
transmission of engineering data share the PN code, they are 
completely unaffected by each other, due to the fact that the 
engineering data is modulated onto the PN code. In fact, in 
the Star Ranger system, ranging coefficients aid GPS 
differential corrections are sent back and forth as 
engineering data between spacecraft, enhancing the 
operation and precision of the ranging, t h h ,  and 
AeroAsbro has studied two basic techniques (see Figure 2) in 
the application of DSSS ranging that directly apply to 
ranging (and communication between satellites at short and 
long dislances. The first method is a simple, transmit and 
receive method, and the second is a slightly more complex 
method using a full duplex technique. For Star Ranger, 
AeroAsbro has chosen the 111  duplex method, because it 
allows the transmitter and receiver to operate in a phase- 
navigation functions. 
- ............................................................................................. 
Simple 
Transmit/ 
Receive 
Technique 
Full 
Duplex 
Technique 
Spacecraft 1 Spacecraft 2 Isjqg] 
Time 1 
............................................................................................. 
Spacecraft 1 Spacecraft 2 
[is&.[-= Transmitting 
Time 1 
-- 
coherent relationship. This permits precise timing-to be 
_ ............................................................................................. 
I Spacecraft1 Spacecraft 2 
Time 2 
Spacecraft1 Spacecraft 2 
Packet 1 
Time i! 
Spacecraft 1 Spacecraft 2 
Time 3 ......................................................................................... 
- ............................................. ............ 
Spacecraft 1 Spacecraft 2 
Time 3 - ......................................................................................... 
Figure 2 - Comparison of Siniple TransmWReceive and Full Duplex Techniques 
5-2518 
continually passed between spacecraft without the necessity 
of re-acquisition of the receiver’s direct sequence signals 
each time a spacecraft switches between transmit and 
receive modes. 
The use of a two-PN code technique was chosen to greatly 
accelerate the code acquisition, allowing each satellite to 
acquire ranging and communication signals rapidly from 
each other. The intent of the two-code system is to use a 
shorter acquisition code of 1023 chips in length, purely for 
initial acquisition purposes, rather than wait for the 
acquisition of a single long ranging code. The system will 
use the long code for precision tracking, with a length 
sufficient not to repeat during its round-trip travel from any 
of the constituent satellites within the formation. For the 
purposes of this application, a code length of le18 chips at a 
chipping rate of 100 MCPS wil be used. In this case, each 
chip represents approximately 3 meters in distance. 
Star Ranger’s modulator/demodulator generates both short 
and long PN codes for the transmitter and receiver 
correlation function. Modulation, or spreading of a DSSS 
signal, takes place, in this case, as a two-step function. First, 
each PN code is bi-phase modulated with the engineering 
data. Then, the transmitter first local oscillator (LO) is 
mixed with each of the PN codes, and both PN codes are 
then modulated with the same engineering data 
simultaneously. This allows engineering data to be 
transferred between satellites on the short PN code even if 
the long code has not been acquired. While the system also 
lends itself to the application of QPSK modulation of the PN 
code, which would double the engineering data throughput 
with no significant detriment to the link budget between 
satellites, BPSK was chosen due to the reduced complexity 
in implementation. The achievable data rate for this 
application using BPSK is 128 kbps. 
The receiving demodulator is slightly more complicated in 
that it must de-spread the incoming signal and acquire the 
PN code via correlation. The bi-phase or BPSK engineering 
data is extracted from the incoming long and short PN 
codes. To determine range, the incoming long PN code is 
compared to the original transmitted PN code so that chip 
delay and carrier phase can be used for the determination of 
pseudorange between each satellite (see Figure 3). 
AeroAstro has been exploring the application of multi- 
access, multi-node communications among the constituent 
spacecraft of a constellation. Multi-access is the ability of a 
number of transmitters to communicate with a number of 
receivers simultaneously on the same frequency. In order to 
accomplish this, each satellite within the formation must be 
assigned its own PN code. Each receiver contains a 
correlator with a replica PN code for each satellite in the 
formation, allowing it to process, in parallel, range and data 
from all the signals from each satellite. By exploiting this 
architecture, a satellite within a constellation should be able 
to communicate with any other satellite within a 
constellation. 
t rrom I J- Downconverter/ 
IF Amplifier 
I 
PNClock 
1 OOMHZ 
NCO 
Short 
Engineering Data 
To Processor 
Range 
To Processor 
Figure 3 - Modulator/Demodulator Block Diagram 
5-2519 
In certain circumstances, there may also exist the need for 
one or more satellites to assume a major communication 
node role. This is a preferred state for simplification of 
communications of the constellation with Earth and 
necessary when a constellation is in a highly elliptical orbit 
and only a single spacecraft is close enough to the Earth to 
have a good communication link. In this configuration, one 
spacecraft within the constellation would assume control, as 
the primary node, for all communications betvveen the 
constellation and the Earth, but each of the spacecraft would 
have the capability to act as the primary node (see Figure 4). 
The Carrier-Phase Differential GPS (CDGPS) used in Star 
Ranger is capable of relative positioning, using 
measurements from the NAVSTAR GPS conste:llation. 
CDGPS sensing techniques were chosen for Star Ranger 
because they provide very precise measures of the: relative 
attitude and positions between vehicles in formation. To 
date, an accuracy of approximately 2 cm has been achieved 
through use of carrier-phase differential GPS. CDGPS data 
will also be used for attitude determination. In the present 
design, the CDGPS receiver has been combined with an 
embedded StrongARM processor, which is well suited to the 
low power and intensive computation requirements of 
formation flying spacecraft. 
Carrier-Phase Differential GPS was developed primarily to 
improve the accuracy of GPS measurements [l], it is a 
relative position measurement technique originally designed 
to help circumvent Selective Availability (S/A) and many 
other error sources in the basic GPS measurement. Given 
GPS measurements at two nearby antennas, relative position 
Spacecraft 1 (SC1) 
€"-I 
/ Primary Node 
between these antennas can be estimated to a high degree of 
accuracy based on tracking the relative phase of the GPS 
carrier waves. Of course, there is an integer number of 
wavelengths difference between the phases measured at the 
two antennas. This integer ambiguity is not directly 
observab'le and must be estimated or calibrated by an 
additional sensor. Nevertheless, CDGPS has been used 
successfidly in a number of applications including automatic 
precisiori landing of commercial aircraft [2] and attitude 
estimatiaa for spacecraft in earth orbit [3]. 
Spacecraft in a low Earth orbit environment will generally 
experience very different motion than most terrestrial 
vehicles. Furthermore, the GPS satellites are in motion, 
changing, position relative to the LEO spacecraft at a rapid 
rate. Tklis relative motion between the GPS satellites and 
LEO spacecraft will result in a large Doppler shift of the 
received RF signals. These large Doppler shifts 
significantly increase the frequency range that must be 
searched to acquire and lock onto the GPS signals. 
Furthemiore, due to the apparent velocity between a LEO 
spacecraft and the GPS satellites, the amount of time each 
GPS satellite is visible is much less than would be the case 
on earth, requiring the constant reacquisition of GPS 
satellites as they come into view. Rotation rates and 
directions of LEO spacecraft may also make it dBicult to 
keep the GPS satellites in view of the spacecraft antennas. 
This could be resolved, although with much difficulty, using 
several antennas to increase the sky coverage. 
. ,  
i , '  
Spacecraft 2 (SC2) 
I 
"5.. .'. .-.. '. ' PN-3 
' Data from and 
communication with 
SCl, SC2, and SC3 5.. '. 
"".. ..,. '*\. pN..3 
... .. '. ,I' PN-2 \ (not Star Ranger) pN-1"' ...,. ..... '--. ' - ! ;  
PN-3 
Figure 4 - Multiple Access 
5-2520 
Preliminary hardware testing and simulations indicate that 
the information required to initialize the onboard GPS 
receivers is relatively easy to obtain using the GPS 
constellation. Due to the expected natural motion of the 
TechSat 2 1 fleet of vehicles, upon which Star Ranger will be 
used, there will be numerous on-orbit, large-scale changes in 
the lines of sight to the GPS constellation. Recent analysis 
indicates that this relative motion of the vehicles within the 
formation can be compensated for by rapid dynamic 
resolution of the integers associated with the measurements 
between satellites through the very quick exchange of 
ranging and differential corrections transmitted over Star 
Ranger’s data link. Better control of the formation’s 
dynamics through quicker navigation updates will greatly 
reduce response time and fuel consumption of the satellites 
within the formation. 
5.  STAR RANGER CAPABILITIES 
SpeciJications 
Star Ranger is a highly capable, yet lightweight and 
inexpensive system. Based on the current design, a 
preliminary set of projected performance specifications has 
been developed. The ranging accuracy of Star Ranger is 
expected to be 1 cm or better. Using CDGPS, it is expected 
that the relative attitude between spacecraft will be 
determinable to 0.5’ or better. In addition, the overall 
relative position of each spacecraft with respect to each 
other will also be measurable to less than 1 cm. 
Star Ranger will be small and lightweight. Currently, the 
engineering model, including antennas, is projected to have 
a mass of less than 2 kg. Presently, the design combines the 
front-end portion consisting of antenna, diplexer, LNA and 
up/down converter in a single assembly. This configuration 
was chosen to place the Ku-Band components close to the 
antenna to reduce the amount of loss between antenna and 
processing electronics. During this process, it is our intent to 
further reduce the overall mass during optimization of the 
engineering model. 
Applicability to Future Missions 
Star Ranger, or variations of the Star Ranger technology, 
will be capable of meeting the needs of a variety of 
constellation missions. While the specifications described 
above are those currently baselined for Star Ranger, the 
overall design concept will be flexible, allowing moderate 
changes in specification. For example, in some 
circumstances, a user might wish to trade off the high 
precision ranging accuracy for an increased range over 
which Star Ranger is operational. On another mission, 
where the use of GPS for angular determination might not be 
feasible, an alternate method using multiple antennas on 
each spacecraft might be an option. 
The first mission for which Star Ranger will be utilized is 
the TechSat 21 mission. This mission is currently in the 
development stages, and AeroAstro has been working with 
the mission team to ensure that Star Ranger development is 
in line with mission requirements. As this development 
work is being funded by AFRL specifically for the TechSat 
21 mission, the Star Ranger baseline specifications are 
aimed at meeting TechSat 21 requirements. However, the 
Star Ranger design will remain flexible in order to permit it 
to be applicable to other missions. 
The NASA Magnetospheric Multiscale mission, also 
currently under development, would be another ideal 
candidate for Star Ranger technology. While some of the 
mission requirements vary from that of TechSat 2 1, many of 
the same principles could be applied to MMS. In this 
particular application, . the ranging precision requirements 
are a lot less stringent. However, the range over which the 
system must be operational is much greater. 
5 - 2 5 2 1  
MMS is just one of the missions in the NASA Sun-Earth 
Connections group. Two other missions, the 
Magnetospheric Constellation (Magcon) and the Geospace 
Electrodynamic Connections (GEC) missions, each of which 
are comprised of multiple spacecraft, would benefit from 
Star Ranger technology. The GEC mission profile is similar 
to the TechSat 21 mission, so it is likely Star Ranger could 
provide the capabilities required for inter-satellite ranging 
and communications on that mission. As with TechSat 21, 
the MagCon mission will be constrained in physical size 
(about the size of a large birthday cake), and therefore will 
have limited space for effective antennas. In addition, there 
will be extreme constraints on power consumption of the 
ranging and communication subsystem. A total integration 
of space-to-space communication and ranging with the 
space-to-Earth link is being considered for MagCon, due to 
these constraining factors. This is an option that AeroAstro 
is continuing to consider in the long-term Star Ranger 
development plan. 
In order to truly exploit the capabilities of Star Ranger, 
future versions are likely to incorporate software that will 
enable high-level control of the microsatellite constellation 
as a whole. The software, in conjunction with Star Ranger, 
would permit the mission controller to send a single 
command, which would then be distributed, as appropriate, 
to the various satellites in the constellation. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Through the development of low-mass, low-power, 
navigation sensors and the increasing popularity of smaller 
satellites, there will be new missions evolving in remote 
sensing requirements that require larger apertures in space in 
the form of optical and radio frequency applications. As the 
control of formation flying matures, the ability of applying 
interferometric principals for astronomical applications will 
follow as they have on Earth, as timing and processing 
techniques have matured. 
At the present time, technology does exist for range and 
position measurement in space. However, onboard 
processing of interferometer data collected in space still 
remains power hungry, requiring large amounts of power to 
be collected in space, thereby reducing the possibilities of 
using small satellites for these applications. Opportunities 
do exist for serious applications that will require dynamic 
position and spatial measurements between satellites. 
Star Ranger is already planned for use on TechSat 2-1 and is 
continuing to gain interest. Engineering models are .in the 
process of being built for TechSat 21 metric testing.. As the 
requirements are formalized for the TechSat 21 subsystem 
requirements, fabrication of flight models will begin. During 
the evaluation phase of the engineering models, AeroAstro 
is developing packaging techniques that will further reduce 
the mass and physical size of Star Ranger. 
7. REFERENCES 
[l] B. W. Parkinson and J. J. Spilker Jr., eds., “Global 
Positioning System: Theory and Applications,” Progress in 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., 1996. 
[2] C. E. Cohen, D. G. Lawrence, H. S. Cobb, B. S. Pervan, 
J. D. Powell, B. W. Parkinson, G. J.Aubrey, W. Loewe, D. 
Ormiston, B. D. Mc-Nally, D. N. Kaufmann, V. 
Wullschleger, and R. Swider, “Preliminary results of 
category III precision landing with 110 automatic landings 
of a United Boeing 737 using GNSS integrity beacons,” 
Proceedings of the ION National Technical Meeting, 
January 1995. 
[3] E. G. Lightsey, “Development and Flight Demalnstration 
of a GPS Receiver for Space”’ Department of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, Stanford University, January 199’7. 
8. BIOGRAPHIES 
Ray Zenick AeroAstro’s lead 
RFengineer, has over 35 years of 
eperience as a design specialist 
with extensive background in 
circuit and systems design, 
employing both analog and digital 
circuit design. Mr. Zenick has been 
involved in several miniature spacecrdt radio development 
programs, and he has been involved in all .forms of 
communications circuit and systems design over his career. 
During the past 8 years, Mr. Zenick has been involved in 
advanced telemetry concepts for remote robotic and 
autonomous terrestrial security systems, the evaluation and 
design qf antennas for high-accuracy Static GPS survey 
techniqucs, and the application of DSP for use in precision 
modulation and demodulation techniques as applied to 
coherent communications. Currently, he is involved in the 
design of low-cost, power efJicient, low voltage, radio 
telemetry transponders for use on microspacecrdt, such as 
AeroAstro’s Bitsy. Mr. Zenick has a B.S. in Engineering 
fiom U. C. L.A. 
Kimberb Kohlhepp is a member of 
AeroAstro’s Business Development 
Team. Since coming to AeroAstro, 
she has been actively involved in the 
proposal process, both in managing 
all of AeroAstro ’s proposal eflorts and 
also in writing proposals. She has 
also been working closely with the Vice President of 
Business Development on marketing and business 
strategies. Prior to working at AeroAstro, MS. Kohlhepp 
was a Research Analyst at Mercer Management Consulting. 
While act Mercer, she consulted to a wide variety of 
industries on strategic and marketing issues. In addition to 
her experience as a consultant, she worked for two years at 
MlTs  Space Engheering Research Center (SERC) as a 
research specialist. At SERC, she was involved in the 
MITNASA Jet Propulsion Laborato y Stellar Interferometer 
Tracking Experiment and the MITmASA Langley Active 
Wing project. She received a B.S. in Aeronautics and 
Astronautics @om MIT. 
5-2522 
