An Absolute High Performance, Self Calibrating Optical 
Rotary Positioning System 
Asad M. Madni 
BE1 Technologies, Inc. 
13 100 Telfair Avenue 
Sylmar, CA 9 1342 
Tel: (818) 364-7215 
Fax: (818) 362-1836 
E-Mail: bei lmadni@aol.com 
Abstract- The next generation high performance Absolute 
Rotary Position System with self-calibration capability, 
incorporating a fast Digital Signal Processing (DSP) 
algorithm with digital servo control capability, is presented. 
Critical encoder calibration parameters and their effects on 
accuracy are discussed with respect to a novel multi-tier 
Sine/Cosine (S/C) read-out approach. This approach 
consists of all S/C tracks in place of digital tracks or a 
combination of coarse digital tracks and a fine SIC track set. 
The series of analog SIC signal sets are digitized 
simultaneously by Analog-to-Digital Converters (ADCs). 
Self-calibration is accomplished for each S/C tier (set of 
tracks) through the use of DSP algorithms. The DSP 
algorithms correct for amplitude, DC-offset, and phase 
errors for each tier of S/C signals. The DSP then computes 
position and merges the tiers resulting in an unambiguous 
absolute position word of desired resolution and accuracy. 
Independent processing of the data fiom multiple 
readstations provides digital cancellation of most of the 
installation and bearing errors. 
Combination of the self-calibrating encoder and digital 
servo employing the same time-shared DSP together with 
the signal processing techniques, described in the paper, 
have been successfully utilized in digital servo control 
applications. The resulting benefits in cost, reliability, servo 
optimization, flexible interface protocol, and the ability to 
recalibrate the encoder in situ are discussed. The resulting 
high-resolution position control system can be adapted to 
numerous applications in aerospace, defense, industrial and 
commercial markets in a cost-effective manner. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
INTRODUCTION 
ENCODER SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
ENCODER ERROR SOURCE DESCRIPTION 
NEXT GEWRATION ROTARY POSITION SYSTEM 
DIGITAL SERVO IMPLEMENTATION 
SUMMARY 
REFERENCES 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
BIOGRAPHIES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Mike Jumper and Tim Malcolm 
BE1 Precision Systems & Space Division 
1 100 Murphy Drive 
Maumelle, AR 721 13 
Tel: (501) 851-4000 
E-Mail: mjumper@beissd.com 
E-Mail: tmalcolm@beissd.com 
Fax: (501) 851-5476 
High resolution encoders have been designed and built for 
many years. Although such devices have been used 
successfully in many demanding applications, a high 
accuracy device has always been difficult to assemble, 
resulting in lead time and costs that were far from desired. 
The high-resolution encoder presented in this paper 
addresses this problem effectively. 
Technological advancements, made through the application 
of a fast DSP and ADCs in high performance optical 
encoders, have led to the development of the next generation 
smart absolute rotary position system. The fast DSP, ADCs, 
and processing algorithms provide the encoder with new 
capabilities resulting in a smart self-calibrating encoder. All 
signal calibration parameters from the analog segment of the 
encoder are digitalized and corrected. The improved 
calibration coefficients, stored in non-volatile memory, 
provide the encoder with higher resolution, accuracy, and 
stability over time and environments than previously 
available in conventional encoders. The DSP also provides 
for independent processing of data from multiple 
readstations for error cancellation, flexible protocol 
confrgurations for communication bus interfaces, and digital 
servo control capability. The digital servo control tasks are 
time-shared with the encoder calibration algorithms, the 
combining or merging of multi-tier position data, and 
encoder data output functions, thus taking advantage of the 
DSP's high speed processing capabilities. 
BE1 Technologies has also developed several DSP based 
high performance rotary position encoders and systems for 
aerospace and space programs. These include a two-axis 
antenna positioner for commercial aircrafi, JPL's microwave 
limb sounder antenna positioner, a LIDAR Shuttle 
experiment, a missile guidance control application, and a 
tactical space application. The basis for these new 
generation high performance rotary position encoders and 
systems are subsequently presented. 
2. ENCODER SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The optical position encoding system described here differs 
from previous generation devices in that the fussy 
mechanical and optical alignment procedures necessary to 
achieve high accuracy have been radically reduced. The 
5-2363 
system consists of one or more precision readstations 
mounted on a bearingkpindle assembly and i i  set of 
processing electronics, which may be mounted internal to a 
common housing, or external in a remote electronics 
assembly. The electronics assembly can be divided into two 
parts; an analog processing section which controls the light 
source and amplifies the small position-variable currents 
generated by a photodiode array, and a digital section 
incorporating a fast digital signal processor, A-D and D-A 
converters, memory and interface components. A block 
diagram of this next generation system is shown in Figure 1. 
A primary difference between this encoder and traditional 
optical encoders is that the readstations create several sets of 
S/C signals at various spatial fi-equencies, analogous to the 
signals produced by a multi-speed resolver. Typically 3 to 5 
sets of these sinusoids (called tiers), varying in spatial 
frequency from 1 cycle per turn to 16384 cycles per turn or 
more. The optical code disk has these sinusoid patterns 
printed in chrome on glass and does not depend upon 
defocusing techniques to achieve good fidelity. Standard 
optical encoders usually use direct digital techniques to 
obtain the lower order bits, but the change to sinusoids 
allows much more flexibility in choosing the final resolution 
of the encoder, as well as allowing wider working distances 
between code disk and optical elements. This is an 
important feature for encoders used in systems, which must 
survive adverse environments andor heavy loads. Typical 
working distances are 50 mils or more for this sort of an 
encoder as compared with 5 mils or less for the traditional 
encoder [l]. 
The encoder described is an absolute encoder; that is, a 
discrete position word is created for each angular increment 
of rotation, as compared to the incremental encoder, in 
which a counter keeps track of the relative angular rotation 
from a known reference position. The absolute encoder has 
the advantage of immediately creating position knowledge 
upon power-up, without the need to slew to a known 
reference position for calibration. This sort of encoder is 
particularly useful for space applications, where a single 
Single Event Effect (SEE) may require an incremental 
encoder to have to slew back to a reference poinit. In this 
device a single SEE can only affect one position; the very 
next position word will be correct. 
This encoder also differs from traditional encoders in the 
minimal amount of analog processing performed on the 
photodiode signals. The small photodiode currents are 
amplified and perhaps summed with complements (to 
remove common mode noise), then are immediately 
digitized by ADCs. All the rest of the processing is digital 
and is not subject to thermal or life drifts as are common 
with analog processing electronics. In addition, since DC 
offsets are read at each interrogation and subtracted from the 
converted data, what thermal or operational drifts do exist 
will be largely eliminated from the data. Since the light 
source is only energized for the minimum amount of time 
required to obtain position data, the light source life is 
maximized. This greatly reduces the concern over light 
source life, since degradation of solid state light sources, 
LED or laser diode, has been shown to be mostly due to 
time under forward bias. What light source degradation does 
occur is compensated by the use of a reference traick on the 
code disk. As the light source ages, the activation current is 
increased to provide the same signal levels at the detectors. 
This technique has been shown to increase the effective life 
of the light source by about two to one. A secondary benefit 
of this approach is that signal balance between multiple 
readstations can be assured even if the light sources degrade 
at different rates. This feature is important for elimination of 
wide-angle errors as will be discussed below. 
The minimal analog processing circuitry results in a very 
small lqg in the delay time (latency) for latching a position 
into the processor circuit. There is great flexibility in the 
selection of operational amplifiers and A-D converters so 
that this parameter can be minimized. The ''aperture jitter" 
for this data collection is also extremely small resulting in 
very sm.al1 errors associated with operation at speed. The 
processing time required for a data word varies with the 
number of readstations, tiers, and encoders that are 
interrogated, but generally will be less than 200 pseconds, 
and in many cases less than 100 pseconds. 
3. ENCODER ERROR SOURCE DESCRIPITON 
All high-resolution encoders make use of interpolation 
techniques to extend the number of bits that can be 
generated from a set of code disk signals. The reason that 
this technique is appropriate is that the return signal from a 
light source/code disk/detector assembly is a diminishing 
function of the optical bit width. As the resolution increases, 
it rapidly becomes very costly and difficult to resolve the 
very small signals from a high-resolution system. The 
standard approach to obtaining high resolution then is to 
generate a set of sine and cosine analog signals with the 
opto-mechanical fi-ont end and use one of a number of 
possible techniques to resolve the sinusoids into bits. These 
techniques have been developed over many years and are 
well understood. Some examples of these techniques are 
phase scanning, which uses summing of phase shifted 
sinusoidls of the same spatial frequency to synthesize bits, 
quadrant switching, which manipulates the sinusoids to 
generate a gray code from which higher resolution bits are 
derived, and arctangent lookup, in which the digital ratio of 
the sine and cosine signal amplitudes is compared to a table 
stored i n  Read-Only-Memory (ROM) that contains angular 
information. This last technique is the one that will be 
discussed here. 
In order to understand the significance of the method 
described here it is essential to explore the possible 
deviatiam from norm that are experienced in a real 
encoding device and the effects of the deviations accuracy. 
All the encoder errors may be divided into two main 
categories, wide angle and narrow angle [2]. 
Wide-angle errors are those, that arise from spindle runout, 
wobble,, and drift of the axis of rotation. Bearing errors that 
are repeatable typically exhibit low harmonic content. The 
cause of these errors varies from installation issues such as: 
outer diameter (OD) and inner diameter (ID) fits, housing 
and shaft eccentricities, mounting shoulder orthogonality, 
and be:arings not properly seated on the housing or shaft 
5-2364 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
E 
W 
h 
CA 
* v) 
3 
5-2365 
shoulder. There are also errors associated solely with the 
bearing itself. These include raceway ball path and 
curvature deviations, ball size variations, and multiple 
raceway supports used during heat treatment and final 
grinding and honing [3,4]. 
Wide-angle errors also include those errors, that result from 
eccentricity or ellipticity of the code disk or code pattem. In 
a high accuracy encoder it is important to minimize the 
wide-angle error as much as possible, since these errors 
usually fall within the servo bandpass of systems built with 
these devices, and directly affect the ability of the system to 
position shaft. The principal method used to cancel these 
errors is the use of multiple opposing readstations. It can be 
easily shown that two opposing stations, for example, will 
cancel over 90% of the error resulting from the odd spatial 
harmonics in the Total Indicated Runout (TIPL) of the 
spindle. Of course, the use of multiple readstations is no 
sinecure since these stations can enhance the error resultin 
from even harmonics. If there are four stations, then the 2" 
harmonic is nearly cancelled while the 4* hamonic is 
enhanced. Encoders have been built with 2, 4, 8, 16, and 
even 32 readstations to minimize this source of error. It is 
also possible to use odd numbers of readstations for this 
purpose [5 ] .  It is important to emphasize that if the error 
components are stable over the required environments, they 
can be digitally corrected; if they are not, it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to correct them. This problem achlally gets 
worse, the more readstations are used to correct the error, 
because the phase, amplitude and sign of the cancelled error 
can vary greatly with slight changes in the mechanical 
location of the axis of rotation, even though the RMS error 
may be relatively stable. Therefore, the ideal 
optomechanical assembly candidate for correction is one in 
which the single station errors are very stable, even though 
the absolute magnitude of the error may be high. Magnetic 
encoders such as resolvers and Inductosyns cancel most of 
the wide angle errors quite well due to the use of 12 or more 
reading stations (sets of pole pairs). However, to achieve 
the highest accuracy it would be very difficult to separately 
read and digitize each read station and correct errors since 
the individual station outputs vary over a wide range if the 
axis of rotation changes. In these devices the fields vary as a 
power law function of plate or winding separation as 
compared to the optical devices, where the changes are 
nearly linear with separation (this assumes the use of 
collimated light) [6]. 
8 
One final issue with this sort of device is that if the stations 
are not individually adjusted (the usual case for magnetic 
devices) the degree of cancellation of any specific harmonic 
of the error is problematic; as the individual station 
amplitudes and phases change, any number of spatial 
harmonics can rise or fall in importance. These facts are 
generally well understood in the industry. This is one reason 
why the mapping of errors in systems, which use: magnetic 
encoders, is of limited utility. In fact the most common 
enhancement of these systems is not mapping, but rather 
schemes which attempt to minimize the effects of system 
noise and perhaps to reduce narrow angle errors, which are 
more repeatable. 
Error calculations have been developed for a number of 
standard configurations. For a 2-station encoder the residual 
error induced by odd harmonics if the stations have phase 
imbalance is 
(where N is the harmonic order of the TIR component), 
and amplitude imbalance of the readstations gives odd 
harmaaic errors of 
The second major category of errors of any angle 
measurement system is narrow angle errors. These errors are 
those, which in an optical encoder result from cycle to cycle 
variatioins in the sine and cosine signals used to generate the 
bits. These errors repeat at a fundamental frequency equal to 
the number of cycles on the code disk (or the number of 
pole pairs in a magnetic encoder). These errors normally 
have a. number of higher order harmonics of the 
fundamental spatial frequency. There are six major sources 
of nanrow angle error: amplitude imbalance, phase 
imbalance, DC offset, carrier phase imbalance, code disk or 
pole pattern errors, and carrier harmonics. The interpolation 
electronics has the task of minimizing the effects of all these 
errors. The peak amplitude and phase of the errors resulting 
from these error sources are summarized in Table 1 [7]. 
It should be noted that two sources of error, those resulting 
from c ider  phase imbalance and carrier harmonics, are 
only present if the system makes use of a carrier frequency 
(such as is universal for the magnetic devices). Naturally 
there are tradeoffs associated with each of these error 
sources and it is apparent that an error from one source may 
actually be used to cancel an error from another source if 
they are at the same spatial frequency. The approach 
presented here, does not use a carrier and therefore sidesteps 
this category of error. 
It should also be noted that these errors are all a linear 
function of the number of sinelcosine cycles on the code 
disk (or the number of pole pairs in magnetic encoders). 
This points to one of the prime requirements for a high 
resolution system-lots of cycles. In this area, optical 
encoders have an inherent advantage since the number of 
cycles, which can be printed, on a code disk is an order of 
magnihide greater than is possible with the magnetic 
devices. 
The approach taken in assembling most high resolution 
optical encoders is to first assemble the spindle bearing, next 
mount and center the code disk, then mount and align the 
readstaliom, and finally marry the interpolation electronics 
to the optomechanical assembly. As can be easily seen in 
the discussion above, there are numerous places where the 
assembly process can damage the ability of the encoder to 
provide high accuracy. For example, if the spindle assembly 
has a large TIR or excessive wobble it will create errors. 
5-2366 
Table 1. Summary of Narrow Angle Errors 
2N 
N 
2N 
3N 
Error Source 
*90° elec 
varies 
SIN/COS Amplitude Mismatch 
(Carrier Feedthru) 
SIN/COS Phasing 
Carrier Phasing 
SIN/COS Harmonics 
Carrier Harmonics L 
Error Peak Amplitude 
AA 
N 
E ,  =- 
L .  
E ,  = J z z 2  
N 
Acp EA, =- 
2 . N  
THD 
ETHD = 7 
THD( carrier) 
N ETHD = 
If the code disk is not centered properly, or if it is not 
aligned to the axis of rotation, or if it is not perpendicular to 
the axis of rotation, errors are generated. Even if all of these 
parameters are correct, but the bearing assembly axis of 
rotation subsequently shifts slightly due to thermal 
excursions or vibration, the encoder accuracy will suffer. 
Assuming that the spindle and the code disk mounting is 
correct, the next effort is to align the readstations. In an 
optical encoder this means that the readstations must be 
mounted equidistant fiom the axis of rotation, at the proper 
angular separation from each other, and then must be rotated 
to properly phase the sine and cosine signals to each other. 
For high-resolution angular position devices (both magnetic 
and optical), this process is usually accomplished by 
monitoring the outputs of a pair of opposing readstations 
and using the phase and amplitude to find a balance point. 
Naturally, this process can be extensive if more than two 
readstations must be aligned, since each readstation must be 
matched with the opposing station, but also the pair must be 
adjusted to other pairs of stations. Once the readstation is 
located properly it must be locked in position; if it 
subsequently moves it will cause errors. A properly 
designed system will be tolerant to radial and axial 
movements which apply equally to all stations, such as 
thermally induced changes, but all encoders are sensitive to 
tangential movements and to any differential movement (see 
Figure 2). Normally, considerable design effort is expended 
to assure that the readstations for an optical encoder, which 
must perform over a wide thermal range, are stable. This is 
particularly difficult for aerospace designs, which must be 
light-weighted. For earth-based high resolution encoders 
size or weight is usually not a driver, but even so, a large 
mechanical assembly must be thoroughly stress relieved to 
assure that mechanical warpage is not an issue. These 
comments also apply to spindle assemblies, which must 
support structural loads. If the axis of rotation moves under 
load the accuracy will change.The techniques described 
Error Spatial 
Frequency Error Phase 
0" elec 
zt25" to zt65" elec 
2N I *90"elec 
N 
2N 
3N 
varies 
Error Spectral 
Frequency 
f, + Nf 
fC 
fc + Nf 
fc + Nf 
fc - 2Nf 
fc - 3Nf 
fc - 4Nf 
2fC 
3fc 
4fc 
described above will largely mitigate this change, but do not 
completely remove the effects. 
4. NEXT GENERATION ROTARY POSITION SYSTEM 
The technical approach common to all next generation 
encoders will be the incorporation of significant wide and 
narrow error cancellation techniques and greatly reduced 
difficulty of calibration. The optical encoders and systems 
will employ digitized multi-tier sine/cosine signals to 
determine position. In concept the encoder consists of an 
optomechanical assembly containing a code disk and one or 
more identical readstations, and a processing module 
containing ADCs, DSP, software, and associated electronics 
(refer back to Figure 1). Each read station is excited by a 
separate light source (LED or laser diode) which is 
individually servo'd to maintain a consistent light level at 
the photodetectors over environments and life. Each 
readstation contains a monolithic photodetector array that 
produces the required tiers of sinelcosine signals. These 
signals will vary in spatial fiequency from 1 cycle per turn 
to the maximum number of cycles per turn determined by 
the desired resolution and accuracy. 
The distinct sets of S/C fiom each readstation (called tiers) 
are minimally processed with analog circuitry, then are 
digitized by the ADCs. All of the S/C signals of one tier 
fiom all readstations are sampled simultaneously; 
subsequently the same electronics reads successive tiers. 
This technique is used to minimize sampling skew between 
the sine and cosine signals, which would give rise to an 
error proportional to velocity. The calculations for each 
readstation are independent. The amplitude sine and cosine 
signals are then digitally adjusted to a calibrated amplitude 
5-2367 
Figure 2. Mechanical Layout of Optical Encoder 
and zero DC offset. The sum and difference of the sine and 
the cosine are then calculated. The resultant phase vectors 
are at exactly 90' phase, effectively eliminating the need for 
precise adjustment of the readhead mechanical location. The 
amplitudes of the resultant signals are again adjusted for 
amplitude, then the ratio is calculated. The DSP then 
accesses an arctangent lookup table and stores a partial 
position word in Random-Access-Memory (RAM). This 
table subdivides each cycle to an absolute resolution of 212 
parts. The process is then repeated on the rest of the tiers 
and the rest of the readstations. Finally, the calculated 
partial position words are merged into one contiguous word 
for each readstation. Note that at this point, the position 
word contains all of the wide-angle errors, but most of the 
narrow angle errors have been eliminated. The DSP then 
averages the position words for the readstations to obtain the 
final position. This step effectively cancels most of the 
wide-angle errors, even from spindles with very large 
mouts. Since the correction coefficients for the sine and 
cosines are determined separately for a number of sectors 
around the code disk, the processor can make an additional 
correction to remove the effects of eccentricity and 
ellipticity. The final data word is formatted and output to the 
user in any convenient format. The use of the DSP allows 
great flexibility in formatting, time tagging, handshaking 
routines and other user needs. A flow chart of the basic 
process is shown in Figure 3. 
This process depends upon determination of calibration 
coefficients for each of the tiers and readstations in the 
encoder. This calibration process has beein largely 
automated in this encoder. The code disk must still be 
centered and leveled with reasonable care, but most of the 
common resulting errors can be removed. The,readheads 
must be mounted in a stable location reasonably close to the 
proper location, but the scrupulous care required for most 
encoders is not needed here; amplitudes must be matched 
only with 50% and phases within 20'. This is a very simple 
task, and one that in many applications could be 
accomplished with pin location of the readstations, thus 
eliminating the need for skilled technicians. Once the code 
disk and readheads are mounted, one places the processor 
assembly in calibrate mode by a command transmitted via 
the interface, and makes 3 revolutions of the code disk. 
These nevolutions need not be at any particular speed or 
direction, but must cover the full range of rotation that is 
being cralibrated. These rotations can often be performed 
with the encoder in situ, which is a great convenience, since 
high accuracy optical encoders are often buried deep in an 
optical mount. Within a few milliseconds of completing the 
revolutiions, the encoder has determined all of the correction 
coefficients and stored them in non-volatile memory. The 
encoder is then placed in operate mode and will report 
accurate: position immediately. Power outages, noise spikes, 
or Sing;le Event Effect/Single Event Upset (SEEISEU) 
cannot affect the data since this sort of encoder is absolute; 
as soon as power is restored it is not necessary to seek a 
reference location for the encoder to report correct position. 
The time delay required by this encoder to capture position 
and report it is dependent on the speed of the ADCs, the 
sample and hold amplifiers, the DSP, and the number of 
tiers and readstations which must be computed. It is not 
unreasonable for the entire process to be completed in less 
than 100 microseconds. This method has a further advantage 
in that data sampling latency from the read command is very 
low and quite precise, less than 5 p e c  f 20 nsec. This 
assume!; that the light source is turned on continuously. If 
the light source is pulsed (commonly done to extend life) the 
total delay is somewhat longer. Typical delays are 40 wsec f 
20 nsec. 
5. DIGITAL SERVO IMPLEMENTATION 
Since ithe encoder now includes a great deal of fast 
processing power, some of this capability is also available to 
provide a complete servo loop wrapped around the encoder. 
For several applications, a flexible Type lV digital servo 
5-2368 
Encoder 
I 
~ ~ - 
Measure amplitude and DC offset 
of all signals over one revolution 
Read all channel values 
with LED off and save 
1 
1 
Turn LED on, wait for amps to settle read each 
channel with AD, turn LED off 
Subtract amplifier 
offsets 
I 
I - 
Remove DC offsets from cos and sin 
Apply amplitude balance factor to sin 
Load sector dependent phase 
correction factor 
1 
1 
Apply phase correction factor to make 
sin and cos orthogonal 
Lookup ratio in 
arctan table 
Compute tier offset coefficient 
for each tier and each readstation 
1 
Save all correction coefficients 
to non-volatile memory 
readstations done? s+ 
Are all 
tiers done? 
Merge the tiers and create position 
word for each readstation 
No 
1 
Average position words for 
all readstations 
Format output, calculate parity 
Transmit serial or parallel data 
Figure 3. Program Flow Diagram for Next-Genertion Encoder 
5-2369 
f--- 4-, 
8 
.3 c
4- s 
ld 
CA 
m" 
d 
5-2370 
loop has been developed which can be modified to perform 
well in many applications. The DSP allows the servo control 
loop interface to be quite flexible as far as command 
structure and servo coefficients. A block diagram of the 
servo loop implemented on a recent program is shown in 
Figure 4. In a typical high resolution application, the 
required motion profiles are a mix of fast, relatively low 
accuracy slews, followed by precise slow tracking or stop- 
and-stare functions. The digital nature of the servo loop 
allows for different sets of servo parameters for the various 
movement regimes [SI. 
As with any servo control application, the load 
characteristics must be accommodated by the allowable 
range of servo parameters. Traditional analog loops require 
fussy tuning of passive networks to change these 
parameters. The digital servo loop is much more pleasant to 
adjust to a specific application. Normally, communication to 
the DSP is via a serial link, which may be synchronous or 
asynchronous. 
The addition of the DSP to the next generation encoder 
allows for the incorporation of extra features. Often the 
optical encoder is married to a motor since it is important 
for accuracy to have the position drive element and the 
position sensing device intimately tied to the same shaft. 
Refer to Figure 1 for a block diagram of such a positioning 
system. Note that by having the encoder and servo 
controlled by the same user interface, a simplification of the 
overall pointing system is achieved. The digital loop is 
intended to be flexible and adaptable to nearly any load 
configuration. This servo design is primarily aimed at 
precision applications as can be seen by the incorporation of 
SIC commutation of the motor phases. The same non- 
volatile memory used to store encoder calibration 
coefficients can also store system parameters such as motor 
phasing information, servo calibration coeficients, and the 
like. This sort of design allows for servo parameter 
modifications in real time, as well as in the debugging phase 
of a design. The servo loop design shown requires about 
100-200 pseconds of computational overhead per 
interrogation. When added to the 100 pseconds required for 
the optical encoder readout, this gives a total cycle time of 
only 200-300 pseconds, implying a servo interrogation rate 
of several kilohertz, as shown in Figure 5.  Most servo loops 
require interrogation at only 100 Hz or less to achieve the 
required bandwidth, but the extra speed allowed by the use 
of a fast DSP gives the possibility of wider servo 
bandwidths when required for more precise control. 
Alternatively, the extra bandwidth could be used to control 
multiple axes. An example of this type of system is the 
gimbal developed by BEI's Precision Systems & Space 
Division for commercial aircraft digital TV satellite tracking 
(see Figure 6). For this system, one controller interprets two 
optical encoders for the azimuth and elevation axes of a 
gimbal assembly. This system includes initial setup and 
calibration, as well as routines to seek the satellite and to 
maintain tracking in spite of base motion changes. This 
requires multiple outer loops for the servo and is a fairly 
complex system, since inputs are taken from rate sensors 
and an RF power meter as well as from the optical encoders 
on two axes. 
Additions to the servo loop can be made to incorporate 
additional controls for lead screws, drive mechanisms, limit 
switches, initialization parameters, etc. that might be 
required for a particular application. Also, pre-programmed 
move profiles can be incorporated in the design. The basic 
loop profiles include the hardware interface details, 
analogous to the Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) 
incorporated in personal computers; these loop profiles 
include acceleration, velocity, and position, limitations of 
the encoder andlor the load, and help to keep torque spikes 
to a minimum. The user is then free to call for a move 
without concern that the standard profiles are violated, and 
knowing that the optimal response curve will be performed 
within the basic limitations of the hardware. 
By design, the user has great flexibility in changing 
parameters and programming moves, but not in altering the 
essential features of the program. This flexibility includes 
selectable digital bi-quad filters at several locations in the 
loop to allow stable loop compensation in spite of load 
nonlinearities and resonances. 
us 
U 
50 - 
100- I---- 
I -
COMPUTE DATA WORDS 
150 = I  -
- = I
AVERAGE DATA WORDS 
- I  
COMPUTE SERVO LOOP 300= - I 
COMMAND MOTOR DRIVE 
uuu 
Figure 5. Timing Budget for Next-Generation System 
5-2371 
[6] Boyes, G. S. “Synchro and Resolver Conversion”. 
Memory Devices, Ltd., Surrey, United Kingdom, 1980. 
[7] Cowger, Lamar. “Resolver Errors and Their Eflect on 
Encoder Accuracy”. BE1 Precision Systems b d  Space 
Division. Maumelle, AR, 1979. 
[8] Laurie, B. J. and Enright, P. J. Classical Feedback 
Control. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technolcogy. 1997. 
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge Lamar Cowger and Jason 
Willis, both of BE1 Precision Systems and Space Division, 
for their contributions to this paper. The authors also wish to 
express their gratitude to Linet Aghassi for her help in the 
preparation of this manuscript. 
Figure 6. Two-Axis Antenna Pointing System 
9. BIOGRAPHIES 
6 .  SUMMARY 
The next-generation optical angular position system 
described in this paper is a powerful, adaptable, cost- 
effective solution for precision applications. This system has 
incorporated useful features beyond what can be achieved 
with conventional approaches. Self-calibration of the optical 
encoder not only reduces the time required to align the 
encoder, but also allows calibration in situ so that the need 
to suffer removal of instruments that are located in places 
where it is impractical, impossible, or painful to get access 
is minimized. The addition of a digital signal processor to 
the optical encoder also allows for simplifications of the 
servo control function in many cases. It is often an 
advantage to have the processing power distributed in a 
system to relieve the main processor of the need to 
microcontrol the position measurement devices. Finally, the 
system described is more cost effective than previous 
solutions, even considering the added functionality. In the 
future, this system will form the basis for ever more 
accurate and p0werfi.d encoders and systems. 
7. REFERENCES 
[ 11 Malcolm, Timothy. “Feeback Devices-Part 1: General 
Prinicples and Part 2: Optical Encoders ”. Space Vehicle 
Mechanisms. Ed. Peter Conley. Wiley: New York, 1998. 
[2] Malcolm, Timothy. “Encoder ResolutiodAccuracy 
Technical Bulletin”. BE1 Precision Systems anid Space 
Division. Maumelle, AR, 1994. 
[3] Wang, Shenandoah. “Bearings of Unusual Precision”. 
Industrial Tectonics. Rancho Dominguez, CA, 1989. 
[4] “Handling and Mounting Precision Ball Bearings”. 
Barden Precision Bearings. Danbury, CT, 1997. 
[5] Hafle, Ralph. “Residual Angular Error with I ,  2, 3, or 4 
Optical Readout Stations”. BE1 Precision Systems and 
Space Division. Maumelle, AR, 
1994. 
Dr. Asad M. Madni is President 
and COO of BE1 Technologies, Inc., 
located in Sylmar, California. Prior 
to joining BE1 in 1992 he was 
with Systron Donner Corporation (A 
Thorn/EMI Company) for 18 years 
where lie served in various senior 
level technical and executive 
position!;, eventually as Chairman, 
President and CEO. He received 
the A.A.S. degree from RCA Institutes, Inc., B.S. and M.S. 
degrees from University of California, Los Angeles and the 
Ph.D. degree from California Coast University, all in 
electrical engineering. He is also a graduate of the Certificate 
Program in Engineering Management at the California 
Institute of Technology, the Executive Institute at Stanford 
University and the Program for Senior Executives at MIT 
Sloan School of Management. Dr. Madni is an 
internationally recognized authority with over 30 years of 
experience in “intelligent” system design and signal 
processing. He is credited with over 70 refereed publications 
and numerous patents resulting in “industry fusts”. He 
serves as a director on the board of four technologjr 
companies and in an advisory capacity for several 
professional and academic organizations including California 
State University Northridge, College of extended Learning. 
Dr. Mathi is also the recipient of numerous awards and 
honors including the IEEE Third Millennium Medal, the 
Joseph IT. Engelberger best paper award at the 2000 World 
Automation Congress, and is listed in all the major Who’s 
Who pulblications including Who’s Who in America. He is a 
Chartered Engineer and an elected Fellow of the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers (IEE), the Institute for the Advancement 
of Engineering (IAE), the New York Academy of Sciences 
(NYAS) and the International Biographical Association 
(IBA). He is also a Life Member of the Association of Old 
Crows (.40C), Life Senior Member of the American Institute 
of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and Member of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS)I and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). 
5-2372 
Mike Jumper is currently aBusiness 
Development Manager for BE1 Sensors 
and Systems Company's Precision 
Systems and Space Division. He was 
the System Mechanical Design Engineer 
for the Hubble Space Telescope Star 
Selector Servo Subsystem during the 
engineering and production programs. 
His responsibilities at BE1 have 
included work on the GOES Scanning 
Mirror MotorEncoders, UARS High Gain Antenna Position 
Sensors and the development of the 24 and 25-bit high 
accuracy commercial optical encoders. He received a B.S. 
degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of 
Arkansas in 1980 prior to joining BE1 that same year. 
Tim Malcolm is currently a Business 
Development Manager for BE1 
Sensors and Systems Company's 
Precision Systems and Space 
Division. He previously served as 
Reliability Manager for 15 years. In 
that capacity, he was responsible for 
reliability/survivability analyses of 
numerous space and military optical 
encoders and servo system designs. 
He is credited with one patent and is 
the author of chapters on Optical Encoders and Feedback 
Devices: General Principles in %ace Vehicle Mechanisms: 
Elements of Successful Desim (Wiley), as well as 
numerous proposals, technical bulletins and other literature. 
He is a graduate of the University of Arizona with a B.S. in 
Electrical Engineering, and worked for Motorola, Siemens, 
and Medtronics prior to joining BE1 in 1980. 
5-2373 
