1Use and Benefit of Seeded Fault Testing in Development 
of Advanced Diagnostic and Prognostic Algorithms 
Allan J. Lees 
President, DSA International Corp. 
Vancouver BC Canada V6S 2L2 
alees@dsaint.com 
Gregory D. Colman 
Senior Project Engineer EMS Center of Excellence 
Rolls-Royce Corporation 
P.O. Box 420 
Indianapolis Indiana 46206-0420 
gregory.d.colman@rolls-royce.com 
604-22 1-5300 
3 17-230-6288 
Abstract-Seeded fault testing is defined as the process of 
installing used parts with a quantified service created defect 
into an otherwise healthy piece of equipment for the purpose 
of developing diagnostic and prognostic techniques to 
identify impending failure in that piece of equipment. 
Having conducted seeded fault testing of an installed and 
fidly functional but non-flying Bell 206 helicopter gearbox, 
it has been found that application of seeded fault techniques 
can produce significant benefits relative to the validation 
and subsequent use of prognostic and diagnostic algorithms. 
Having developed a level of expertise on the Bell 206, 
additional plans are being developed to conduct seeded fault 
testing of a T56 propeller reduction gearbox prior to moving 
to the complete installed engine assembly. The work 
completed so far has shown that in complex equipment, 
some prognostic and diagnostic techniques are valid and in 
other cases shown some techniques to be invalid even 
though they may have worked in less complex equipment. 
Development of a database of seeded fault data for general 
industry provides an essential tool for evaluation and 
refinement of future algorithms. Early application of seeded 
fault test data in a program using a condition based 
maintenance approach on complex mechanical equipment 
has in many industries produced significant benefits for the 
equipment operators in terms of higher equipment 
availability, lower operating costs and increased safety. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
NATURE OF THE SUBJECT 
BACKGROUND OF PREVIOUS WORK 
PURPOSE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PAPER 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
SEEDED FAULT TEST TECHNIQUES AND USAGE 
FACILITY 
INSTRUMENTATION 
DATA RECORDING 
LOAD INDUCTION 
PITFALLS AND ADVANTAGES 
THE BELL 206 EXPERIENCE 
APPLICATION AND BENEFITS OF SEEDED FAULT TESTS 
APPLICATION TO ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT 
ALGORITHM TESTING & EVALUATION 
BENEFITS OF SEEDED FAULT TESTING 
THE T56 EXPERIENCE 
DATABASE DEVELOPMENT AND USAGE 
CONCLUSION 
REFERENCES 
BIOGRAPHY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Nature of the subject 
The evaluation of diagnostic and prognostic algorithms used 
for the determining the health condition of complex 
mechanical equipment has long been hindered by the 
shortage of creditable real world data. In the authors 
opinion, the existence of creditable real world data would be 
invaluable in the development of single algorithms and 
allow a fair unbiased comparison of the effectiveness of 
different diagnostic and prognostic algorithms. The 
reliability of the evaluation is directly linked to the level of 
confidence during initial fielding of newly developed 
diagnostic and prognostic algorithms, but it takes on a 
special significance when applied to equipment under a 
condition based maintenance philosophy. 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
7-3221 
Since it is rarely possible to explore even a small percentage 
of the possible failure modes that could develop in an actual 
piece of equipment, a method of evaluating the various 
diagnostic and prognostic algorithms separate fiom the in- 
service application is essential. Accelerated wear testing has 
been and still is generally used to generate data on failure 
modes of the components that comprise sub-assemblies of a 
more mechanically complex piece of equipment. For 
example, extensive run-to-failure testing has been conducted 
on bearings, gears, shafts and similar sub-components 
destined for use in larger transmissions. Due mainly to the 
simplicity of these individual components and the 
significantly shortened life span in an overloaded condition, 
this is a fairly cost effective approach. However, when 
using the same approach with large complex mechanical 
systems designed to operate under high load conditions for 
an extended period of time, this run-to-failure testing 
becomes prohibitively expensive and difficult to control. 
An alternative to accelerated wear testing is the use of the 
seeded fault testing approach. The basic difference between 
the traditional accelerated wear testing and the seeded fault 
testing approach is that seeded fault testing implants faulted 
components with increasing amounts of wear or damage. 
Since the nature of the faults are generally well understood 
and documented, this enables the diagnostic algorithm 
developers to plot a number of key points along the failure 
progression curve instead of employing the time consuming 
and expensive process of plotting the entire curve as the 
accelerated wear testing method generally seeks to do. 
Background ofprevious work 
There is no data set available today utilizing highly loaded 
complex mechanical equipment that the general scientific 
community can use to make an unbiased evaluation of the 
effectiveness of new diagnostic or prognostic techniques that 
are being put forth as candidates for systems employing a 
condition based maintenance (CBM) or other diagnostic 
based maintenance philosophy. This lack of good data 
forces algorithm developers to search for alternates. 
Several years ago the US Navy conducted seeded fault tests 
on the aft transmission of an H-46 twin rotor helicopter 
(Boeing Vertol V-107). The rotors of the H-46 are 
intermeshing and as a result the aft transmission rotates in 
the opposite direction to that of North American helicopters. 
Consequently these tests could not be conducted on North 
American test stands so the US Navy went to the Westland 
test stand in the UK where the aft transmission could be 
tested. 
Purpose and significance of the paper 
This paper explores the seeded fault testing procedure used 
during evaluation of a non-flying Bell 206 helicopter 
gearbox and the benefits gained. It will then examine the 
approach currently in work to create an even more complete 
data set using a T-56 main propeller gearbox. In the process 
of delineating the approaches and procedures the general 
technique will be outlined including some of the pitfalls to 
be aware of and the benefits that might be available. Since 
there are several possible variables that might potentially 
influence the fault signature, exploration of their anticipated 
impact and the resulting anticipated benefit is explored. The 
end result will be the definition of a testing approach that 
generates data sets usable in the development and evaluation 
of advanced prognostic and diagnostic algorithms for CBM 
or other data oriented maintenance philosophy. 
2. SEEDED FAULT TEST TECHNIQUES AND USAGE 
In seeded fault testing a part with a well-known defect is 
intentionally installed into an otherwise healthy piece of 
equipment. The intent is to measure the signature generated 
by that defect (fault signature). By carefully measuring the 
signature generated by the seeded fault via a number of 
different techniques (vibration, torque, acoustic etc.), it is 
possible to generate a set of fault signature data that 
describes that fault at that particular stage of development. 
Running multiple parts with the same fault at the same and 
different stages of development provides points along the 
failure progression curve which, can then be used to predict 
the remaining useful life. In creating the curve it is essential 
to understand that it is usually a multi-dimension curve 
influenced by the variables which can alter the system 
dynamics and hence the fault signature. Further more, the 
more complex the equipment the more dimensions the 
failure curve assumes. 
The data set generated from the testing can then be used to 
develop diagnostic algorithms that can identify and quantify 
the fault, as it is evolving, long before it develops to the 
point where it can cause termination of the system 
functionality, usually known as the failure point. 
Although it is theoretically possible to calculate how a 
component fails and how various parameters might change 
as that component degrades, this approach generally only 
works for the simplest cases where the sensor system and 
pattern recognition techniques can readily detect that 
change. In our view, a more reliable method of assessing 
the performance of these systems is to use seeded fault test 
data. Unfortunately very little seeded fault test data exists. 
It is important to note that in advance of the actual test it is 
necessary to define as best as possible the types of sensors 
that might be required to detect the fault signature and at 
what threshold that detection might occur. 
Facility 
Where seeded fault testing of complex mechanical systems 
occurs is not as important as the capabilities available during 
the testing. These capabilities along with appropriate 
7 - 3 2 2 2  
personnel safety constraints will usually dictate the type of 
facility. 
When running a complex mechanical system with a known 
fault implanted, the degree of risk escalates as the severity of 
the fault is increased. It is therefore critical to have a firm 
understanding of the fault and its relation to the overall 
integrity of the assembly in which it is placed. In the case of 
the Bell 206 testing an actual, but non-flying helicopter was 
used and run at varying degrees of power. This situation 
mandated an outdoor facility with all of the personnel and 
support equipment appropriately protected and the test 
designed so as to minimize the risk. In the case of the T56 
gearbox an armored indoor facility is planned during the 
gearbox only phase and an outdoor facility is planned for the 
on wing phase. 
Instrumentation 
When a faulted component is installed and tested, the fault 
within that component grows. How much it grows depends 
on the severity of the loading and the time at laod. As the 
fault grows the signatures generated by that fault will 
change. Thus to insure the correlation of the data generated 
to the same level of defect and point in time, the 
instrumentation intended for application should be applied 
and operational for the entire test series. 
The specific instrumentation to be applied is dependent 
upon the objective of the test as well as the budget available. 
However, since the objective is to generate quality data sets 
the instrumentation should be considered as a top priority. 
Since the instrumentation is so critical calibration and 
correlation to a known standard are factors that need to be 
closely considered during planning and execution of the test. 
Data recording 
An inseparable part of instrumentation is the form and 
format on which the data is recorded. Data from years past 
has tended to be primarily analog in nature and usually 
recorded on magnetic tape. Recent data collection activities 
have utilized digital recording media. The speed of the data 
recording equipment must be compatible with the sample 
rate at which the data is being taken. 
Load Induction 
Simple mechanical systems usually have a limited number of 
load induction paths. For instance in the case of a simple 
fully enclosed industrial right angle drive gearbox, the 
loading usually results from torque or bending moments 
applied to the shafts. In a complex mechanical assembly the 
load induction paths can be numerous. In the case of the 
T56 gearbox any one of or a combination of the power 
extraction accessories that are attached can impose loads. 
And each of the load can have a unique impact. Gyroscopic 
loading, thermal loading, input power variations, propeller 
shaft power extraction and propeller shaft moments are 
some of the load induction paths that have been considered 
in planning the T56 test. In essence, anything that crosses 
the boundary layer of the unit being tested is a potential load 
induction path. 
Pitfalls and advantages 
One of the largest disadvantages routinely faced when doing 
seeded fault testing is the need for a large supply of 
components with faults with similar failure modes. The 
most common solution to this problem is to artificially 
create faults on the components via machining methods. 
The draw back to this approach is that these types of faults 
rarely if ever occur in real service and hence real world 
applicability questions are induced. In the opinion of the 
author a better solution is to use components removed from 
service due to the existence of “real” faults. 
In a large population of assemblies there is often a common 
set of failure modes that lead to the production of a 
significant number of replaced components. Where as 
collection and cataloging of the faulted parts can be a 
significant effort, the result is several sets of parts with 
multiple occurrences of common failure modes at the same 
and different stages of progression. 
Since this requires an extensive pool of assemblies from 
which to draw, cooperation of the overhaul facilities that 
service the assemblies is needed. This is why the T56 
gearbox is such a good candidate for this type of work. 
Several thousand T56 engines are in service and with the 
extensive network of maintenance centers, collection of the 
faulted parts by the manufacture is, relatively speaking, easy 
compared to a much smaller population serviced by non- 
networked facilities. Selecting parts from an in service 
product can also have the advantage of a real and possibly 
immediate application for the algorithm. 
For accelerated wear testing to be useful as a tool to 
characterize failure progression, the assembly must be 
removed from testing, disassembled and the component 
being studied carefully inspected using non destructive 
testing (NDT) techniques at various points during the test. 
Once the status of the fault is accurately quantified it is 
reinstalled and the system operated until the next point. 
This process continues for a number of points along the 
failure progression curve until the system reaches the point 
where it fails to accomplish its function. 
Each time the system is disassembled and assembled there is 
a very high probability that the structural dynamics of the 
system will be altered regardless of intent or care taken 
during the inspection process. To minimize the data scatter 
caused by the shift in structural dynamics, several complete 
runs from the “new” condition to the “failed” condition must 
be conducted before it is possible to quantify the effect that 
assembly and disassembly have. Unfortunately this also 
7 - 3 2 2 3  
introduces an additional dimension caused by the variation 
between new assemblies or assemblies with significantly 
new content. 
The seeded fault test approach has much the same problem 
related to the shift in structural dynamics caused by repeated 
disassembly and assembly but the problem can be 
minimized by utilizing a baseline configuration as a 
reference point that is periodically returned to during the test 
series and by conducting multiple runs with components 
containing nearly identical faults early in the test so that the 
shift range can be quantified and in some cases partially 
controlled. Also, since the entire assembly is not taken to 
the point of functional compromise until the very end, the 
variation in structural response occurring as a result of 
totally new or significantly different assemblies is 
eliminated. 
Another disadvantage of the accelerated wear test is the 
inability to repeatedly develop faults of a nature different 
than what accelerated wear will produce. These faults might 
occur due to defects induced during assembly, material 
defects or contamination. Since there is no way to ensure 
that that same failure mode will happen the same way each 
succeeding test a large number of tests are needed in order 
to obtain the few with consistent and similar failure modes. 
The time needed to conduct the accelerated wear testing on 
assemblies with a high load rating can be extensive, Highly 
loaded assemblies already contain a significant amount of 
energy and due care must be taken to ensure that the total 
energy resident in the system during the overload condition 
can be contained in the event of a catastrophic failure. 
Normally this forces the amount of overload to be limited 
and thus the total test time is extended. 
3. THE BELL 206 EXPERIENCE 
Used parts with naturally occurring faults including worn 
pinion gears and bearings, planetary gears and bearings were 
removed from service exposed transmissions and implanted 
one at a time into the test transmission on a fully fwnctional 
Bell 206 helicopter. To conduct these tests engineers at 
DSA International worked with the instructors at the British 
Columbia Institute of Technology Sea Island Aerospace 
Training Facility to closely control the build of the test 
transmission up and down with the faulted parts. Canadian 
Helicopters provided these parts from service-exposed 
transmissions in an attempt to make the tests correspond as 
close as possible to actual in service faults. After every third 
test the original set of good parts were re-installed and the 
baseline vibration patterns re-measured to ensure that the 
data scatter was within acceptable limits. The Bell 206 
helicopter was chained to the mnway and run up to 70% 
load with one faulted part in the transmission. A total of 10 
different seeded faults tests were conducted. Vibration data 
from accelerometers affixed to the transmission showed 
clear evidence of the implanted faults. More importantly the 
amount of damage could be related to the vibration patterns 
obtained. This work was funded in part by the Canadian 
Department of National Defense under the Defense 
Industrial Research Program. Figures 1 and 2 below show 
the general configuration of the Bell 206 transmission and 
the accelerometer measurement locations. 
Figure 1 - Bell 206 Transmission 
7 - 3 2 2 4  
Tranovene 
Lonpibldind - Longiludinal -c-C 
(a) Top view (b) Stamoard VleW 
Figure 2 - Accelerometer Locations 
These tests showed very promising results. Worn input 
pinion gears showed a reduction in overall vibration energy 
at gear mesh frequency and an increase in the vibration at 
the side bands of mesh frequencies. The gear mesh 
f?equencies were modulated by the rotation speed of the 
damaged gear. Figures 3 and 4 show the pinion gear 
baseline and seeded fault test results respectively. 
RANGE: -5i dBV STATUS PAUSED 
-7 
A2T4PlB3 R f f i  10 *.5 +yH ___." - ---- . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . .  ................................................................................................. 
f : : : .  : I  G j  i : : : : :  . . .  
4 .......................................................... ..Baseline ....................... 
. . . .  
/ . . . . .  
. . . . .  I 2 5 0 i  . ' . . 1 ' ' ' . . . . .  . . .  
i l  I / O I V j  : : : : : I : : : ,  mG ................................................................................................. 
I ! . . . .  . I [  . . .  ! I  
Figure 3 - Baseline Pinion Gear Mesh Frequency 
RMS: 10 8: STORED. . !!?e!?. . ..... ___ ........ - . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . . .  , 2.5 G i  . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . . .  I . . . . . . . . .  . s .  . . . . . . . . .  j 
I 
I 
250 1 
mG 1 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  I 
. . . . . . . . .  .'$ Faulted Test : 1 . . . . . . . . .  : x :  : :  1 : : : .  . .  I . . . . . . . . . . U , . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  L . .  . . . . . . . . .  I 
. . . . . . . . .  
' 
. . . . . . . . .  . : a . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . .  & : : .  . . . . . .  : 
I . . . . .  , . . .  . . . . . . .  ; /DIY I 
. .  6 
START: 0 Hz 81s: 11.719 HZ STOP: 3 125 Hz 
K: 1875 Hz Y: 378.2 mGrms SB: 172 X 
The results of implanting bearing faults were just as 
promising. Three different mast bearings with progressively 
more damage were implanted in an otherwise healthy Bell 
206 helicopter transmission. The first bearing had a light 
track on the race most likely due to contaminated lubricant 
created by secondary damage from the failure of another 
component. Figure 5 shows a photograph of the inner race 
damage. 
Figure 5 - Mast Bearing Damage - Light Track on Inner 
Race 
The second mast bearing fault consisted of several small 
cracks on the inner race as shown in figure 6. 
The f i a l  fault involving the mast bearing showed heavy 
pitting and spalling of the inner race likely due to a lightning 
strike or severe brinelling from wind. Figure 7 shows a 
photograph of this damage. 
The test results are shown in figure 8 below. The frequency 
of vibration is on the horizontal axis and the amount of 
vibration in milli g's is on the vertical axis. There are four 
spectra shown in figure 8. The two on the bottom are 
baseline vibration patterns. The 3rd from the bottom is the 
light track (see figure 5), the fourth fiom the bottom is for 
the slight cracking (figure 6) and the top spectrum is for the 
heavy pitting and spalling as shown in figure 7. 
Figure 4 - Heavy Pinion Wear and Major Spalling 
7 - 3 2 2 5  
Figure 6a - Mast Bearing Damage - Several Small Cracks 
on Inner Race Figure 7a - Mast Bearing Damage - Many Large Spalls and Pits on Inner Race 
Figure 6b - Mast Bearing Damage - Several Small Cracks 
on Inner Race 
Although somewhat confusing at first glance, the results 
show the harmonics of the BPFI (Ball Pass Frequency Inner) 
being modulated by one and two times the rotor speed. The 
BPFI is a calculable number based on the physical geometry 
of the bearing and is normally supplied upon request from 
the bearing manufacturer. The side bands (or modulating 
frequencies) are spaced at the rotation speed of the main 
rotor. 
Close examination of the test results shown in figwe 8, 
reveal that the side bands are a clear indication of the mast 
bearing fault. More importantly they show not only the 
presence of a mast bearing fault but the level of vibration at 
the modulating frequencies is directly related to the level of 
damage on the 
Figure 7b - Mast Bearing Damage - Many Large Spalls and 
Pits on Inner Race 
mast bearing. This is the beginning of a prognostic system 
since it is possible for an experienced maintenance mechanic 
to correlate the bearing damage with remaining useful life in 
the bearing and from that estimate how much longer the 
helicopter could remain in service before an unacceptable 
level of risk of catastrophic failure might occur. At this 
point in the development of diagnostic and prognostic 
technology, one best err on the safe side since there is very 
little seeded fault data or run to failure data upon which to 
begin to base prognostic assumptions. This is the very 
purpose and reason for conducting the proposed seeded fault 
tests to help quantify how well or how poorly proposed 
diagnostic and prognostic systems work and what 
improvements could be made to them to be more reliable. 
7-3226 
4/ 5 
I00 
mG 
10 
mG 
/DIV 
0 
G 
START: 
RANGE: -51 d6V STATUS: PAUSED 
B: STORED A5T4P5Cl RMS: 10 
7 -- -- ____________________I____ ________ 
j Tail Rotor 
0 H t  6W 937.5 mHt STOP: 250 H t  
Figure 8 Three Levels of Mast Bearing Faults 
4. APPLICATIONS AND BENEFITS OF SEEDED FAULT 
TESTING 
Numerous initiatives in multiple services (commercial and 
military) around the world have called for the development 
of condition based maintenance (CBM) systems powered by 
both diagnostic and prognostic capabilities for the expressed 
purposes shown below. 
1. Reduce 0 & S (Operations and Support) Costs 
2. Improve Readiness and Operational Availability of 
3. Improve Safety 
(Especially Manning) 
Mission Critical Equipment 
In the attempt to create the algorithms that will power the 
advanced CBM systems, scientists and engineers have found 
that the utilization of data sets, which included known and 
well documented failure conditions are of extreme value. 
Most equipment development programs do not contain the 
funding or schedule budget sufficient to create the data sets 
necessary for development and evaluation of today’s more 
powerful algorithms but if they did the seeded fault 
techniques could be applied as follows. 
1. Creation of improved component removal criteria by 
correlating component condition with fault signature. 
2. Production of data sets that are used to develop and 
assess the accuracy and reliability of diagnostic and 
prognostic algorithms. 
3. Assessing the performance of the CBM systems under 
realistic conditions. 
4. Provide real world data to train neural network based 
systems. 
5. Evaluate the effectiveness of self-learning diagnostic 
and prognostic systems. 
6. Evaluation and validation of new and developing sensor 
systems and technologies. 
When applied in any one or all six of the above methods, 
seeded fault testing can produce a significant benefit for the 
individual investigator but a massively larger benefit can be 
obtained when the results are shared with the entire 
scientific community in a manner that tends to adopt a 
standard approach. The problem that usually prevents the 
sharing of this data revolves around the potential disclosure 
of company proprietary design data. 
Besides the benefits implied in the six applications stated 
above there are some even greater reaching benefits that can 
be achieved. The objective of most CBM systems is to 
7 - 3 2 2 7  
minimize the total overall system life cycle cost. Their 
ability to do this is tied directly to the capability of the 
included algorithms and the data being fed to them. Seeded 
fault testing provides the vehicle to ensure that the sensors 
are sufficiently sensitive and of the right type to detect the 
failure modes of importance. It is also the vehicle to ensure 
that algorithms with the proper level of accuracy and 
detection capability are included into the system the first 
time and thus avoiding expensive system redesigns. 
This “do-it-right-the-the-first-time” approach will enable a 
high degree of confidence in the system from the beginning. 
It will eliminate many of the traditional complaints such as: 
1. Too many misdiagnoses 
2. 
3. Too labor intensive 
Too many “No-Evidence-of Failure” found 
A benefit of the actual test rig itself is that it provides an 
opportunity to integrate the entire hardwarehofhvare portion 
of a CBM system. This lack of integration capability is 
usually one of the stumbling blocks to creating an effective 
and reliable CBM system. This lack of integration prevents 
each of the vital parts of a comprehensive CBM system from 
working together well and sometimes not at all. Without the 
means for all parts of a CBM system to function together the 
much-needed diagnostics and prognostic benefits are not 
achieved. A common end result of the lack of integrations is 
the inability for the CBM system to provide clear direction 
to the war-fighters that are trying to make informed 
decisions under highly stressful conditions. 
It is recognized that one of the key technologies for 
achieving improved readiness and reduced operating costs is 
the development of reliable tools for accurately and rapidly 
pinpointing the root cause of impending failures. Fore- 
knowledge of an impending failure would assist maintainers 
and operators of equipment to pre-order parts and schedule 
maintenance and repairs for a time when these repairs cost 
the least in terms of manpower and equipment downtime. 
This knowledge would facilitate determining the optimal 
removal time thereby avoiding the unnecessary expense of 
over maintaining a piece of equipment while at the same 
time avoiding the serious consequences of catastrophic 
failure. 
Since the ultimate goal of a diagnosticlprognostic system is 
to accurately and reliability determine the most cost 
effective removal point in time, this seeded fault test data 
could be used to validate integrated CBM systems. This 
would include quantifying the efficiency of expert systems 
and automated fault detection systems or for training neural 
network based novelty detection systems and other self 
learning systems. False alarm rates, accuracy and reliability 
will be important factors in gaining user acceptance of CBM 
systems. Seeded fault tests will play an important part in 
garnering this user acceptance. 
5 .  THE T56 EXPERIENCE 
The T56 became involved initially as a result of a 
requirement to define better service limits for the main 
propeller gearbox. At that time an estimated $10 million per 
year was being spent to overhaul gearboxes, which had no 
apparent problem. Previous efforts to utilize basic fault 
signature data had been less than satisfactory due in large 
part to the inability to correlate component condition to the 
signatures being generated. Thus it was decided to utilize 
the seeded fault test approach. 
With the gearbox encompassing multiple gear train types, 
multiple gear meshes and multiple bearings many of which 
are very similar, the T56 gearbox can most certainly be 
classified as complex. Coupled with the long service history 
and large population of the engines, the T56 was an ideal 
candidate for this kind of testing. Add the logistical support 
structure available through the engine manufacture and the 
ability to immediately apply what is learned, use of the 
seeded fault test approach became a very logical choice. 
Early in the development of the test plan it became obvious 
that to meet the objective of the program, a multifaceted 
approach would be required. Because the gearbox is so 
complex, building a base of understanding with simpler 
equipment was essential hence the study of the Bell 206 data 
and test experience. Understanding the benefits as well as 
the limitations, which a test stand approach imposed was 
also necessary. The understanding of the limitations 
imposed by the test stand ultimately lead to the development 
of the test work array shown in figure 9. 
A test facility was modified specifically for the purpose of 
conducting the seeded fault test on the T56 gearbox and 
equipment specifically designed for load induction was 
developed. Sensors and data acquisition equipment was 
obtained and a preliminay test plan drafted. We were 
awaiting arrival of the gearboxes when the USAF rearranged 
the Component Improvement Program priorities and funding 
for continuation of the program was drastically reduced. 
7 - 3 2 2 8  
1 
GRAVATION TOWARDS OPEN 
ARCHITECTURE NIULTI-PURPOSE 
MACHINES COMP LIKE 
Figure 9 - Total Array Test Program 
The accomplishment of the test stand effort was planned for 
6 stages. The first stage involved a study of data and fault 
patterns related to simpler systems as well as the T56 
gearbox. Hence a review was conducted of the seeded fault 
test data collected during the Bell 206 tests for phenomena 
comprehension as well as candidate diagnostic and 
prognostic algorithms. Using this data a variety of time 
fiequency analysis methods and pattern classification 
techniques will be applied with a view to developing 
confidence in the sensor systems, data collection and 
recording techniques, and detection thresholds. 
The second stage involves the implantation of the faulted 
components into a test gearbox and running of the gearbox 
on the test stand. After reviewing the list of component 
failures, a list of the 15 most common ones was developed. 
Collection of these parts at different levels of fault 
development was begun. The actual number to be run will 
depend upon the size and quality of the sample population 
collected as well as the funding available. The test plan 
calls for the use of a wide variety of sensors systems and 
signal processing techniques to collect data on the test 
gearbox. 
Imbedded in the test plan is the requirement to check the 
data scatter caused by the shift in structural dynamics 
created by repeated assembly and disassembly. Thus a 
standardizing set of known good hardware will be implanted 
every few tests to insure correlation is maintained. 
From the stage 2 effort a preliminary set of methodologies 
would be developed for potential use in developing the 
improved service limits. However, given the significant 
shift in structural dynamics between the test stand 
environment and the actual on wing environment it is logical 
to assume that not all methodologies developed on the test 
stand would be usable in the field. 
Thus a third stage would be used to aid in the transfer of the 
methodologies from the test cell to the wing. In this stage a 
gearbox with a simulated propeller would be run with many 
of the same faults that were run in the gearbox alone. 
Depending upon how some of the technical issues are 
resolved it may be possible to conduct this stage concurrent 
with stage 2. 
The transfer process would continue with Stages 3 and 4 
7-3229  
where the transferability from one gearbox to another would 
be tested and the effect of the full power section and QEC 
would be evaluated. To ensure transferability additional 
service exposed gearboxes initially supplied by the 
Canadian Forces would be run across the stand and 
evaluated for potential faults based on the previously 
gathered seeded fault test data. No faulted parts would be 
installed and immediately after testing, the gearboxes would 
be disassembled and a detailed inspection report prepared 
documenting the condition of the faults actually found and 
the condition of the parts(s) suspected. The strip down 
reports and repair facility test results would be compared 
with the test results from the test stand to ensure the 
methodologies were hct ional  and reliable. 
Stage 5 would follow as an on the wing correlation and 
demonstrationhalidation of the methodologies developed 
for improving the service limits. In much the same manner 
as in the test cell, known faults previously run would be 
implanted and the resulting signatures measured and 
correlated to previous test data. The methodologies would 
be adjusted for the difference installations and the results 
supplied to the operators. 
At every stage of the test effort data would be collected and 
stored in digital form (CD-ROM). Some analog data from 
multi-channel wide band IRIG 1 FM recorders and DAT 
recorders may also be utilized on a limited basis. 
Implantation of the faults into the gearbox being tested on 
the test stand will begin with single fault implantation and 
proceed as confidence is gained to multiple fault 
implantation. Variance of the load induction factors will 
likewise begin singly and advance to multiple concurrent 
variances as confidence is gained. 
Currently the test stand is undergoing load tests. 
Interconnect shafts and bearings are running in place of the 
forward and reverse running T56 gearboxes. These 
commissioning tests are being done to calibrate the stand 
prior to configuring it to conduct the seeded fault tests on 
the T56 gearbox. Figure 10 below shows the current test 
stand configuration with interconnect shafts in place. 
Figures 11 and 12 show recent photographs. From these 
tests it was possible to establish appropriate calibration 
factors using shaft mounted strain gauges to measure torque, 
thrust and bending loads. In addition, baseline vibration 
data was collected to determine the influence of the electric 
drive motor, interconnect shafts, slave gearboxes and 
bearings on the T56 test gearbox under test. Further testing 
will be carried out to validate the test and measurement 
instrumentation, slip ring assemblies, and other ancillary 
equipment needed to operate the test stand. 
interconnect shaft and a special torque loading coupling are 
also incorporated. The latter is used to impart a static torque 
into the entire drive system (including the T56 test gearbox). 
Figure 13 shows the fmal configuration for the T56 test 
stand. 
Due to the scarcity of serviceable gearboxes it is likely that 
the reverse running gearbox will be .fabricated from parts 
assembled into a special frame. This avoids the significant 
complication of making a T56 gearbox run backwards which 
necessitates defeating the negative torque system, re- 
plumbing the lube oil supply and scavenge pumps, defeating 
the prop brake system and devising a way to connect the 
T56 input shaft to the torque tube of the T-56 test gearbox. 
All of the foregoing would require the expense of acquiring 
a fully serviceable T56 gearbox that would be permanently 
modified to run backwards and hence removed from service. 
6. DATA BASE DEVELOPMENT AND USAGE 
A report issued by the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army discusses 
three objectives. 
1. 
2. 
3. Improve Safety 
Reduce 0 & S (Operations and Support) Costs 
(Especially Manning) 
Improve Readiness and Operational Availability of 
Mission Critical Equipment 
The same report also address the shortcomings relative to 
attainment of the objectives. In that report the Chief of Staff 
cites four primary deficiencies as the cause behind why the 
current systems are not meeting the objectives. They are: 
1 Too many misdiagnoses 
2 Too many No-Evidence-of Failure 
3 Too labor intensive 
4 [The military is] lagging behind commercial 
industry [in maintenance and support practices] 
The stand is arranged in a 4 square (back to back) 
mechanical regenerative confguration in which one test T56 
gearbox is connected back onto itself through a reverse 
running T56 gearbox. A pair of slave gearboxes, a floating 
7 - 3 2 3 0  
~ ~~ ~ 
Figure 10 - Test Stand with Interconnecting Shafting in Place of T56 Gearboxes 
Figure 11 - Test Stand Showing Slave Gearboxes and Interconnecting Shafting 
7-3231 
description of the fault. This approach tends to keep the 
evaluations unbiased. 
Figure 12 -Test Stand Showing Interconnect Shafting with 
Shaft Mounted Instrumentation 
Even though it is an Army report, the reality of the situation 
is that the stated objectives are not being met for most 
services. There are several underlying causes but one of the 
primary ones is the lack of a creditable, well-documented, 
well-organized set of data sets that includes a range of 
failure signatures on equipment that range from the simple 
to the complex and from the lab to the real world. 
Thus it is planned to make the data sets generated by this 
test program available to the scientific and engineering 
communities in addition to using it to develop the improved 
service limits. To do so will require a repository for the data 
sets and access control for those with a valid need. The 
control on the access is not meant to restrict distribution but 
to provide a communication link so that feedback on the 
success (or failure) of the effort being under taken. Where 
and when possible other seeded fault test programs would be 
included into the database. To ensure consistent usage and 
eliminate potential analysis errors a standard would be 
defined for the collection and storage of the data sets. 
7. CONCLUSION 
Advancement of the sciences supporting monitoring system 
technology development is bumping up against a natural 
barrier that must be removed if progress is to continue. 
However, in addition to the technical problems there are 
process problems that will also require solving. These other 
problems have multiple underlying causes including items 
such as the need to integrate and streamline current 
maintenance and support practices such as the JSF program 
is attempting to do. There is always the ever-present budget 
constraint that must be lived within as well as the technical 
causes including the need to provide far more accurate and 
capable diagnostic and prognostic algorithms. It is intended 
that the test technique and data described in this paper will 
go a long way towards removing the barrier standing in the 
way of algorithm development. 
8. REFERENCE 
Funding for development of the test stand has come from 
several different sources including the USAF Component 
Improvement Program (CIP) as well as private sources. 
Efforts are currently under way to expand participation in 
this multi-year program to include universities, other private 
companies and foreign military services, who might benefit 
from being a part of this program. 
Data being distributed would include sets with fault 
descriptions as well as blind data where there is no 
7-3232 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
T-56 Reverse 
Running Gearbox 
T-56 Test Gearbox and 
Figure 4 - Final Configuration of T-56 Test Stand 
9. BIOGRAPHY 
Allan Lees is the President of Dynamic Signal Analysis 
International Incorporated 
(DSA). The primar3, focus of 
DSA is to provide machinery 
health monitoring services to a 
multitude of industries and 
military services around the 
world. Creator and patent 
holder of numerous signal 
processing techniques and 
portable health monitoring 
systems, Allan is committed to 
furthering the state of the art 
through application of 
advanced signal acquisition and analysis techniques. He 
has been active in the field for nearly 30 years participating 
on a number of industry committees including SAE. He 
hold a BS in EE. 
courses in preparation for obtaining his masters degree. 
He is actively participating in developing international 
standards and guidelines for development of engine 
monitoring systems as part of the SAE E-32 committee. 
Greg Colman is a senior project engineer specializing in 
the area of engine monitoring systems for gas turbine 
applications. His nearly 20 years in the field at Rolls-Royce 
Corporation, General Electric and with 
the US Navy has produced 2 patents 
and several papers. He has successfully 
developed new and upgraded engine 
monitoring systems for seven diperent 
gas turbine systems in use through out El the world. He earned his BS in 
Aerospace Engineering in 1973 @om the University of 
Missouri at Rolla and has taken several post-graduate 
Available 
7 - 3 2 3 3  
