Networking Intelligent Components to Create Intelligent 
Spacecraft 
Robert C. Hammett 
Draper Laboratory 
555 Technology Square 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
rhammett@draper.com 
6 17-258-2494 
Abstract-Spacecraft utilize complex digital electronic 
controls to perform their missions. Although these systems 
have benefited from the availability of ever-faster computers 
and miniaturized electronics, overall control system 
architectures have changed little, utilizing a shared, 
centralized computer programmed to service many 
subsystems. These centralized systems perform well, but are 
a challenge to design and integrate, requiring complex 
custom software, custom U 0  electronics and extensive 
vehicle wiring. The availability of microprocessors, 
memories and serial data terminals small and rugged enough 
to be embedded directly into subsystem mechanical 
components has opened the door to revolutionary new 
distributed architectures. These so-called “smart” or 
intelligent components can be interconnected into a network 
to form a distributed architecture. This paper discusses work 
done to define these distributed architectures and to 
construct prototype components. Important issues addressed 
include the physical network required to distribute data and 
power to components, highly reliable, fault-tolerant 
operation, the importance of industry standards and a 
discussion of packaging and installation considerations. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Introduction 
2. Comparing Networked to Traditional Systems 
3. Networked Component System Concept 
4. U 0  Network Development 
5. Breadboard System Demonstrations 
6. Conclusions 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 1999, the Scalable Fault-tolerant Intelligent Network of 
X(trans)ducers (SFINX) project was sponsored by the 
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to explore the 
application of “smart” U 0  devices to spacecraft and to build 
a prototype system for laboratory demonstration. Draper 
Laboratory teamed with NASA and the Oak Ridge National 
Laboratories on this project. Draper had previously 
conducted internal research and development in this area 
and this project built on this work [Ref 11. The project 
objective was to develop and demonstrate a system concept 
that could reduce avionics weight and utilized an open 
industry standard for the smart U 0  system. A standard 
interface was considered the key to managing software 
complexity issues, to encouraging greater use of commercial 
components on NASA vehicles and to promoting the reuse 
of proven components and software [Ref 21. Key program 
considerations were that the sensors and actuators contain 
embedded processing, that all communications between 
sensors, actuators and computers would be digital data 
rather than analog and that a shared, multi-drop network of 
two wires would be used to distribute both power and data 
to all sensors and actuators. To provide the required 
reliability and fault tolerance needed for spacecraft, the 
SFINX project specified a redundant network architecture 
and cross-coupling data links at each sensor and actuator to 
provide localized and highly effective fault detection and 
redundancy management. 
This paper will describe some of the design features of the 
SFINX approach and will discuss the progress that has been 
made on the laboratory demonstration. Future plans to space 
flight test demonstration hardware and the introduction of 
these systems into operational spacecraft will be discussed. 
2. COMPARING NETWORKED TO TRADITIONAL 
SYSTEMS 
The space avionics systems in use today and being 
developed for NASA X-vehicles are largely based on 
avionics developed for the space shuttle. At the time it was 
developed, 25 years ago, the shuttle represented a 
revolutionary improvement upon previous systems by using 
a fault-tolerant architecture and as the first system to use 
serial data buses to carry critical signals [Ref 31. The use of 
serial data for critical signals was necessitated by the weight 
penalty involved in wiring hundreds of individual analog 
signals the full length of the shuttle payload bay. But the 
shuttle avionics are a heavy, complex system. According to 
the space shuttle reference manual [Ref 41, “The space 
shuttle avionics system consists of more than 300 major 
electronic black boxes located throughout the vehicle, 
connected by more than 300 miles of electrical wiring. 
There are approximately 120,400 wire segments and 6,491 
connectors in the vehicle. The wiring and connectors weigh 
approximately 7,000 pounds, wiring alone weighing 
approximately 4,600 pounds. Total weight of the black 
boxes, wiring and connectors is approximately 17,116 
pounds. “ 
0-78034599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
5-2209 
With the shuttle payload capacity of 65,000 pounds, 
avionics weight is 25% of the useful payload. At thLe current 
shuttle payload to orbit cost of $10,000 per pound, reducing 
this avionics weight by 75% would increase the payload 
capacity by about 13000 pounds and reduce the cost per 
pound by about 17% to $8300 per pound, a substantial 
improvement. In addition, reducing the power required by 
the avionics can further reduce weight or, in the case of 
shuttle, could be used to allow the shuttle to increase its 
endurance beyond today’s 14 day missions. Although some 
of this benefit will be automatically realized fiom using 
modem black boxes that are lighter and use les,s power, 
much of the wire weight is associated with analog sensors 
and actuation equipment that is still the only choice for 
today’s vehicles. 
The network of smart, digital I/O equipment described in 
this paper represents a new paradigm for avionics systems. 
Although it is probably not practical to retrofit this approach 
into the shuttle, it can be applied to new vehicles. This new 
approach is contrasted with the space shuttle in Figiure 1. 
3. NETWORKED COMPONENT SYSTEM CONCEPT 
Development of the SFINX network VO concept began with 
an analysis of the I/O required for future space vehicles. An 
early conclusion was that it is desirable to have a fully 
integrated health monitoring, data acquisition, and control 
systems, not separate systems. An integrated approach will 
minimize weight, simplify installation and provide 
maximum flexibility for robust control and effective health 
management. But the requirements for control systems are 
more demanding then what is needed for data acquisition, 
requiring that hard, real-time deadlines be met and that 
system performance be completely repeatable and 
deterministic. And of course many control func:tions are 
safety critical and typically must continue to operate 
correctly and without interruption following (electronic 
system failures. 
It was also recognized that an ideal system would ‘have both 
distributed and centralized control functions. For functions 
data Digital conversion 
s \ analog eFctronics; 
Analog senso 
actuators, wiri 7 
requiring information from many sources or the coordinated 
operation of many subsystems, a central flight control 
computer is required. Requirements analysis also revealed 
that the central computer must provide closed loop control 
of some functions thus tight control of data latency must be 
maintained. But it was also revealed that it is also desirable 
to off-load sensor and actuation specific processing to 
distributed I/O devices wherever possible, allowing the 
central computer to serve in a supervisor capacity. 
Distributing the VO software can reduce the complexity of 
the flight computer software and enhance the dependability 
of the system. By embedding sensor and actuator specific 
processing within the sensors and actuators, this software 
becomes a part of the component. 
To meet these requirements, the overall architecture shown 
in Figure 2 was established. In this architecture, the central 
flight control computer interfaces to a high-speed 
“backbone” data bus to acquire data fiom distributed 
intelligent components and to transmit commands to them. 
These intelligent components may be individual intelligent 
sensors and actuators or they may be more complex 
components consisting of multiple sensors, actuators and 
mechanical systems with integral control processing 
packaged within. To limit the amount of power delivered by 
I/O network wiring, and to avoid the need to equip each 
sensor and actuator with an expensive high-speed network 
interface, a number of lower tier, reduced power and lower 
speed U 0  networks are used. Each of these interface to the 
high-speed backbone using a gateway. These VO networks 
make use of a low cost, multi-drop network to provide 
power to, and exchange data with, the individual sensors 
and actuators. The backbone data bus can use any one of a 
number of existing or emerging electrical or fiber optic bus 
standards. Since many of the functions controlled by this 
system are critical to the survival of human beings or 
survival of the autonomous vehicle, both backbone bus and 
the individual VO networks must be redundant and provide 
fault-tolerances. And even less critical functions benefit 
fiom fault-tolerance that insures mission success and 
rmnunizes launch delays. . .  
FIGURE 1 - NETWORKED AVIONICS COMPARED TO SPACE SHUTTLE 
5-2210 
Fautt-Tolerant Ftight Control Computer 
I 
pigh speed Backbone Data Network 
y5 From Backbone To individual 110 Networks 
Typical 110 Network 
FIGURE 2- NETWORK I/o APPLIED TO A SPACE VEHICLE 
4. YO NETWORK DEVELOPMENT 
The primary focus of the SFINX program has been on 
developing the I/O networks needed to connect individual 
intelligent sensors and actuators to the vehicle backbone. 
These U0 networks must provide both a data interface and a 
source of electric power to the intelligent sensors and 
actuators. The data terminal and power conditioning 
circuitry associated With each individual sensor or actuator 
must be kept small, low power and environmentally rugged 
to allow it to be located within or near the sensor or actuator 
it serves. This ability to directly interface the I/O network to 
a single sensor or actuators holds the key to wire reductions, 
to “plug and play” development and is a major differences 
between the SFINX approach and miniature, multi-channel 
data acquisition systems that are already available. The 
SFINX project explored four important topics related to 
these U 0  networks: 
Fault-tolerant architectures 
Two wire power and data networks 
lEEE -1451 Standards 
Packaging and installation considerations 
Two Wire Paver and Data Networks 
The SFINX project selected a 2-wire combined power and 
data network for the I/O networks. By using only two wires, 
the amount of wiring is minimized and vehicle installation 
is simplified and made highly reliable. Altematives 
considered but not selected included: 4-wire power and data 
network; optical fiber and power wiring; and wireless data 
and power wiring. Another altemative, wireless data with 
battery power was not considered due to the issues of 
battery replacement. 
Two options for the 2-wire U 0  network were ultimately 
pursued; a high speed, simultaneous bi-directional data 
approach and a modest speed command I response 
approach. The high-speed approach, capable of millions of 
bit per second data rates, was developed as part of the 
SFINX project. It makes use of spread spec” CDMA RF 
data transmissions onto the power wires and offers the 
benefit of supporting simultaneous and tightly synchronized 
communication with many sensors and actuators. This high- 
speed approach offers enormous growth potential, but 
currently requires circuitry that is too large to be embedded 
into individual sensors. The modest speed approach utilized 
a beta version off-the-shelf component under development 
for the automotive industry. This approach superimposes a 
low level Differential Phase Shift Keyed (DPSK) data signal 
upon a DC power line to provide 25OKbps data rates. This 
approach can meet the needs of many vehicles, and is 
available today in a very small package. The conclusion 
reached was that the modest speed approach could be used 
to support NASA’s near term generation 2 vehicles while 
the high speed approach should be developed for future 
generation 3 vehicles. 
Fault-Tolerant Architecture 
Since the I/O networks must support critical functions, a 
redundant, fault-tolerant architecture is needed. Although 
the use of multi-drop networks offers many advantages, it 
does introduce common mode failures that can affect many 
sensors and actuators simultaneously and requires system 
level to overcome these. For the most critical of functions, a 
full four-channel or quadraplex architecture coupled with 
majority voting mechanisms to reject faulty data is required. 
For non-essential instrumentation, the same U 0  network 
wiring can support non-redundant or “simplex” sensors. 
Other functions may require dual or triplex redundancy to 
provide the desired reliability. The SFINX solution was to 
develop the architecture with the flexibility to support any 
5-2211 
of these levels. Figure 3 illustrates that a typical SFINX I/O 
network can be configured with four redundlant and 
independent networks, and that individual intelligent I/O 
components plugged into the network may have from one to 
four channels of redundancy. 
UD to four redumdant Gateways to backbone 
Sensor /actuator nodes may be quad, triplex, 
dual or simplex (as needed for reliability) 
FIGURE 3 - FAULT-TOLERANT ARCHITECTURE FOR 
U 0  NETWORKS 
The four channels are maintained electrically independent of 
one another and electrically isolated to insure that faults do 
not propagate between channels. To remove YO specific 
software from the central processor and distribute it to the 
intelligent I/O units, each unit is made responsible for its 
own calibration, linearization, and other data pr'ocessing. 
But to make the redundant sensor or actuator units truly 
independent of the central computer, each must perform its 
own fault detection, isolation, and recovery without 
assistance from the flight computer. To meet this need, the 
SFINX architecture includes a cross channel data link 
feature to allow the redundant sensors and acblators to 
exchange data. 
This cross channel data link features is illustrated in Figure 
4. This exchange of redundant measurements and status 
information makes it possible for the embedded processors 
to detect subtle sensors failures by comparing the redundant 
readings and for the redundant channels to perform 
thorough diagnostics upon themselves or on the redundant 
channels they are communicating with. Similarly for 
actuators, commands arriving at the flight control Icomputer 
Four channel crosslink 
Three channel crosslink 
* * *  
FIGURE 4 - FAULT-TOLERANT ARCHITECTURE, FOR 
I/O NETWORKS 
can be exchanged and compared and corrupted commands 
ignored. This command voting functionality is similar to 
that provided on the space shuttle for critical commands to 
fire pyrotechnics to ignite engines and separate stages. 
Redundant U 0  networks offer the promise of providing the 
extremely high levels of actuation dependability and safety 
applied to the space shuttle pyrotechnics, but at a more 
affordable cost. 
IEEE-1451 Open System Standard 
The success and acceptance of the networked U 0  approach 
is dependent upon the adoption of an open, standard 
interface to the intelligent sensors and actuators. An open 
standard will allow any potential suppliers of sensors or 
actuators to build components that can be plugged into the 
same network with components from other suppliers and 
they will be interoperable. This standardization will promote 
competition for similar components, which spurs innovation 
and cost reductions. The availability of off-the-shelf 
intelligent components with a standard interface will 
promote greater use of each component design, leading to 
economies of scale recurring cost benefits and the ability to 
spread non-recurring development costs over a greater 
number of units. The reuse of standard intelligent 
components reduces the amount of time required to develop 
new avionics systems and will naturally lead to the reuse of 
well tested software already embedded in the components. 
To insure interoperability, the standard must address the 
followitng : 
Electrical interface 
I Data transport interface 
Embedded electronic data sheets 
Physical interface (connectors and cables) 
For the SFINX project, the IEEE 1451 standards were 
selected. The E E E  1451 standard was one of the first 
efforts to develop standards specifically for intelligent 
compon'ents. In particular, the standard pioneered in the 
development of Transducer Electronic Data Sheets or 
TEDS. The TEDS establishes a standard for the types and 
format of data that can be stored within the memory of 
intelligent devices and allows the flight computer to 
interrogate the sensors and actuators for this data. At the 
time of this publication, efforts are underway by the 1451 
industry groups to establish standards for the electrical, 
physical and data transport interfaces for a multi-drop, 
combined power and data interface that can be used for 
these U 0  networks. 
Packaging and Installation 
The enabling technology for intelligent I/O networks is 
highly miniaturized, rugged and utilities low power 
electronics. The ability to embed the electronics needed to 
transform analog output sensors and analog controlled 
actuators into digital, multi-drop devices is the key to the 
network U 0  concept. Embedding additional processing 
5-2212 
capability and memory into these devices transforms them 
into intelligent component that allow us to move from 
complex, software intensive centralized computer systems 
to more easily integrated distributed systems. The move to 
digital multi-drop networks also can greatly simplify the 
installation of electronics in the vehicle, both during initial 
vehicle development and during modifications and 
upgrades. Specifically, large amounts of point to point 
analog signal wiring can be replaced by a combined 
instrumentation power and digital data network with taps to 
connect to each sensor and actuator. Segregating low-level 
analog signal wires from potential sources of electro- 
magnetic interference is no longer required. Significant 
weight can be saved by replacing individually routed 
switched electrical power wiring with a main power bus 
connected to remote power switching devices under fault- 
tolerant control by the U 0  network. The elimination of 
power wiring eliminates the hazard associated with chaffed, 
cracked or arcing power wiring, enhancing the safety of the 
vehicle. The I/O network packaging and installation concept 
is shown in Figure 5. As shown in the figure, the concept is 
to integrate microminiature sensors or actuators (such as 
MEW units) and all support circuitry into a single tiny, 
lightweight package that can be installed in place of a 
traditional sensor. The sensor is internally redundant, 
designed to provide absolutely dependable fault-tolerant 
operation and is connected to redundant (triplex shown) 
networks to provide fault tolerant delivery of power and 
data to the internally redundant sensor. The electrical 
connections to each of the three networks use separate 
connectors requiring only two wires. The supporting 
circuitry embedded into the device includes 
microprocessors, one per channel, with associated program 
memories and Non-Volatile (NV) memory to allow the 
intelligent device to retain information after power is 
removed. The software program for the microprocessor can 
Larger gage “tnmk“ wiring 
Smple “T’ connector 
Small gage “spur” m g  
2 pm Connector 
to each bus 
opt0 isolated 
/ dataexchanges 
ed 
location 
MEMS sensor and 
micro-electronics 
2 wire data terminal 
2 wire power supply ID tag 
microprocessor 
in-service programmable NV memory 
*sensor signal conditioning circuits 
opto-isolated cross-link & ID tag commuoications 
FIGURE 5 - INTELLIGENT I/O COMFONENT 
be updated by downloading a new one over the network 
during maintenance. A physical ID memory tag attached to 
the location where the sensor is to be installed rather than to 
the sensor itself allows the sensor to determine its location 
and to configure itself for this location. As previously 
discussed, the channels of the device may exchange 
information over cross-link data paths and these paths are 
electrically isolated to insure electrical faults do not 
propagate. 
For the SFINX project, a prototype of this packaging 
approach was developed as shown in Figure 6. Making use 
of readily available components and using Micro-Chip- 
Module (MCM) packaging techniques, a three-channel 
vibration sensor with-an integral digital signal processor and 
a 2-wire power and data interface was designed. The actual 
accelerometer sensors would be separate and 
short cables. 
connected by 
FIGURE 6 - MCMPACKAGED VIBRATION SENSOR 
5. BREADBOARD SYSTEM DEMONSTRATIONS 
Although the Network I/O architecture is based on proven 
electronics, details of the system concept and packaging 
issues require significant development before it will be 
considered ready for deployment on an operational vehicle. 
NASA established a goal for the fvst phase of the project to 
produce a breadboard demonstration. A later phase would 
then repackage the breadboard system into flight worthy 
prototypes and demonstrate them in space on either a NASA 
X-vehicle or as a space shuttle experiment. The small-scale 
demonstration shown in Figure 7 was developed to show 
that both the network concept and several prototype 
intelligent I/O units could be made to operate together. 
This breadboard demonstration included four types of 
representative intelligent transducers: a pressure sensor, a 
vibration sensor, a solenoid operated valve controller and a 
temperature sensor. The breadboard system utilized triple 
redundancy, the intelligent transducers would include 
crosslinks to exchange data and both power and data would 
be delivered to the nodes on a two wire interface. IEEE- 
145 1 standards were applied to the breadboard interfaces. 
5-2213 
Simulated flight 
control computer 
Transducer bus 
controller 
breadboard 
Intelligent transducer network 
I I 1  I I I 
I I 1  I I I 
valve 
power 
pressure vibration Y valve temperature 
sensor sensor solenoid sensor 
W’ DSP valve controller 
FIGURE 7 - SFINX SWL SCALE DEMONSTRATION 
Figure 8 shows a photograph of the vibration sensor 
breadboard built for this demonstration, connected to the 
modest speed off-the-shelf 2-wire power and data modules. 
Off the shelf accelerometers were used for the sensors rather 
than the MEMS sensors postulated for the ideal packaging 
solution. The large three channel digital signal processing 
breadboard was built to provide experimental flexibility, not 
for minimum size. 
6.  CONCLUSIONS 
The frst phase of the SFINX program raised the network 
U 0  concept to a NASA Technology Readiness Level ( T U )  
of level 4. A TRL of 4 indicates that the system has been 
shown lo operate in the laboratory, but that it has not been 
shown to be able to operate in the space environment. Low 
risk reduction of these new systems on an operational 
vehicle will require additional risk reduction activities. To 
reach this level, prototype hardware designed to operate in 
the space environment must be design and built, 
environmental qualification testing performed and a system 
demonstrated as an experiment on a space vehicle. Future 
commercial suppliers of these intelligent components must 
be included in these experiments and given a chance to gain 
familiarity with this new approach. At the present time, 
NASA is soliciting proposals for these types of risk 
reduction activities and this appears to be the opportunity to 
mature these systems. 
The we of networks of intelligent U 0  components 
represents a new approach for designing the electronics 
needed for space vehicles. There are many immediate 
benefits, to be realized including: 
Increased reliability and safety 
Improved health management (reducing operations 
w 
Reduced wiring weight and complexity 
costs) 
Reduced software complexity and cost 
Simplified vehicle development and integration 
Beyond these near term benefits, its seems likely that 
vehicle subsystem designers will discover many innovative 
features can be added once they have affordable and 
completely dependable electronic intelligence embedded in 
their systems. 
REFERENCES 
[l]Ultra-Reliable Real - Time Control Systems - Future 
Trends - Robert Hammett, 17th Digital Avionics Systems 
Conference, Oct 98, Seattle WA. (selected as best paper of 
conference) Also published in the IEEE Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems Magazine, Aug 99 
[2] Sensors Smurfen Up - Bill Travis, EDN magazine, 
March 4,1999 
FIGURE 8 - VIBRATION SENSOR BREADBOARD 
[3] Space Shuttle Avionics Systems, NASA report SP-504, 
John F. Hanaway and Robert I. Moorehead, 1989 
[4] Space Shuttle Online reference, 
http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/reference/shutreff orbiterla 
vionics/overview.html 
5-2214 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of Mr. 
Anthony Kelley and Mi. W.T. Powers of the NASA MSFC 
and those of Mr. William Bryan and Mr. Mark Buckner of 
the Oak Ridge National Laboratories. I would also like to 
acknowledge the considerable efforts made towards this 
work by Mr. William Wyman and Mr. Robert Menyhert, 
and Ms. Jeanne Brady of the Draper Laboratory. 
BIOGRAPHY 
Mr. Robert Hammett is a principal member of the Draper 
technical staff. He has degrees in both mechanical and 
electrical engineering. He has 23 years experience in the 
design, development, test, and manufacture of electronic 
control systems for aircraft, ships, and space applications. 
Prior to Draper, he has worked for Pratt and Whitney 
Aircraft, Chandler Evans and Allied Signal. At Pratt and 
Whitney, he helped pioneer the development of the first 
Full-Authority Electronic Engine Controls (FADEC) for jet 
engines. These FADECs were first-of-a-kind systems that 
represented a significant step forward in the use of digital 
electronic controls for life-critical applications. At Allied, 
Rob developed electronic controls for such applications as 
aircraft auxiliary power units, cabin pressure controls and 
air data computers. He was been exposed to the full 
development cycle of avionics including concept definition, 
product design, qualification testing, manufacturing and 
long term product support. 
At Draper, he has developed fault-tolerant controls for 
unmanned underwater vehicles, the Seawolf submarine, and 
the Kistler space launch vehicle. For the Seawolf, Rob was 
responsible for the development, test, and deployment of the 
Performance Monitoring functions that detect faults, 
manage redundancy, and provide maintenance advisory 
information. The Seawolf was also a unique first-of-a-kind 
system, using a fault tolerant computer and redundant U 0  
electronics to provide a “swim-by-~ire~’ system. Recently, 
Rob has been the principal architect of the Vehicle Health 
Management (VHM) s o h a r e  for the Kistler launch vehicle 
and several programs investigating upgrading the Space 
Shuttle avionics. Rob w a s  technical director of the NASA 
SFINX Program to develop I/O networks for future 
spacecraft and lead several earlier IR&D efforts looking into 
the use of WO networks. 
5-2215 
