Commercial and Internet Trends and the NASA 
Spaceflight Ground Network 
M. Chris Spinolo 
NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center 
Code 291 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 
chris.spinolo@gsfc.nasa.gov 
30 1-286-7552 
Abstract-’NASA is a critical information source in this 
Age of Information. With the advent and maturity of the 
Internet, the demand for NASA information has grown 
beyond science data archives to near real time and even real 
time data, particularly on the Earth and near Earth 
ecosystems. NASA also has prospered a policy of sharing 
mission responsibility with non-NASA entities, which still 
require tracking support fiom the NASA network. This 
paper discusses the issues in conflict when trying to solve 
the paradox of securing a critical national resource and 
participating as a good citizen of the Information Age. By 
illustrating several ground network architecture examples, 
these issues are highlighted. Recommendations for using the 
NASA tracking networks are given. 
information; and the more current the information, the more 
demand there is for it. Some of the most useful information, 
for casual, commercial and critical users, is space and 
terrestrial environmental data[3] gathered from NASA 
programs. 
These two trends have created a growing conflict in 
requirements for the NASA tracking network, between 
protection of a critical national resource and delivering 
program products to the customer and public. Through the 
use of various ground network architecture examples, the 
issues and solutions are illustrated. The approach is 
pragmatic; the perspective that of a network operator who 
has dealt with and successfully served dozens of diverse 
spaceflight programs. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2. CURRENT TRENDS - CONFLICTING ISSUES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
INTRODUCTION 
CURRENT TRENDS - CONFLICTING ISSUES 
CONFIGURATION EXAMPLES 
CONCLUSIONS 
WORKING SUCCESSES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The NASA spaceflight tracking[l] and supporting ground 
networks[2] are critical national resources protected under 
federal statute, requiring thorough IT security measures. 
However, it is no longer the only spaceflight game in town. 
Commercial spacecraft tracking networks and flight 
operations have followed commercial launch service 
availability and are now a viable option for spaceflight 
programs. 
The ubiquity of the Internet continues to increase day to 
day, spawning an increasingly insatiable appetite for 
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. Copyright. 
NASA Tracking Networks Security Posture 
As the Federal Government oversight bureaus (i.e. Inspector 
General, FBI) become more aware of information 
technology (IT) security risks and issues[4], NASA IT 
resources come under increasing scrutiny and evaluation. As 
a result, security postures and measures continue to grow 
more stringent and pervasive. Many policies that were 
accepted only a year ago are now seen to be unacceptable 
risks. However the architectural approach at the highest 
level remains intact. NASA Resources are categorized as 
“closed” or “open”. Closed resources are those deemed 
sensitive enough to require a high degree of isolation 
because of performance requirements or criticality of the 
resource (e.g. compromise may result in catastrophic loss of 
life or property). Open resources are those not classified as 
closed. Data can be passed between a closed network 
resource and any open network resource only by a single, 
NASA operated secure gateway facility. The NASA 
tracking network is a closed resource. Most of the NASA 
spacecraft control centers are still closed resources. 
2-1021 
However current outsourcing trends have customers of the 
data the NASA tracking network acquires as open resources. 
Commercial tracking networks[S] 
Several years ago, NASA spun off the launch services it had 
developed so that a program no longer approaches NASA 
for a launch service but acquired this service directly from 
the commercial market place. Even NASA purchases these 
launch services now. Recently, NASA has prospered a 
policy to commercialize tracking network services as well. 
Already several startup commercial tracking networks have 
been established, which offer spacecraft tracking service on 
a per pass basis. NASA programs are encouraged to use 
them, and they are attractive for cost reduction. The 
challenge for the network, in this scenario, is to provide data 
delivery to closed NASA resources (mission control centers) 
while protecting the entire closed network from what is 
essentially an Internet based service offering. 
Outsourcedflight operations 
As the aerospace industry has matured and proliferated, the 
opportunity to commercialize flight operations is an 
attractive option. While NASA science programs are still 
established and managed by the Administration, universities 
and aerospace companies now propose to establish and run 
their own mission operations and control center, rather than 
rely on government furnished facilities and systems. These 
external control centers are open resources that still require 
support from the closed NASA tracking network. 
Realtime Customers 
The application of NASA, space based technology and 
information in a way that directly enhances the quality of 
life here on earth is a strategic goal of the agency. For 
example, the use of real time data from an outpost between 
the sun and earth provides early warning of solar eruptions 
that would be damaging to systems that provide a critical 
support infrastructure for life on the surface. This early 
warning capability also increases the safety margin for 
space explorers working on the space station. Another 
example is a new mission, currently underway, to provide 
constant, near realtime views of the earth with the explicit 
goal of prospering a global perspective among the public, in 
order to foster cooperation and compassion among 
otherwise diverse peoples. These mission concepts require 
a capability to constantly deliver realtime data from the 
closed NASA tracking networks to the public Internet 
3. CONFIGURATION EXAMPLES 
What follows are descriptions of various attempts to build 
ground support networks for flight projects and the risks 
assumed by each particular architecture. 
NASA 
Tracking 
Sites a Resource 
Figure 1. Conceptual Drawing 
Figure 1 illustrates a conceptual diagram of the relationship 
between the various components discussed in this paper. 
The most significant feature is the isolation of mission 
critical resources in the closed side of the network. Security 
policies dictate that no resources are allowed to be 
connected to the closed network and any other network. 
This is commonly referred to as an “air gap” security 
posture, and has never been waived by NASA. The 
“customer” Science operations and principal investigators 
have always been, and continue to be open resources. Other 
pertinent features are: 
Access to the closed network is only possible via the 
single, NASA owned secure gateway. 
Connections through the secure gateway must be 
initiated fiom the closed network, no connections are 
initiated from the open network to the closed network 
resources. 
- Encrypted data flows are not permitted through the 
secure gateway. 
- Network performance levels are specified and 
delivered effectively by the closed network. Such 
guarantees are not perceived to be possible in an open 
network where network use is not controlled. 
- 
- 
A ground system architecture is determined by analyzing 
the mission operations concepts to determine the primary 
tracking network, placement of the control center and other 
critical real time resources in relation to the tracking 
network, placement of science operations and principal 
investigators, and providing a delivery mechanism for 
mission products to the customer and public. 
Closed Example 
This scenario (Figure 2) is typical of the majority of existing 
NASA missions. The control centers are located at NASA 
sites and connected to the closed network. The most 
significant advantage of this configuration is the fault 
tolerant, highly available connectivity between the control 
center and the tracking stations. Another advantage of this 
2-1022 
approach is the simplicity of the security plan for critical 
facilities, which take advantage of the isolation of the 
NASA closed network. The primary disadvantage is the 
elimination of connectivity options for the control center 
which now has only one door behind NASA’s secure 
gateway. Initially this may seem significant, but as launch 
approaches and critical support actually comes in view, 
most programs take level of comfort in this architecture. 
The comfort level comes from the self control and validated 
rules of engagement enforced by connection to the closed 
network, not just the “protection” (real or perceived) 
afforded by features such as the secure gateway. 
NASA --hh 
Interne 
Figure 2. Closed Mission Ops Data Flows 
The control center can also be located at a university or 
commercial facility in this mission architecture, but must be 
strictly isolated from any other network. While feasible, 
many mission concepts with non- NASA control centers 
rely on existing resources at the university or corporation for 
cost savings, making such isolation problematic. 
This is the recommended confguration for a mission that 
relies on the NASA Tracking network as the primary 
tracking network. 
Open Example 
In this mission architecture, the entire operation, with the 
exception of the actual spacecraft tracking, is in the open 
network. The primary advantage, indeed the chief goal of 
this approach, is to allow the project maximum flexibility in 
distributing and collaborating with 31d party participants. 
The primary disadvantage is the risk of separation from the 
NASA tracking stations inherent in the secure gateway. 
Another feature, which could be pro or con, is the 
responsibility for IT security of the control center rests 
solely with the project. 
This is the recommended architecture for missions that will 
use commercial tracking services as the primary tracking 
network. It is highly likely that such missions will still rely 
NASA 
Tracking 
Sites 
Figure 3. Open MOC Data Flows 
on NASA tracking networks for launch, early mission 
coverage and contingency support. Even though these data 
flows are 2-way, these connections must be initiated from 
the closed network. 
Commercial Tracking and Operations 
NASA 
Figure 4. Commercial Tracking Services 
The last conceptual example highlights a new issue created 
with the advent of commercial tracking networks. With this 
new service offering, new and existing NASA missions can 
purchase pass support “off the market.” This requires that 
realtime support be configured from an open resource to a 
Mission control (MOC) center on the closed network. 
These data flows must be initiated ftom the control center. 
The passes are usually scheduled via an Internet interface, 
so the closed MOC also requires direct connections to the 
open side, but entirely isolated from the closed segments. 
This issue has resulted in some new mission choosing to 
locate the control center on the open network (see Open 
Example) 
2-1023 
The method for securing the data flows between the 
commercial tracking networks and the control centers is still 
to be determined. Federal law requires that the command 
uplink to federally and NASA sponsored satellites be 
protected, including the ground segment. This risk is 
presently mitigated by dedicated Ip connections (e.g. not 
Internet) to the commercial provider. 
Summary 
The key considerations for projects considering the use of 
NASA tracking networks in their mission profile are: 
The NASA tracking network is an isolated secured 
facility with established and enforced access policies. 
This provides an infrastructure for highly available, 
safe access between the spacecraft and the control 
centers. 
U.S. Government law and policy requires significant 
security practices for spacecraft projects and audit the 
projects to check compliance. These policies are 
becoming more restrictive and less flexible, even in 
light of emerging technologies conflicting program 
policy. 
There is a trade off between access to the spacecraft 
through the NASA tracking network and access to 
the Internet and other networks for product 
distribution and project collaboration. 
- 
- 
- 
4. WORKING SUCCESSES 
This section describes actual online successes. 
ACE 
NASA 
Tracking 
Sites 
Figure 5. ACE Mission 
The Advanced Composition Explorer[6] (ACE) is the first 
NASA mission to use IP as the ground transport 
mechanism, and is one of the most successful. This mission 
architecture has proven to be robust, secure and very 
flexible. 
The major characteristics of this mission architecture are the 
closed MOC, open science operations center (SOC, where 
the spacecraft instruments are managed) and a constant 
realtime customer, NOAA, who provides early warning 
capability of damaging solar eruptions to the public[7]. All 
connections from the closed to the open networks must be 
initiated from the closed side. In order for NOAA to receive 
spacecraft data when the MOC is not in contact with the 
through the Deep Space Network, they have scheduled 
tracking time on the U.S. Air Force and various foreign 
research facilities in Japan, U.K. and India, 
All critical segments of the ground system reside in the 
closed network where they enjoy high network availability 
and isolation. All spacecraft commanding is done from the 
MOC. 
Landsat 7 
a Networ €5 Interne 
Figure 6. Landsat 7 
The Landsat 7 ground system architecture is similar to ACE, 
but has positioned itself for greater flexibility toward the 
Internet by implementing an open side connection in the 
MOC. This approach is very attractive to the secure 
gateway since all connection requests are between system 
managed by the MOC and remain very static, i.e., the 
secure gateway rules do not have Internet addresses. The 
mission operations concept can now freely add support to 
customers in the Internet. There is an assumption, and 
requirement for, a system administrator in the MOC with 
heightened security awareness and savvy. A compromise in 
the open MOC resources may provide access to the closed 
MOC through valid secure gateway rules. 
Remote Control Centers 
Several missions, including most of the new, emerging 
missions, have control centers that are not NASA operated 
or located. These new missions also plan to take advantage 
of emerging commercial tracking services. 
2-1024 
The important points of consideration in this configuration 
are that the connections from the NASA tracking networks 
must be initiated from the closed side and the project has a 
larger role in securing the critical MOC from the Internet. 
This configuration gives the project considerable autonomy 
in regard to its ground network architecture, policy and 
mission concepts. 
Figure 7. NASA Outsourced Control Centers 
This configuration is becoming the most common among 
the emerging missions as NASA promotes the 
“commercialization” of more segments of the space 
program. The main concern here is the proper and adequate 
application of significant security measures such that the 
NASA mission satisfies law and policy, and is not put at 
inordinate risk. 
TRIANA 
Figure 8. Triana 
The Triana mission[8] (to be launched in 2002) is 
interesting because of the use of encryption in a portion of 
the ground system. 
Background - The Triana mission is to orbit a satellite at 
L1, between the earth and sun, providing a continuously 
updated global view of the earth for the Internet, and other 
science objectives. 
The Triana ground system can be separated into two major 
parts, the mission operations segment, responsible for the 
operation and safety of the actual spacecraft, and the science 
operations which manages and delivers the mission 
products. The mission side is entirely closed and located at 
a NASA facility while the science side is on the open side 
and located at a university in California. Because the SOC 
will actually generate command loads for the spacecraft, the 
data must be secured as it traverses the Internet. Thus the 
data is transmitted over a virtual private network through the 
Internet which provides encryption and privacy. 
Encrypted data flows are not permitted by the network 
security plan, through the secure gateway. This restriction 
is required to permit visibility at the secure gateway to 
verify compliance and proper use. Therefore the encrypted 
path over the Internet ends in a NASA operated subnet on 
the open side of the secure gateway. 
VPN Caution - Encryption must be used in a circumspect 
way, and should not be considered a generalized cure for 
security issues, it is only a piece of the solution, a tool at our 
disposal. A common failure in the execution of many 
security plans happens when the implementation of “neat” 
technology causes the project to lower its guard and lose its 
IT security vigilance, particularly at the host level. The 
result is a system compromise allowing encrypted access 
into the critical segment of the ground system. This is 
possible because VPNs imply trusted hosts, and trusted 
hosts are a loophole of many an IT security plan. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
The NASA tracking networks are a valuable national 
resource and many aerospace programs use the network as 
part of its mission operations concepts. The network is 
implemented to provide extreme availability and safety for 
its users, but in order to accomplish its mission, access 
policies are strict and enforced. Missions that use the 
NASA tracking network as the primary spacecraft tracking 
network should consider these issues carefully and early so 
that they are compatible with the closed network. As more 
of the aerospace mission concepts becomes more 
commercialized, they must still comply with established 
government policies[9]. 
Trends that bring the public at large into the mission 
operations concept, and the application of Internet 
technology to the aerospace disciplines (e.g. the spacecraft 
as an IP node) expose the mission to an ever greater risk. As 
their exposure increases spacecraft will become popular 
targets of hacker opportunity.[lO] The aerospace community 
must stay at the forefront of IT security technology. [ 111 
2-1025 
REREFENCES [ l  11 The Computer Security Technology Center, located at 
the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
__ hQxJ&w+ .ci ac,ort-/$ctc/ 
[ 11 Space Network 
htt~://msn.gsfc.nasa.gov/tdrss/ 
[2] The NASA IP Operational Network 
httd/forbin?.gsfc.nasa. povlprodsesvAONETlionetstm 
[3] Examples on online terrestrial information 
http://seawifs. gsfc.nasa.govISEAWIFS.htm1 
http://ww.eartliwatch.com/SI<Y WATCIUskywatch.htm1 
[4] NASA Policies and Guidelines 
http://nodis.asfc.nasa.~o\1:80/1.ibra~~/I~irectives/NASA- 
WIDEll’rocedures/L,erral PolicieslN PG 2810 1.html 
[5] The Universal Space Network 
http :llwww.uspacen e 1 work. coni/ 
[5] AlliedSignal is a developing a new satellite command, 
control and communications network, DataLynx 
http:ll~~v.alliedsignala~rospace.coin: 80/acrospacc/sen;ice 
s/dalalvnx/index. html 
[6] Advanced Composition Explorer Homepage 
httr,:l/liclios.rtsfc.nasa.gov/ace/ace.html 
[7] ACE Real Time Solar Wind 
http:/Isec.noaa.g;ov/ace/ 
[SI The Triana homepage 
1ittu:lltriana.gsfc.nasa. gov/home/ 
191 IT contractors must follow NASA security rules 
httu://v\.ww.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2000/07 1 7/web-nasa-07- 
17-00. asp 
[ 101 IP on the Spacecraft 
http:/l~~~.iiewscientist.coin/news/news 22464 I .html 
[ 1 11 Other good IT security references: 
Internet Engineering Task Force User Security Handbook 
(RFC2504) 
http://www. ietf,or&/rfc2504. txt‘?number=2504 
[ l l ]  Internet Engineering Task Force Site Security 
Handbook (RFC2196) 
http ://www. ietf. orgz/rfc/r€c2 1 96. txt?numbe1=2 1 96 
[ l l ]  The Common Criteria (IS0 IS 15408) is a structured 
way of evaluating the security requirements and properties 
of a product or system. 
http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/ 
[ 111 Good security web site. 
- h _. t tp :ilw\nvLsecurityfijcus. corn/ 
Chris Spinolo is the Lead Engineer for the NASA IP 
Operational Network. The IONet is the mission critical, real 
time, ground segment network for all NASA manned and 
unmanned spaceflights, from the Space Shuttle and Hubble 
Space Telescope, to high altitude balloon flights. This world 
wide, mission critical network connects NASA and other 
tracking stations with dozens of mission control centers 
throughout the world. 
2-1026 
