Validation of Theoretical GPS Multipath Bias 
Characteristics' 
Joseph M. Kelly 
Avionics Engineering Center 
Ohio University 
234A Stocker Center 
Athens, OH 45701-2979 
jkellv@bobcat.ent.ohiou. edu 
740-593- 1526 
Abstract-Although GPS multipath error envelopes have 
been well-explored both mathematically and in hardware 
environments [1,2], the range biases caused by Doppler- 
shifted multipath pulling on the GPS receiver tracking loops 
have long remained the target of purely analytical 
discussion. This paper examines the effect of so-called fast- 
fading multipath on GPS code phase tracking performance 
and proposes a test method for isolating system range biases 
in an off-the-shelf receiver. The biases, which may be on 
the order of several meters, are based on the use of a non- 
coherent delay-lock loop (NCDLL) in the receiver's code 
tracking structure. In addition, existing models show a 
complete elimination of these bias errors in the presence of 
fast-fading multipath if a coherent delay-lock loop (CDLL) 
architecture is employed in the receiver. Bench data will 
show the existing theoretical model to be incomplete and a 
revised model will be presented in order to explain observed 
results. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2: CURRENTMODEL 
3. TEST APPROACH 
4. BENCHRESULTS 
6. S ~ A T I O N  RESULTS 
5. NEWMODEL 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
INTRODUCTION 
With the abolition of GPS Selective Availability (SA) and 
the increasing number of differential users, multipath 
remains as the most significant obstacle to high-accuracy 
positioning applications. Since multipath errors generally 
Michael S. Braasch 
Avionics Engineering Center 
Ohio University 
322B Stocker Center 
Athens, OH 45701-2979 
braaschm@ohiou.edu 
740-593-0105 
are uncorrelated between receivers, even local differential 
techniques can do little to reduce them. This leaves the task 
of multipath error reduction to the user equipment. For 
stationary users and base stations, antenna techniques can 
usually be formulated to stop most multipath signals before 
they ever enter the receiver front end. A moving user, 
however, often has no luxury of a constant orientation nor is 
it able to outfit the platform with a large antenna array for 
null placement. Unfortunately, many platforms that require 
high-accuracy navigation systems are undergoing complex 
motion. The clear answer in these cases is to attack the 
problem with receiver processing techniques. 
In modem local differential schemes, the user equivalent 
ranging error (UERE) budgets around 2.5 meters each for 
multipath and receiver noise (1-0) and assumes that all other 
error sources are fully removed by high-accuracy 
corrections. With the budgeted noise performance, further 
multipath reduction methods would yield little result since 
the system RMS error would be dominated by this noise. 
However, wide-bandwidth receiver channels and carrier- 
smoothing techniques have proven to significantly mitigate 
the effect of tracking noise in a GPS receiver and a 
tremendous improvement can therefore be made if multipath 
errors are correspondingly reduced. To effect this 
improvement, it is necessary to understand how multipath 
affects the tracking process so that techniques can be 
developed for reducing the resultant position errors. Since 
moving users experience constant and often rapid change in 
the satellite-reflector-receiver geometry, the general case is 
one in which multipath has some Doppler shift with respect 
to the direct signal. This causes a quasi-periodic phase 
rotation in the baseband multipath signal that leads to 
fluctuations in received power. The composite effect is 
0-78034599-2/01/$10.00 Q2001 IEEE 
3-1317 
appropriately referred to as fading multipath. The frequency 
at which the fading occurs is termed the fading bandwidth. 
For a stationary GPS user, signal fading is limited to that 
which can be attributed to dynamics in the satellite 
constellation. This leads to a maximum fading frequency of 
around 0.6 Hz [3] and commonly far less. These long- 
period multipath fades result in long-period errors for which 
little correction can be accomplished through any type of 
averaging. Mobile users, however, can experience fading 
frequencies from several Hertz in a ground-based system up 
to several hundred Hertz in extremely dynamic aviation 
platforms such as military aircraft. The exact values for 
each case are heavily dependent on the geometric 
relationship among satellite, user, and reflector. 
Previous theoretical studies [3,4,5] have examined ranging 
errors in cases when the code-tracking loop is unable to 
keep up with highly dynamic multipath signals and have 
found certain biases associated with the use of a non- 
coherent delay-lock loop (NCDLL) for code phase 
estimation under these conditions. It is proposed in these 
models, and shown mathematically, that switching to a 
coherent delay-lock loop (CDLL) will yield the benefit of an 
unbiased estimate of code phase by eliminating the squaring 
process that leads to an unbalanced distribution of errors in 
time. This report has two distinct goals. First, it is desired 
to verify the pseudorange biases in standard GPS receivers 
employing NCDLL tracking and to compare them with the 
predictions made by the existing model. The second goal is 
to examine the authors' finding that the CDLL receiver 
offers little, if any, performance improvement over the 
NCDLL receiver under controlled conditions in the 
attainable test space. Consideration of coupling between 
code and carrier tracking loops and a brief look at carrier 
phase multipath are given to explain the measurements and 
a new high-level, greater fidelity model is proposed and 
demonstrated. 
CURRENT MODEL 
The bulk of the material presented in this section lis either 
taken from, or a verification of, mathematical models 
discussed by R. D. J. van Nee in [6]. While the high points 
are reviewed to provide a venue for introducing bench 
results, a full investigation of the theory and simulation 
design is not included. The interested reader is encouraged 
to find more information in [3,5,8]. 
A sufficient understanding of the effect of multipath on 
spread spectrum-based ranging systems comes most easily 
from inspection of the mechanism used to lock onto the 
pseudorandom noise (PRN) code in the received signal. 
This high-level model assumes steady-state tracking and 
neglects issues of signal acquisition and navigation data 
modulation for simplicity. For an error-free, infinite 
bandwidth GPS signal, one can consider the cross- 
correlation function between the locally generated replica 
and the received signal. Plotted against the offset, or lag, in 
the local replica, the cross-correlatiLon is roughly the 
triangular delta function with the peak occurring at the zero- 
lag point and tapering linearly to nearly zero at offsets 
greater thian one code chip. For robust tracking, replicas of 
the signall are generated at predetermined offsets leading and 
lagging the estimated true synchronized code. These offset 
replicas me correlated with the received signal over a set 
time period and subtracted from each other to yield a 
discriminator output, which is filtered and used as the 
feedback signal to drive the code generation clock. If all 
dynamics are reduced to zero, this delay-lock loop causes 
the local signal to be advanced or slowed until the output of 
the early and late correlators are equal. 
Introducing a single multipath reflection into the receiver 
causes the ideal correlation function to become distorted in 
an asymmetrical way, thus causing the receiver's estimate of 
code phase to be skewed fiom the truth. The degree of 
distortion is determined by three receiver-independent 
parameters: the strength of the multipath reflection, the path 
length difference or multipath delay, and the relative phase 
of the incoming multipath signal with respect to the direct 
signal. Though the relative phase generally is a function of 
path delay, changes can occur depending on the character of 
the reflecting surface. Hence, both this model and the 
hardware tests to follow treat it as an independent variable. 
For a miltipath signal that has a Doppler shift fiom the 
direct line-of-sight signal, this relative phase is time varying 
and the distorted cross-correlation function varies 
accordingly at the difference For a received 
GPS signal that is corrupted by IVP distinct specular 
multipath reflections, [6] gives tht: composite signal 
equation is: 
i=O 
where p is the PRN code of the tracked satellite, a, T, and 8 
are the amplitude, delay, and relative phase of the i" signal 
and i = 0 signifies the direct signal. The angular fiequency, 
o, is that of the line-of-sight reception and the range of 
60,/6t determines the fading bandwidth of the multipath. 
For the early-late discriminator with a correlator separation 
of d chips, the discriminator functions vs. code offset for 
coherent imd non-coherent loops are as follow: 
d 
2 
- R(T - z j  - -)]dt 
for the coherent loop and, 
* Only the difference frequency is observed because of the inlierent low- 
pass characteristic of the correlation operation. 
3-1318 
2 error variations closely agreed with those predicted by the 
mathematical model, available in [4]. Focus now turns to 
testing the performance of actual receivers, which employ 
these two loop types, in a bench setting with off-the-shelf 
receiver packages and high-fidelity GPS signal emulators. 
for the non-coherent loop. In these equations, the 
discriminator curves, called S-curves for their error-free 
shape, are differences between components fiom early and 
late correlators. The function R(T) is the autocorrelation of 
the PRN sequence p(t). The integration period, TLF, is the 
characteristic response time of the code tracking loop and is 
well below 0.1 Hz for modern carrier-aided receivers. 
Examination of these discriminator curves shows that the 
estimated carrier phase, &hat, appears in the composite 
discriminator function for the CDLL, but not for the 
NCDLL. This is because the function of the NCDLL is to 
capture all of the power in the phase plane and the CDLL 
will only sense that which is in phase with a reference 
sinusoid. For the case when the fading frequency of a 
multipath, 68,/6t, exceeds the code loop bandwidth, 1/2TLF, 
by a large amount, the integration of the summed i>O cosine 
terms averages to zero since 8, varies linearly with time. 
Only the constant component due to the direct signal 
remains. This means that for fast-fading multipath, the 
CDLL multipath errors will be reduced to zero. For the 
NCDLL, the magnitudes of the complex periodic terms 
remain constant and the composite discriminator output is 
simply a combination of several individual components due 
to each multipath contribution. The result is a non-zero bias 
from the NCDLL in the presence of fast-fading multipath. 
For simulations of the code phase estimation process, a 
lookup table of correlation values was generated and a 
vector of the changing multipath relative phase was created 
to direct the fading effect. This method makes the 
assumption that the integrate-and-dump time of the 
correlators is small compared to the period of the fade so 
that the multipath relative phase can be assumed constant 
over a single correlation interval. For the correlation times 
of 5-10 ms used in simulation, fading frequencies of up to 
around 10 Hz meet this criterion. A feedback structure was 
implemented in MATLABTM to test coherent and non- 
coherent loop performance for generic receivers using 
NovAtel's Narrow CorrelatorTM technique. The results of 
running these simulations show the biases predicted for the 
NCDLL for signal-to-multipath ratios (SMRs) of 4, 6, and 
10 dl3 and are presented in FIGURE 1. A filtration of the 
correlation lookup table values was used to simulate a 
bandlimited signal from the receiver front end. A 4-dB 
SMR trace is presented in FIGURE 2 to show that the 
calculated errors are only slightly affected by assuming a 
perfect signa1. The CDLL simulation performed as 
expected with no substantial range bias (40 cm) regardless 
of multipath delay or power. The magnitudes of biases and 
5 
5 - 4  
P ,  
9 '  
0 
0 0 2  0 4  0 6  0 8  1 
MULTIPATH DELAY (CHIPS) 
FIGURE 1: Range bias vs. multipath chip delay for a 
NCDLL receiver under fast-fading multipath. Receiver 
front end BW = 17 MHz. 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 
MULTIPATH DELAY (CHIPS) 
FIGURE 2: Range bias vs. multipath chip delay for NCDLL 
with infinite receiver front end BW. 
TEST APPROACH 
ISOLATLVG TRACKING BIAS 
Calculating biases in any process requires some accepted 
truth reference to which measurements can be compared. 
Even in the guaranteed absence of standard GPS error 
sources such as SA, noise, tropospheric and ionospheric 
delay, and satellite position uncertainty, detection of 
pseudorange biases is difticult. This is because any clock 
uncertainty in the receiver or satellite will lead to an offset 
from the anticipated range measurement that has a very low 
frequency characteristic and cannot easily be separated from 
a constant measurement bias. In practical use, the clock 
offsets fall out or are taken out in a full position solution and 
the true ranges plus pseudorange errors effectively are used 
3-1319 
in position calculation. In testing the hypothesis outlined in 
the previous section, only the errors on a single pseudorange 
are of concem and thus tackling a full position solution in a 
bench environment would add levels of complexity that are 
unnecessary and could possibly skew results. It is desirable 
to use measurements from a single satellite and available 
information about error characteristics and signal properties 
to isolate the error component of interest. A code-minus- 
carrier (code-carrier) solution from a single channel lends 
itself to solve this problem [7] provided a few assumptions 
are made about the multipath-induced errors theimselves. 
First, consider the components of a raw pseudorange 
measurement that is only corrupted by multipath arid noise. 
It will contain the true range, a receiver clock term, a 
satellite clock term, noise, and multipath as follows: 
From the same satellite, a carrier phase, or accumulated 
Doppler range (ADR), measurement may be taken and will 
contain similar terms except for the addition of a cycle 
ambiguity, A: 
The code-carrier difference is then: 
Here, both clock terms and the range term have been 
completely removed, leaving only the cycle ambiguity, 
noise and multipath. It has been shown [SI that, even for 
strong multipath, the maximum carrier error is less than 5 
cm for a single specular multipath. Additionally, carrier 
phase noise is at the millimeter level and may therefore be 
neglected. On the larger scale that is being examined, this 
leaves: 
Now, to isolate the multipath error, IMPcode, the assumption 
first must be made that the noise will be small in 
comparison with the multipath error. This will be verified 
later in the measured data. Next, it should be noticed that 
the carrita cycle ambiguity, A, will remain constant through 
a data collection period so long as the receiver maintains 
lock on the signal. This means that, in order to be 
observable, the multipath error must change in time in such 
a way that the true error is known at one point and the rest 
of the data set can be referenced to it. Because of extensive 
theoretical and practical work in spread spectrum multipath 
analysis [1,2,3,8,9], it is known that multipath delays of 
greater than h(1 + d/2) will have little or no effect on signal 
tracking, depending on the quality of the PRN codes used in 
the system. Here, h is the code chip length and d is the 
early-late correlator spacing in chips. It can also be 
reasoned that a multipath signal with zero delay is not really 
multipath at all and will not cause tracking problems. For 
these reasons, the testing scheme is set to constantl:y track a 
GPS signal for a period of hours. During this time, a 
multipath reflection will be generated such that the delay 
changes &om zero delay to greater than 1 ps (around 310 m 
or 1.05 C/A code chips). For a receiver equipped with 
NovAtel's Narrow CorrelatorTM technology, this delay will 
ensure that the two endpoints in the data set contain very 
small multipath errors and the events, of interest occur in 
between. By observing the transient in the set and knowing 
that the endpoints are error-free, one can then effectively 
isolate the errors caused by multipath adone. The multipath 
errors will themselves consist of contributions from the bias 
and the remaining variations that make it through the 
tracking loop. Under fast fading conditions, these variations 
become very small and it will be shown that the bias 
dominates the residual error. The bias component of "de 
can then be studied for both cohere:nt and non-coherent 
tracking loops. 
GENERATING MULTIPATH 
The bench simulation of a GPS signal corrupted by a single 
specular multipath reflection can be accomplished in two 
ways. The first is to generate a single itransmission and split 
it in two. One of these is attenuated by the desired amount 
and then combined again with the original through a delay 
circuit of some type. Implementation of this method poses 
two distinct problems. First, adding extra hardware in the 
line coulld create additional reflections and create a signal 
that effectively has more than one multipath, leading to 
incorrecl conclusions about error severity. Secondly, 
designing and controlling a delay circuit with a continuous 
sweep of multipath lag as required by the previously 
outlined isolation technique. would be quite a task in itself 
and may add additional complexity or points of failure. The 
other wary to simulate the multipath environment is to use 
two separate signal generators that are simultaneously 
triggered1 and for which the operator can precisely control 
output power and timing of at least one of the devices. The 
user interface of the STR2775 GPS single-channel emulator 
cards, produced by Global Simulation Systems, makes this 
method ihe more attractive approach. 
Following FIGURE 3, the composite received GPS signal is 
formed by driving two STR2775 cards with a single 
oscillator, using a hard-limit circuit to derive the code 
clocking input from the carrier input. Once these two inputs 
are given, one of the cards can be set to synchronize to the 
other via a 1-pps (pulse per second) link. The multipath 
delay and fade are then brought into effect by way of the 
controlling software of the cards. A line of sight velocity 
may be introduced to one of the signals with the power 
slightly ireduced. Keeping this velocity small allows a slow, 
continualus divergence of the ranges in the two cards and 
mirrors i l  slowly increasing delay. Since a slow divergence 
using this technique would also lead tal multipath fading that 
is too low-fiequency for this test, a second option is 
employed to put a larger Doppler slhift on the multipath 
signal. 
3-1320 
STR2775 GPS 
LIMIT 
STR2775 GPS 
signal generator 
FIGURE 3: Bench test setup for receiver performance. 
Receiver data output is collected by a separate computer. 
The STR2775 software offers the option to simulate a 
carrier divergence due the ionosphere and the magnitude of 
the carrier differences may be set large enough to emulate 
multipath relative frequencies of many cycles per second, 
even though the line-of-sight range is changing very slowly. 
Since the carrier of the direct signal is stronger than that of 
the multipath, the PLL will not tend to lock onto the 
multipath signal and cause erroneous divergence errors to 
surface. The outputs of the signal generators are combined 
and fed to the GPS receiver being tested and output logs are 
collected for analysis. 
RECEIVER SPECIFICATIONS 
A direct comparison between errors stemming fi-om the use 
of coherent and non-coherent loops in the receiver tracking 
method is the aim of this test. Ideally, this minor 
architecture change should be the only difference between 
the two receivers tested so that differences due to varying 
product lines or manufacturers will not leak into the results. 
Engineers at NovAtel Inc. were able to perform a 
modification in software for a Beeline Pro-Pak GPS receiver 
such that a single channel would be set to use a CDLL 
architecture and the rest of the unit would employ a NCDLL 
as originally designed. This is convenient because it 
provides extra assurance that both loops are being fed the 
same input and any differences in tracking performance will 
be due solely to the absence of the quadrature components 
in the discriminator calculation for the coherent loop. A 
standard output data stream for the Beeline includes 
pseudorange and accumulated delta range measurements, 
which will be used to isolate the bias errors as outlined in 
the previous section. 
BENCH &SULTS 
For data collected fi-om the Beeline receiver, code-carrier 
differences were calculated for the continuous data set 
running a multipath delay fiom 0 to -1.1 CIA code chips. 
The first results to be analyzed are those of the non-coherent 
receiver channel in order to verify that fast-fading multipath 
biases do exist in the most commonly used equipment. 
FIGURE 4 shows the code-carrier residual error over the 
delays tested for a multipath that is 4 dE3 weaker than the 
direct signal. It is apparent that the worst error occurs for 
short delay (-0.1 chip) multipath and is around 4 meters for 
the case of a 5 Hz fading frequency. 
0 0 2  0 4  06 08 1 
Multipath Delay (chips) 
FIGURE 4: NCDLL code-carrier product for SMR = 4 dB, 
fade = 5 Hz. 
One would certainly expect a weaker multipath to cause 
smaller tracking biases. This is verified in FIGURE 5 where 
the fading frequency remains 5 Hz, but the multipath is set 6 
dB below the strength of the direct signal. Here, the worst 
case bias occurs with the same delay, but with reduced 
severity of around 2.4 meters. Finally, the dependence on 
the fading frequency is briefly examined. Doubling the 
carrier divergence velocity on the multipath, a fade of 10 Hz 
is introduced for the SMR = 6 dB case and the error vs. 
delay trace of FIGURE 6 results. The maximum error is 
again at the same peak location, but has fallen to under 2 
meters. Clearly, there is a frequency dependence of the 
phase estimate, which is not predicted by the original model 
in the fast fading region. 
I 1  
0 1 _ _ _ _ _ _  2 ___.___.__ 1 . _ ---: ___.__ ;---.------; __----.- 3 ----. _ -. 
0 0 2  0 4  0 6  0.8 1 
Multipath Delay (chips) 
FIGURE 5:  NCDLL code-carrier product for SMR = 6 dB, 
fade = 5 Hz. 
3-1321 
0 0 2  0 4  0 6  0 8  1 
Multipath Delay (chips) 
FIGURE 6: NCDLL code-carrier product for SMR = 6 dB, 
fade = 10 Hz. 
Because of resolution in the GPS signal emulators and the 
need to have a signal that never loses lock over the course of 
several hours, lower and higher fading frequencies than 
these are not simulated. It has been shown, though, that 
under this test range, the NCDLL errors are not quite as 
great as the initial theory predicted. Still, with several 
meters of error under poor multipath condition, there is still 
cause for concem and so attention of the test tunis to the 
promise of improved performance from a CDLL. The same 
input that was used to generate FIGURE 4 was tricked by 
the coherent receiver channel and yields the error plot in 
FIGURE 7. A visual inspection shows that the coherent 
loop oEers very little reduction in the bias errors. 
Furthermore, FIGURE 8 and FIGURE 9 show that the same 
trends observed in the NCDLL are showing up in each of 
these cases. 
Multipath Delay (chips) 
FIGURE 7: CDLL code-carrier product for SMR:= 4 dB, 
fade = 5 Hz. 
0 0 2  0 4  0 6  0 8  1 
Multipath Delay (chips) 
FIGUIE 8: CDLL code-carrier product for SIVIR = 6dB, 
fade = 5 Hz. 
1.4 
1.2 
1 
0.8 - 
E 
Y E 0.6 
f 0.4 
0.2 
w 
m 
11: 
0 
-0.2 
A slight advantage seems to exist with the CDLL in the 10 
Hz fading case, a fact which will be discussed in the 
following section. 
NEW MODEL 
Althouglh consideration of the code discriminator alone can 
qualitatively predict the performance ,of the NCDLL under 
fading rnultipath conditions, it fails to give any realistic 
insight to the errors of the CDLL-based receiver. One key 
reason for the shortcoming of the model lies in how in- 
phase and quadraphase components of the complex 
correlators are generated in the modi:l. Assuming that a 
receiver channel can maintain frequency lock on the 
incoming signal, a reference phase for I and Q 
determination is inherent in the demoldulating sinusoid that 
is genenated by the carrier tracking loop. This means that 
the assumption of a perfectly sinusoidal demodulating 
signal in the previous model is only valid when the carrier 
loop estimates a constant phase for the received signal. 
Because multipath affects carrier measurements as well as 
3-1322 
code measurements, this is not true in the case of fading 
multipath. FIGURE 10 below shows the common phasor 
model for understanding the distorting effects of multipath 
on a phase-lock loop (PLL). Here, the horizontal vector D 
represents the phase of the direct signal, which is constant. 
The vector M, at some phase & with respect to D, corrupts 
the phase lock loop so that the resultant composite, C, is 
tracked and the estimated phase of the signal is in error by 
an amount &. 
FIGURE 10: Phasor representation of multipath distortion 
in PLL tracking. 
Under the condition that the multipath phasor is rotating 
faster than the PLL can follow, i.e. outside of its bandwidth, 
the time-averaged composite phase becomes the phase 
estimate. In the case of a constant fading fiequency, this is 
equivalent to the true phase of the direct signal in the 
absence of channel noise. Clearly, if the fading frequency 
of the multipath is smaller than, or comparable to, the 
carrier tracking loop bandwidth, the direct carrier signal no 
longer will be used as the phase reference sinusoid in 
demodulating the signal to baseband. Rather, the phase of 
the composite carrier will be tracked and will introduce a 
time-varying distortion into the reference phase. A 
geometric analysis provides the following approximate 
relationship between multipath phase, $,, and composite 
signal phase, & where SMR is the post-correlation signal to 
multipath amplitude ratio: 
) 
sin #m 
SMR + cos #m (bC =tan-'( 
For a carrier loop discriminator that uses an arctangent 
estimator on prompt in-phase and quadraphase components 
in the P U  for phase tracking, the time-dependent phase 
estimate under strong multipath is depicted in FIGURE 1 la. 
This behavior will be observed in general whenever the 
multipath fading fi-equency is inside of the carrier loop 
bandwidth. It is therefore necessary to parse a third region 
of fading fi-equency for which the fading is too fast for the 
code loop to track, but still observable to the carrier loop. 
This region will be termed medium-fading multipath. The 
trace in FIGURE 1 1 b is the corresponding composite phase 
from (8). It is apparent that the composite phase is very 
closely tracked by the carrier loop for 'multipath of slow- 
and medium-fading multipath. 
_ _  phase adjustment (from direct truth), carrier BW = 20 
-" 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
a time [sl 
ohase offset from direct truth mina vector comoosite 
-_U 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
b time (s) 
FIGURE 11: a) Estimated PLL phase under strong slow- 
fading multipath., b) Phase of composite signal in phasor 
representation. 
A consequence of the low pass character of the carrier PLL 
is that the phase estimate will indeed approach a constant as 
the Doppler shif? of the multipath grows large. This means 
that the mechanism responsible for the desirable 
performance of the coherent loop in the original model is 
approximated and the CDLL will likely perform much 
better than the NCDLL as the multipath fading frequency 
moves outside of the carrier PLL bandwidth. In many 
modern GPS receivers, this value is around 20 HZ and a 
fast-moving platform can still briefly experience multipath 
with fi-equencies exceeding this value. 
'SMULATION RESULTS 
The validity of this new model is tested simply by 
incorporating the carrier multipath considerations into the 
feedback structure of the original software simulation. For 
the test case in which a 5-Hz fading multipath signal is 
injected 4-dB down fiom the strength of the direct 
transmission, the introduction of a carrier tracking loop 
bandwidth of 20 Hz into the CDLL receiver yields the bias 
error vs. delay curve shown in FIGURE 12. In form, this 
result falls in close agreement with the observed 
performance trace fiom FIGURE 8, but the model still is in 
error with the severity of the biases. The crucial point here, 
though, is that strong biases are indeed present in the CDLL. 
To show that this enhancement can also serve to explain the 
frequency dependence of the bias, FIGURE 13 presents the 
bias vs. delay curve for 5- and 10-Hz fading frequencies of 
the multipath with a 6-dB SMR. 
3-1323 
2 5  
1 - 
E 
e z 1 5  
- 
E 
1 
0 5  
0 
delay (chips)  
FIGURI, 12: CDLL bias for new model with SMR = 4 dI3, 
fade = 5 Hz. 
multipath model and that considering the contribution of 
carrier phase multipath is crucial in characterizing 
measurement errors with this architecture. 
It has been discovered in related research (not presented 
here) that variations in factors such as normalization of the 
discriminator and timing schemes can often lead to 
significant changes in the magnitudes of the errors. This is 
a double-edged sword of sorts in that it offers some hope 
that there is an optimal loop struciture for reducing or 
perhaps even eliminating errors fiom medium- and fast- 
fading multipath. On the opposite side, however, this makes 
it difficult to form one general model for the effect of this 
type of interference on tracking accuracy since receiver 
architecture can vary dramatically among manufacturers and 
specific proprietary information is often unpublished. Still, 
the new model presented here has offered insight into the 
observed errors of the CDLL for medium- and fast-fading 
multipath and opened up the way jor more analysis of 
receiver (complexities on the initially straightforward theory. 
Potential work for the foreseeable future includes expanding 
the testing capabilities to look at higher fading frequencies 
and examining the possibilities for tightening up the carrier 
loop by aiding fiom other sensors to narrow the medium- 
fading multipath region. 
CDLL Bias F F  = 1 0  H z ,  S M R  = 6 dB 
REFERENCES 
[l] Braasch, M. S., “GPS Multipath Model Validation,” 
1996 IEEE PLANS Conference, April 1996. 
[2] Cox,, D., Shallberg, K., Manz, A., “Definition and 
Analysis of WAAS Receiver Multipaith Error Envelopes,” 
ION National Technical Meeting 1999., Jan 1999. 
delay (chips) 
FIGURE 13: CDLL bias for new model with SMR = 6 
dB, fades = 5 and 10 Hz. 
The reduction of bias magnitude for the higher fading 
frequency gives additional credit to the validity of the new 
model. 
CONCLUSION 
A verification of the existence of measurement biases in 
GPS owing to highly dynamic multipath situations Iias been 
presented and shown to agree approximately with 
theoretical results for the commonly used non-coherent 
delay-lock loop receiver. Bench tests have shown that, 
under strong multipath reflections, biases of several meters 
can be observed due to the asymmetrical operation of the 
NCDLL. One problem that has arisen is that;even with the 
provisions in the new model, the predicted bias errors are 
still slightly more severe than those observed. For the 
coherent delay-lock loop, it was found that empirical data 
showed an incompleteness of the previously existing fading 
[3] Van Nee, R, “Multipath Effects on GPS Code Phase 
Measurements,” in Proceedings of ION GPS-9 1,199 1, pp. 
915-924. 
[4] Van Nee, R, “Multipath and Multi-Transmitter 
Interference in Spread-Spectrum Comnnunication and 
Navigation Systems,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, 1995 
[5] Kelly, J.M. and Braasch, M.S., “Mitigation of GPS 
Multipath via Exploitation of Signal Dynamics.” in 
Proceedings of the ION Annual Meeting, 1999. 
[6] Van Nee, R, “Spread-Spectrum Code and Carrier 
Synchronization Errors Caused by Mul tipath,” in IEEE 
Transactiions on Aerospace and Electralnic Systems, Oct. 
1993, v2‘9, n4, pp. 1359-1365. 
[7] Braasch, M.S., “Isolation of GPS Multipath and 
Receiver Tracking Errors,” Navigation, v41 n4,1994-95. 
3-1324 
[SI Breeuwer, E., “Modeling and Measuring GPS Multipath 
Effects,” Thesis, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The 
Netherlands, 1992. 
[9] Dixon, R. C., Spread Spectrum Systems with 
Commercial Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New 
York, NY, 1994. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Patrick Fenton and Brian 
Smith at NovAtel, Inc. for supporting this work through 
donations of time and information. This research was 
funded by the NASARAA Joint University Program for Air 
Transportation Research and by the C. Paul Stocker Family 
Foundation. 
BIOGRAPHY 
Joseph M. Kelly is a graduate research associate with the 
Avionics Engineering Center at Ohio University. Joe has 
been with the Center for two years and is currently pursuing 
a Master of Science degree in Electrical Engineering with a 
concentration in Electronic Navigation Systems. Joe’s work 
over that time has focused on GPS receiver multipath 
performance and GPS sohare-defined radio development. 
Michael S. Braasch is an Associate Professor of Electrical 
Engineering .and a Research Scientist with the Avionics 
Engineering Center at Ohio University. Mike has been 
performing navigation research since 1985 and is 
internationally recognized for his work in characterizing the 
effects of multipath on GPS. 
3-1325 
