Electronic Commerce Customer Relationship Management 
(ECCRM) 
Minitrack Introduction 
 
CoChairs: 
Nicholas C. Romano, Jr.     Jerry Fjermestad 
Management Science and Information Systems  School of Management 
College of Business     Center for Pervasive Information Technology 
Oklahoma State University    New Jersey Institute of Technology 
Tulsa, OK 74172      Newark, NJ  07102 
USA       USA 
Phone: (918) 594-8506 Fax (918) 594-8281   Phone: (973) 596-3255 
Nicholas-Romano@MSTM.OKSTATE.EDU  Fjermestad@adm.njit.edu 
 
 
The Seybold Group suggests that customer relationship management is more than the quality management of the 
past.  It has become the framework for establishing and building relationships with customers.  The six papers 
accepted for this minitrack provide frameworks and models to analyze and build better customer relationships. 
 
N. Jukic,  B. Jukic,  L. Meamber, and G. Nezlek in their paper Improving E-Business Customer Relationship 
Management Systems with Multilevel Secure Data Models suggest that customer relationship management 
systems are characterized by many shortcomings.  Multilevel secure data models can be used to address sharing 
and managing these large information systems.  Several advantages of such implementations are addressed along 
with examples.  
 
M. Khalifa and V. Liu in their paper Satisfaction with Internet-based Services integrate satisfaction as studied 
by IS and marketing researchers and apply it to the Internet in contrast to the traditional channels.  The 
developed model was tested empirically through a longitudinal survey study.  The results suggest that the three 
major constructs are significant predictors of customer satisfaction of online services. 
 
K Kimery and M. McCord in Third-Party Assurances: the Road to Trust in Online Retailing develop a 
model describing the relationship between trust, perceived risk and the intent to purchase online.  A study was 
then conducted using an online survey with 164 university business students.  The results support the basic 
model.   
 
Petra Schubert and Walter Dettling in their paper Extended Web Assessment Method (EWAM) - Evaluation 
Of E-Commerce Applications From The Customer's Viewpoint e define an evaluation grid to appraise the 
quality and success of e-commerce applications.  The EWAM tool is used to analyze web sites in consumer 
goods and the e-banking sectors.  The results suggest that many web sites do not meet user expectations. 
 
Nicholas C. Romano, Jr in his paper Customer Relationship Management for the Web-Access Challenged: 
Inaccessibility of the Fortune 100 Business Web Sites discusses the fact that it may be difficult to build and 
manage relationships with customers if they cannot access the web site.  The study evaluates the accessibility of 
100 Fortune 500 company web sites.  The results suggest the majority of the firms had accessibility problems 
severe enough to warrant correction. 
 
Yooncheong Cho , Il Im, Roxanne Hiltz, and Jerry Fjermestad in their paper An Analysis of Online Customer 
Complaints:  Implications for Web Complaint Management investigate current sources of online complaints 
and provide guidelines for successful e-CRM.  On thousand customer complaints were analyzed from several 
different sources.  The results suggest that customer dissatisfaction results from several attributes including 
failure to meet price expectations, ease of use, security and privacy issues. 
 
 
Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2002
0-7695-1435-9/02 $17.00 (c) 2002 IEEE 1
Proceedings of the 35th  Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-35’02) 
0-7695-1435-9/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
