Optimal Tool Allocation (OTA) for Cost Reduction under Uncertain 
Demand 
Hsin-Yin Wang, Chun-Shine Chen, Min-Hsiu Hsieh 
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Ltd. 
No. 25,I.i-Hsin Rd., Science-Based Industrial Park Hsin-Chu, Taiwan 300-77, R. 0. C. 
Hvwanac@tsmc.com.tw , cscheni@tsmc.com.hv , mhhsiehOtsmc.com.tw 
Abstract - On addressing the issues of uncertain demand and 
the rapid changing of developing rechnoiogi,. a capital- 
intensive seniiconductorfoundry is faced with a big challenge 
lo reduce cost, mused 6 j ~  low utilizalion tools. In order to be 
competitive, what i.s needed most is cost reducrion, through 
enhancing the tool utilization. This paper presents not only a 
successful model lo analyze the impact of low fools utilization 
61if abo  provide a solution to achieve the cost reduction 
target. 
BACKGROUND & MOTIVATION 
is not required among cross fabs, then it could be sold out. 
The execution processes are the following: 
(1) Sell out the low utilization tools 
(2) Move-in the useful tool Bom other fab 
(3) Fully utilize the space and tools 
Finally, we can choose the best scenario through simulating 
the key performance indices of all feasbile scenarios. The key 
performance indices in this model includes financial indices 
such as NF’V(Net Present Value), IRR(Intema1 Retum Rate) 
and payback period, ... etc. Through these fmancial indices, 
they reflect both profitable and production ability in fabs. 
After all, the system support top managers to make the 
the semiconductor industry, it is higher capital-intensive , decision of tool disposal and achieve cost reduction target 
where caDital exoenditure is contributed bv Droduction (See figure and figure2). . .  
equipment. In the last decade, the semiconductor industry has 
grown rapidly, the demand for 8” wafer product was greater 
than the supply. At the same time, huge amount of capital has 
been invested in equipment. In this phenomena there is a 
hidden challenge. 
How could we solve the high cost problem, caused by low 
utilization tools, while demand turns down rapidly? Specially 
unique tools utilized only for specific products or customers. 
They not only cause the impact of high cost and low margin, 
but also space reduncy, material and manpower loss. 
Fortunately, we still can take the advantage of cluster fab 
characteristics to create maximum profit through re-allocating 
the tools among cluster fabs. 
METHODOLOGY 
In order to address the problem of high cost caused by low 
utilization tools to achieve both cost down and output targets. 
The execution processes are illustrated as follows. 
Firstly, we must regularly review the utilization of tools, 
specially the unique tools for specific products or customers. 
While low utilization tools are found, summarized the impact 
Low Utilization of 
i2dicat.d Tml 
(GpUndTml I Allocation) OTA I 
? More Ourput according to the following dimensions. ( I )  Financial loss: NTS X M profit loss per month (2) Capacity loss: X K wafers loss per month (3) Cost loss: NT% X M loss of depreciation expense 
(4 )  Space loss: X mm2 is redundant 
( 5 )  Material loss: NTS X M material loss per month 
(6) Manpower loss: X headcount loss per month 
Secondly, find the opportunity of cost down through tool re- 
allocation. At first, we can benchmark tool utilization with 
cross-fab and search for the surplus tools. Therefore, there are 
several alternatives. If space is available, then swap this tool 
60m another fab, otherwise, just backup it that fab. If the tool 
Figure 1. OTA Sbucture 
0-7803-7604-8/021$17.00 02002 IEEE 
24 1 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY 
Hsin-Yin Wang received the B.S. degree in the Department 
of Industrial Engineering from Tung Hai University in 1994, 
and the M.S. degree in Department of Industrial Engineering 
and Management from Nation Chiao Tung University, ROC 
in 1996. She is currently a Industrial Engineer of Industrial 
Engineer Division at Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing 
Company, Ltd.. 
Chun-Shine Chen received the B.S. and the M.S. degree in 
Department of Industrial Engineering from Chung Yuan 
University, ROC in 1996 and 1998. He is currently a 
Industrial Engineer of Industrial Engineer Division at Taiwan 
7 
Figure 2. Methodology of Cost Reduction Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, Ltd 
IMPLEMENTATION Min-Hsiu Hsieh received the B.S. degree in the Department of Industrial Engineering from Feng Chia University in 1989, 
In the case-study company, meet both the lo\l, margin 
crisis and the big challenge of achieving wafer outpiit target. 
current impact and the status. Engineer Division at Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing 
collect the tools utilization data of cross-fahs and fm8d out the 
surplus tools. After all, focuse on the unique tool and simulate 
all key performance indices of feabsible scenarios. In this case, 
the simulation results show the most profitable scenario is 
moving the tool from one fab to another. 
CONCLUSION 
The benefits of OTA are significant. In the past, ther: was no 
systematized approach to effectively reduce cost caused by 
low utilization tools with uncertain demand. In this paper, not 
only successfully build up a model to analysis the impact of 
low utilization tools but also provide a solution to achieve the 
cost down target. In general, this OTA brings lsmc the 
following benefits and advantages: 
( I )  Cutting costs down through optimizing re-arrangement 
intemal resource (Cost saving US$ 10.4M per year for 
selling the low utilization tool and reduce material , 
manpower expense) 
(2) Smoothly achieve wafer output target. (About ti% more 
output increase) 
(3) Fully utilize and re-allocate multi-site space and 
manpower. 
and the M.S. degree in Department of Industrial Engineering 
and Management Nation Chiao Tung University, 
Therefore, Dept. IE (Industrial Engineering) analyze the in 1996. He is a section manager Of Industrial 
Company, Ltd.. 
REFERENCES 
[ I ]  Susan M. Cogley, “Cost Reduction in A Manufacturing 
Fabricator : From The Bottom Up” in Proceedings of the 
IEEUSEMI Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing 
Conference, 1995, pp42-44. 
[2] David Art, Michael O’Halloran and Brian Butler “Wafer 
Fab Construction Cost Analysis & Cost Reduction 
Strategies: Applications of SEMATECH’s Future Factory 
Analysis Methodology” in Proceedings of the 
IEEUSEMI Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing 
Conference, 1994, pp16-21. 
242 
