Proceedings of the Second Joint EMBSBMES Conference 
Houston, TX. USA October 23-26,2002 
The Medical Information Management System (SIGIM) 
- Elaboration of an Electronic Patient Record - 
Guilherme War, Cybele Boudoux 
System Information Group (SIG) - Catholic University of the state of Pernambuco (UNICAP) 
ZIP CODE: 50050-900 - Recife - PE - Brazil 
Abstract - The Medical Information Management 
System (SIGIM) aims at integrating many of the 
already existing technologies applied to health care, 
allowing a big improvement in the quality of services 
and service provision within the health caring area. As 
the project involves several areas in terms of 
knowledge and expertise, it was divided among four 
groups. The authors of this article were responsible for 
creating an Electronic Patient Record (EPR). To 
achieve a result, the adopted technologies were: A 
three-tier architecture, this separates the presentation 
for the user, the rationale and the database; XML 
(extensible Markup Language), which standardises the 
transmission of the medical data of the patient among 
the systems. At this first stage, for the construction of 
an ERP we have focused our studies on the 
particularities of the Oncology. 
Keywords - Electronic Patient Record(EPR), Three- 
Tier Architecture, XML. 
I. INTRODUC~ION 
The use of the computer science in the medical 
standardisation and organisation of the medical information 
of the patients. 
To the creation of the EPR, we have adopted a three-tier 
architecture, where there is a separation between the 
presentation for the user, the rationale and the database. This 
architecture facilitates the elaboration of flexible appliances 
which can be simply altered to meet the constant needs of 
changes. Also, the XML (extensible M a r h p  Language) has 
been adopted so as to standardize the change of information 
between the systems. 
11. METHODOLOGY 
Electronic Patient Record (EPR) 
The EPR (Figure 1) is an electronic structure for the 
maintenance of information about the health condition and 
the care received by someone all hisher life [ 13. 
The important aspects for the construction of the EPR 
are: Integration between the systems (Radiology, Laboratory, 
etc.); Transferring of information between various medical 
fields; Interaction with other institutions; Standardization of 
data [3,6]. 
information management has progressed from a situation in 
which the computer used to utilise for the realisation of 
relatively simple tasks to a level of global interaction, in 
which the medical information - data, image and voice - is 
shared, coming from different sources and applications[ 31. 
In a hospital environment, for example, the pieces of 
information can be kept in archives, transmitted, accessed, 
protected and processed from the use of the information 
system technology (IST), such as: Database, Distributed 
Systems, Computer Networks, Internet, Digital Processing of 
Image and voice, and so on. 
Aiming at the interactions among the IST cited above, 
The Medical Information Management System (SIGIM), 
Project developed by the Information Group System (IGS) of Fig. Record (EPR) 
the Catholic University of Pernambuco (UNICAP), will have 
an organizational infra-structure which is able to integrate a 
heterogeneous collection of standardized, organized and safe 
multimedia resources and data. 
As the project involves various areas of knowledge and 
expertise, it was divided among four groups: 
1) Elaboration of the Electronic Patient Record (EPR); 
2)  Construction and manipulation of the database 
3) Manipulation of medical images and voice. 
4) Digital network of communication. 
Each group has been developing a group of activities 
within their area, but they will be working closely together. 
The authors of this article are responsible for the creation 
of the Electronic Patient Record (EPR), which aims at the 
The EPR can be installed either in a clinic, with only the 
module of basic information and the module of the required 
field, as also in a hospital, adding and co-relating the 
modules of the several fields. 
In order to have independency and facility of co-relation 
between the modules, we have adopted a three-tier 
architecture and the XML. 
At the beginning, we focused our studies on the 
elaboration of the module of Oncology(Figure 2) ,  since The 
Medicine is a vast field, where each sub-field has its own 
features. 
0-7803-761 2-9/02/$17.00 0 2002 IEEE 1954 
Components - XML 
Fig. 2. Module EPR -Oncology 
Three-tier Architecture 
Three-tier architecture is logical and not physical. It is 
concerned about the functions of the appliances and not with 
its implementation. 
Division of the tiers: 
1. Presentafion Tier: the aim of this tier is to receive 
information from the client, forward them to the rationale tier 
so that it makes the correct processing, receive the results 
and present them to the client. 
2 .  Rationale Tier: In this tier, the processings and rules of 
the rationale are specified, uniting the presentation and 
database tiers. 
3. Database Tier: it provides the access to the database, 
independently of the tools and the language used in its 
construction. 
Benefits of the architecture in the construction of the EPR 
. 
facilitating the interaction between different systems; . 
which are the responsibility of another; 
8 
necessities, without affecting the rationale and database. ‘ 
necessary to modify the client. 
XML (extensible Markup Language) 
Independency and inter-operability among the tiers, 
Security and protection: No tier can realize functions 
Personal handling of the client according to their 
The up-grades in the system are done without being it 
It is an extended markun laneuaze. named in 1998, hy the 
I .  Conten:: written in XML; 
2 .  Structure: XML Shema or DTD (Data Type Definition), 
its job is to indicate the rules which the XML document is 
following [2,4]. 
3.  Presentation: use of XSL (extensive Style Language), 
which allows to specify how the data will be presented exit 
dispensers. 
Benefits of the XML in the construction of the EPR. 
The separation between the data, processes and interface 
brings together the interaction between the data coming 
from different sources and appliances; 
The XML Document can he generated from databases 
which already exist: . lnteraction between old appliances and new 
technologies; 
Multiples forms of visualising the dma, since the XML 
defines the data Structure only, and not the visual; . Platform Independency, Operational System and 
Programming Language. 
* XML Documents can make reference to non-XML 
resources, such as Image Bank and Video Clips [41. 
111. RESULTS 
The obtained results were: a) Structural Model of the EPR- 
Oncology- Necessary Data; b) Choice of the three-tier 
architecture to the applicative development; c) Definition of 
used pattern in the structuring and transmission of data - 
XML. 
N. DlSCUSSlON I CONCLUSION 
According to the studies of the existing technologies e the 
relative necessities to the development of the EPR, it has 
been noticed that the three-tier architecture and the XML 
pattern adapted, effectively, to expected result. 
The use of the three-tier architecture allows the interaction 
between the systems independently of the used technologies 
in their development. Moreover, this architecture facilitates 
the integration of new modules to the system. 
The XML (extensible Markup Language) gives a 
patterned format to the structured description of data, which 
can be implemented from a great number of appliances, 
being it of easy extension. 
~ I - .  
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Although it is a 
markup language, the XML differs from the HTML, because 
it uses the tags for the definition of the StNCtUreS of data and 
not to their designing 141. 
The XML emerged from the necessity to standardize the 
structure of the data in a simple and flexible way, making the 
independent information blocks “chat” among themselves, 
that is, making the interaction of data from different sources. 
REFERENCES 
[ I ]  Computer-based Patient Record Institute (CPRI), Action 
Plan for Implementing a Unique Health Identifier. In: 
www.cori.orp/docs; 1996 August. 
[2] c .  Machado, UtilizaGrio do XML no Sisrema de Hypr -  
Automaton., Instituto de InformAttica da UFRGS, 2000. 
1955 
[3]H. Johanston, Sistemas de lnformaqiio Hospitalar: 
Presente e Futuro. Revista InformCdica, Silo Paulo, 
v. 1,n. 2, 1993. In : http://www.euub.org.br/informed. 
[4]R. Light. Iniciando em XML. Makron Books do Brasil 
Editora Ltda. 1999. 
[SIINCA. Instituto Nacional do Chcer. In: 
http://www.inca.org.br 
[6]R. Sabbatini, Tecnologias de Informap7o e o Hospital 
Moderno. Revista Informatica mCdica, Siio Paulo, v.2,n. 3, 
1999. In: httu://www.euub.org.br/informaticamedica. 
1956 
