Real-time Monitoring System for a coming- 
flying crow Using MPEG-4 
Akira Kubota,Yoshitem Kagawa, Chugoku Electric Power Corporat ion 
Masanobu Nagasugi, Hiroyuki Kobayashi, Toshiba Corporution 
Abstract- ' h e  power line accident by nest building of a crow has 
big influence 10 users, such as stopping an electric power supply. 
Therefore, in order to prevent the accident beforehand, we developed 
a real-time monitoring system for a coming-flying crow which 
supports a steel tower inspection etc.. 
(1)Technology 
As image compression technology, MPEG-4 (Moving Picture 
Experts Group Phase 4) is used. 
(2) The crow recognition technique 
It became clear that a luminosity value of a crow is lower 
than a background a little. Then, the system which compares 
the luminosity value of a crow with the luminosity value of the 
background, and recognizes a crow was adopted. 
(3) Effect 
As a result of the experiment by this system, the high rate of 
recognition was obtained and it was checked that this system is 
effective about the monitoring of a coming-flying crow. 
InderTenns-monitoring system , coming-fliying crow , MPEG- 
4 , personal handy phone system, image recognition 
I. INTRODUCTON 
Although the rate of the power line accidents by the bud is 
few of all the electric accident number of cases, prior 
prediction is difficult and the influence which it gives to a 
consumer is large. The majority of the power line accidents by 
the bird is due to the crow. Actually, electric accidents occur 
by the Crow's coming in contact with the live part so that the 
crow may use the iron tower as a nesting place and rest ground, 
and dropping the nesting material. The iron tower is inspected 
to prevent this beforehand every day. It is necessary to 
increase the efficiency of such a steel tower inspection. 
11. THE PIClTJRE TRANSMISSION METHOD AND THE IMAGE 
RECOGNITION METHOD SUITABLE FOR CROW-MONITORING 
FLINCTION 
A. The ourline 
The conventional picture monitoring system gives a big 
burden to a member who monitors, in order that a monitoring 
member may look at a picture and may judge abnormalities. 
Moreover, there is a possibility that a short-time sudden 
phenomenon cannot be discovered, in the situation that many 
monitoring cameras are installed. Although the automiltic 
monitoring system by image processing had been developed in 
order to mitigate the load of these monitoring work, exclusive 
use or highly efficient hardware is required, and the use place 
was restricted. Moreover, when transmitting the image of a 
monitoring camera from a remote place, since degradation of 
an analog signal sent by cables was severe, the equipment for 
maintaining quality of image was required, and equipment 
cost was high. For this reason, when the digital image from the 
spot is transmitted and displayed and monitoring subject is 
automatically recognized by real time by radio 
communications, alarm etc. needs to be notified to a member 
who monitors. Moreover, there was the necessity of reducing 
cost, using a commercial camera and a commercial personal 
computer. 
B. Picture transmission by MPEG-4 
The MPEG-1 video coding system which is the digital 
image compression technology used by this research is 
characterized by the high rate of compression by video. 
Moreover, it is compressible to the grade which can transmit 
video by general radio communications (personal handy phone 
system is used in this research). In order to realize this high 
rate of compression, MPEG-4 divide a picture frame into a 
block and it cuts down the amount of data by judging the 
picture which changed with the last frame by each block, and 
compressing and transmitting the block which changed. 
C. The image recognirion method 
Since MPEG-4 data is the result of analyzing a certain 
amount of motion, by narrowing the changeful picture block 
from MPEG-4 data,  it can reduce the amount of calculation of 
recognition sharply, and can realize the system which 
recognizes and supervises change of the move object in a 
picture and a color on real time. In order to recognize a crow 
by using this function of MPEG4, a move object including the 
coming flying crow is recognized and detected. Next, a crow is 
recognized by detecting a specific color (black). 
111. THE TRIAL PRODUCTION OF THE SYSTEM WHICH MONITORS 
THE COMING-FLYING CROW 
A. The system which supervises the coming-flying crow 
The composition of the system which supervises the 
coming-flying crow currently made as an experiment by this 
research is shown in Fig. 1. In the field, the image data taken 
0-7803-7525-4/02/$17.00 Q 2002 IEEE 2284 
by the monitoring camera (video camera) is coded with video 
coding equipment (personal computer). The coded image data 
is transmitted to an office side via personal handy phone 
system. The image data sent to the office side is received, and 
a crow is recognized and displayed at the same time image 
data is decrypted with picture analysis equipment (personal 
computer). A recognition result is expressed as a white frame, 
as shown in Fig. 2. (personal handy 
rc 
Nole PC 
4) useful roo1 
The following tool was created i n  order to improve 
recognition accuracy by performing the size of a crow, setup 
of a delicate color, and accumulation processing of a 
background to a subject or a scene. 
a) The tool about u size ond movement 
( I )  The tool which sets up rhe size of u recognirioii 
(2)  The rool which recugriizes a muve object hg 
object 
icsing coding dum ut the rime <,f encoding. 
( I )  The tool which sets irp (I specific. color i i i  detrril 
(2) The rool which recognizes U spccific color by 
using coding dum ut the ri iw ufrricodbig. 
(3) Tbe rool which specijirs U specific culurfrom 
rlie subject object i i i  imoye rlurtr 
b )  The tool aboirr u color 
Fig. 1 The system which supervises the coming-flying crow (4) The rool specified conibiiiing U specific color 
c) The tool ubout (I backjiroirrid 
The tool which extracts change by carrying out fixed 
time accumulation o f  thc background 
( I )  The rod which rr~m.snrir.s i.oding dura with 
prrsurrrrl h w d y  pliorw .sysrr,,i 
(2) The tool which s m e s  coili~ig dura 
(3) The tool which displovs U recogriirim resitlr on 
(4 )  The tool which ourputs u rerugniriurr resirlr to u 
cl) Other rools 
a screen 
text 
Fig.2 recognition result of crow 
B. The feature of a system 
I )  The use ofpersonal handy phone system 
In consideration of transmission with personal handy phone 
system, the coding data is created by the bit rate united with 
the transmission speed of personal handy phone system in the 
coding part. Including the technique for raising the error 
tolerance of radio transmission, coding data itself can respond 
now to the deficit of data on radio transmission. 
2)  The use of PC 
Since the picture board for image recognition is 
unnecessary, the process to code and compound video can be 
carried out by using a commercial personal computer. 
3)  The use ofMPEG-4 
The recognition using the function of MPEG-4 can he 
divided into move object recognition and specific color 
recognition. 
Recognition size is set up per block by move object 
recognition (at least 2 blocks or more). Moreover, by 
recognizing a specific color, the method which is easy to judge 
with people's vision is introduced into the system which 
specifies a color, two or more colors are specified (a maximum 
of 16 colors), the color range is set up, and in order to modify 
easily, color data is extracted from a screen. 
By combining move object recognition and specific color 
recognition, the advanced recognition function to recognize 
the object of a specific color which is moving is realized. 
IV. EXAMINAT~ON AND EVALUATION B Y  TRIAL PKOIXICTION 
SYSTEM 
A. The exurninurion purpose 
The examination was carried out about how "six" ,  
"movement", "color", and "nature" which are mentioned as a 
cause of the reduction of recognition acciiracy influence the 
rate of recognition. Moreover, verification was performed 
about the validity of a tool. 
B. The examinurioii inerhod 
Examination environment is the same as the trial production 
system of Fig. 1. In the exam, since verification i n  the actual 
spot was difficult, the image of the crow of a silo was taken 
with the video camera in advance. And the image input to PC 
was performed by reproducing the image of the crow with a 
videocassette recorder. Photography was performed by 
automatic setup by the camera fixed with the tripod. Moreover, 
as for the access speed by personal handy phone system, 
verification was performed by 32kbps. 
C. An exnminotion result urid. Evolirnrion 
As a result of examining by changing the size and 
photography conditions of an image of a crow, i t  was checked 
that the image of a crow can be correctly recognized in a 
certain amount of size. However, owing to catching move 
objects other than a crow, such as a tree which shakes by the 
wind, etc., there was much incorrect recognition, and in order 
lo apply to the job, i t  turns out that it is necessary to take a 
2285 
crow greatly, reduce the rate of incorrect recognition, and to 
solve the subject shown further below. 
5)  The conclusion of a system which recognizes lhe outline 
of a crow 
Since the form of a crow changes a lot, the pattern 
matching system by the form is overlooked comparatively with 
many judgment standards, and since the possibility of an error 
and the possibility of superfluous recognition are high, it is not 
suitable. Therefore, the another system was examined 
I )  As a measure which falls the rate which recognizes 
accidentally a motion of the tree and branch which shake 
by the wind, a recognition range setup which recognizes 
only an object part is required. 
2 )  Since a setup of rhe color (black) of a crow is dificult, a 
colorless setting function is required. B. Examination of a luminosity matching system 
31 When a crow is detected. the O U f D U f  function o f t h e  
I ~.~~~~~~~~~~~~ ,~~~~ ~I 
alarm f o r  human checking is required. 
from the middle when checking the saved prolonged 
image data, the function which traverses video rapidly, 
It was judged that the system which matches the outline 
pattern of the crow which was being examined at the beginning 
was not suitable for recognizing a crow certainly, and 
examination of another technique was performed. 
4) since there is nofunction which reproduces image data 
rolls back and is suspended is required. 
Moreover, by this recognition technique, since all black 
move objects were recognized to be crows, we decided to aim 
at improvement in an image recognition level so that it can 
apply to the job which supervises the crow coming flying by 
improving software, such as implementation of pattern 
matching. 
V. IMPROVEMENT EXAMINATION OF CROW RECOGNITION 
A c c u ~ n c ~  
A.  Examination ofpartern matching by form 
As recognition of a crow, the outline of a crow was 
extracted and the system which compares the outline and 
pattern of a dictionary was examined first. 
I )  The pattern matching dicrionary of an outline 
The features in an outline (a beak, tail, etc.) attached the 
priority, and were created as a dictionary. A dictionary has a 
form silhouette, the feature position, and the size ratio 
information on each part. 
2) Outline extraction 
In order to perform matching with a dictionary, it is  
necessary to extract an exact outline first. Then, the outline of 
the black object which moves from the difference of a picture 
was extracted using vector information, the coded picture 
information, and color information. Since all the pictures of a 
subject were not coded, it was difticult to extract an outline 
only from the difference of the picture of MPEG4,  and it 
extracted the outline combining the picture memory. 
3) Matching 
Although the "form silhouette" of the crow obtained by the 
dictionary and outline extraction, the '"feature position", and 
the "ratio of the size of each part" were compared, it was not 
compared well. 
4)  Theproblem in outline recognition o f a  crow 
Picture size is small, and since coding is distorted, it is 
difficult to extract an exact outline. Moreover, since form is 
greatly different by the case where an angle, a position, and 
feather are extended etc., in order to match by Zdimensional 
data, the dictionary of a vast quantity of patterns is needed, and 
it is not practical as a system. 
1 )  Analysis of a picture 
The image data (correct answer data) in which the crow is 
reflected was compared with the image data (background data) 
which has not been reflected in detail. Consequently, since 
there was a tendency for the distribution of the correct answer 
M B  (macro block) in which a crow is to incline toward the 
direction of minus (dark) a little from the histogram of Fig.3 , 
It became clear that a luminosity value of a crow is lower 
than a background a little. 
Bckroound MB 
-200 0 200 
A luminosity error with a background 
Fig.3 The difference in an error with a background picture 
(correct answer MB, background MB) 
2)  Luminosity matching of a crow 
The technique of recognizing a crow was examined by by 
measuring and matching the luminosity of the block 
considered that a crow exists and a background block. The 
whole recognition flow is Fig. 4. 
................ . ..........., 
i Combvulo" I 
Fig. 4 Functional flow of system which matches luminosity af cmw 
2286 
3) Range setup 
In order to reduce incorrect recognition, the portion 
predicted to be that a crow stops needs to be set up for every 
picture, and a recognition place needs to be limited. The high 
recognition result of accuracy is obtained by doing this work. 
When a range setup lowers a mouse in a screen, the system 
which takes a domain by the diagonal is adopted and a 
required domain is set up by taking two or more domains. 
4)  Distinction of crow recognition 
It is recognition within the limits, and the luminosity 
average of the arbitrary small blocks in a macro block (also 
including a overlap of a contiguity macroscopic block) is 
calculated about the macro block by which change information 
was checked, and it is searched for the block which fulfills the 
following conditions. 
max ((background-input picture )/background >= TH) 
TH: The thereshold value of the measure which recognizes a 
5) Isolated macroscopic block processing 
When the circumference 8 macroscopic block is not 
recognized, it is judged that the possibility of noise is high and 
the process is cancelled. For this reason, recognition is not 
carried out when a crow is settled in 1 macroscopic block. 
Moreover, most, since [ of a screen 1, as for an outside macro 
block, calculation processing was not able lo be performed, 
recognition'was made not to be carried out. 
crow 
Recognition macroscopic block 
Ag. 5 The case when the isolated macro block is canceled 
6) Renewal of a background 
About the macro block which is not recognized, it is the 
following formulas and renewal of a background memory is 
performed. 
Background memory <-(Wx background memory + present 
picture)/(W + 1) 
W: Parameter of renewal of a background 
When it is judged that matching with the background and 
object recognition result which were updated at the time of 
renewal of a background memory is performed, and there. is a 
crow, updating processing does not have a line crack. 
Moreover, the 25th frame has the structure where recognition 
is not performed from the fust frame for background 
accumulation processing. 
7) Conclusion of a luminosity marching system 
When performance evaluation of a luminosity matching 
system was carried out using the examination picture, it 
overlooked on the average, and the rate of an error and the rate 
of superfluous recognition were low, and the good result was 
obtained. Therefore, the luminosity matching system using the 
difference of a luminosity value with this background was 
adopted for the improvement in the rate of recognition, 
VI. IMPROVEMENT OF MONITORING SYSTEM FOR COMING- 
FLYLNG CROW 
A .  The purpose of improvement 
The improvement of a system was performed in order that 
the problem in the examination and evaluation by the trial 
production system might be soloved, and the recognition 
accuracy of a crow might be improved. 
B. The improving point of a system 
The main functions improved for the improvement in 
recognition accuracy of crows, such as adoption of a 
luminosity matching system, and verification are as follows. 
I )  By performing a setup of the recognition range, it was 
improved in other places so that recognition might not be 
performed (reduction of incorrect recognition, such as a 
branch shake). 
2 )  Since the color of a crow was recognized, the black of a 
colorless setup was added and the setting method of a 
color was improved. 
Background was performed and thefunction to recognize 
a crow was added. 
moved,accumulation processing of a background was 
improved so thai it might not become a background. 
5) While ihe recognition result was displayed on the screen 
at the time of recognition, the function to sound alarm 
was added. 
6) When the saved image data was reproduced later, the 
function (a rapid iraverse, a stop, lop sending, top 
return) like video was added. 
3) Matching with the luminosity of a crow and a 
4 )  When the crow recognized ai once stopped having 
vu. EXAMINATTON AND EVALUATION BY IMPROVED SYSTEM 
A .  Examinaiion purpose 
About the trial production of the system which supervises 
the improved crow coming flying, the difference between the 
rate of recognition before and behind improvement and the 
rate of incorrect recognition was examined. Moreover, the 
degree recognized that buds other than a crow are crows 
accidentally by luminosity matching system adoption is 
examined. 
B. The examinaiion meihod 
above-mentioned fouruth clause. 
The examination was performed by the same method as the 
2287 
C.  Ail rxaminarion result und evaluation 
I )  Runge serring function 
In verification of the rate change of recognition by use of a 
range setting function, although the rate of recognition was 
almost changeless, the number of incorrect recognition was 
reduced about an average of 60%, and the effect was checked. 
2 )  Colorless settingfzincrion 
In verification of the rate change of recognition by use of a 
colorless setting function, although the rate of recognition was 
almost changeless, the number of incorrect recognition was 
reduced 77%, and was effective. 
3)  Luminosiry mutching system 
In verification of the rate change of recognition by use of a 
luminosity matching system, as for the rate of recognition, 
about 80% or more and the high rate of recognition were 
obtained except for the case of darkness. When a range setting 
function and a luminosity matching system were used together, 
the number of incorrect recognition was reduced about an 
average of 72%. and combined use of both functions was 
effective. 
VIII. EVALUATION OF SYSTEM W H I C H  SUPERVISES C O M I N G  - 
F L Y I N G  C R O W  
A. Pructicality of a sysrem 
1 )  Tlte mre of recognilion 
Except for special environment, such as darkness and a 
backlight, the crow has been recognized about 80% or more. 
Although it was easy to generate incorrect recognition when 
the natural environment of a mountain etc. was in a 
background, by performing a recognition range setup etc., the 
rate of incorrect recognition is reduced about an average of 
60%, incorrect recognition is reduced by improvement, and 
practicality was checked. 
2 )  personal handy phone sysrem (transmission medium) 
Also with personal handy phone system of the low bit rate, 
at a high-speed effective speed (an average of 7.3 
Frames/(second)), i t  was mostly transmitted to real time 
(average transmission delay time 1.68 seconds), and when the 
crow coming flying was supervised, since there was little delay, 
practicality was fully checked at high speed. 
B. Applicability as U short form monitoring sysrem 
1 )  Convenience 
Time required for a system setup is about 15 minutes, and it 
is possible by putting specific color recognition and move 
object recognition together to a monitoring subject to be 
temporarily used as a simple move object monitoring system. 
2) Cost 
This system consists of cheaply combination of commercial 
products, such as a personal computer and a video camera. 
However, there are problems, like that there are not 
waterproofness and battery operation time has restriction, and 
it is necessary to decide on a use place in consideration of 
environmental sides (the weather, power supply. etc.). 
IX.  POSTSCKIPI 
By changing the size and photography conditions of an 
image of a crow, although there was a problem that a black 
move object with the Same luminosity is recognized to be a 
crow, about 80% or more cases came to be recognized as a 
crow. Moreover, incorrect recognition was reduced an average 
of 70% or more by performing a recognition range setup etc. 
It was effective as a system which supervises the crow 
coming flying by this. Moreover, when used as a simple 
monitoring system, a move object is simply supervised by 
choosing the algorithm which recognizes the move object 
containing the color (specification color) of a subject object. In 
order to actually utilize the system made as an experiment this 
time, the utilization system in consideration of the 
environmental sides (the weather, a power supply, personal 
handy phone system communication charge, etc.) in a use 
place needs to be developed. In order to apply to the job other 
than the job which will supervise the coming flying crow from 
now on, development of utilization systems, such as a 
functional addition, is due to investigate the needs and to be 
performed. 
X. REFERENCES 
[ I ]  ISOlIEC IS 14496-2"lnrormution trchnolugy~coding of rudiowisual 
objects-Pan 2:Viiua1,"1999 
121 Sukeichi Miki ,"AllafMPEC4", KoryoChosakili Publishing Co.. Lid. . .  . 
13) Yuji Kiuchi," Talk of image recognilion", Nikkan Kogyv Shimhus 
CO. ,Lid. 
141 Inironiation techonology-generic ccxling of audio-visudl 
ohjectr:viau~l,lSOlIEC JTCVSC29lWGI I N2502 Final Draft of 
International Standurd,Atrantic City.Ortober 1998. 
151 Torhiaki Walanabe : "MPEC-4 last version dercnption and 
demonstra1ion"ShingakugihDu E 91- I l l  (1998.03) 
161 Akira Sakuma. Kanji Inagaki, Tashifumi Hayashi, Hirayuki Kohayuhi, 
Ken Nakdjo, Jun lkeda : 'The rnunito"ng system adapting MPEG-4 ". 
the 5th picture sensing symposium (SU'9Y) and lune 199') 
XI. BIOGRAPHIES 
Akira Kubota was born in Hiroahima.Japm on 
July 31,196U.Hr received his bachelor drgrcec irom 
Kyoto University. He has h e n  working in Chuguku 
Electric Power Co.. and i s  in Infurmaton System 
Depanment, Promotion of Office Automation. 
Yoshilnu Kagawi was born in Yanioguchi.JzI;;; 
On March 16,1970.He received his bnchelor ~ k & c , ~ .  
from Fukuoka University. He hi14 becn working i 
Chugoku Electric Power Co.. and i s  in Trchcic- 
Research Center. 
His rpccial field i s  Communication oflniorm;t!im 
2288 
Masanobu Nagasugi was horn in Kanagawa.Japan.on 
June 28,1966.H~ received his bachelor degree from 
Keio University. He has been working in Toshiba 
Copration and is  in Power Sysrerni & Services 
Company, Toshiba Co..Hir special field i s  Solution of 
Information Technology Systems for Eleclric Power 
Company. 
Hiroyuki Kobayashi was barn in Tokya,Jupan,on 
September I0,19M.He graduated from Kasai 
Industrial High Schwl.  He has been working in 
Toshiba Cornoralion and is in Power and Industrial 
Systems R 8; D Center. .His special field is research 
and dcvelopmenc of a sensor and communicalion 
technology 
2289 
