Introduction to the Information Technology in Health Care Track 
 
Now in it third year, the information technology in health care track at HICSS continues to develop as a forum at which 
health care, computer science, and information systems professionals can come together to discuss issues related to the 
application of information technology in health care.  While the medical, technical, and managerial perspectives each 
contributes to particular aspects of the health care problems, the complexity of today's problems requires more than one 
perspective.  As a unique opportunity for cross-disciplinary interaction, we hope this track will give our conference 
participants and the readers of these proceedings new insights into the problems they face. 
The track contains the following seven minitracks: 
 
ƒ E-Health Strategies 
ƒ Healthcare chain workflow management by use of IT 
ƒ Privacy and security for health information systems 
ƒ Integrating Information Systems Theory and Health Informatics Research 
ƒ Health Care Data Management 
ƒ Knowledge Management for Health Care Systems Support 
ƒ Telemedicine 
 
 
The minitrack coordinators provide brief summaries of their minitracks and overviews of the papers in their sessions. 
The papers in these minitracks address a wide range of clinical, managerial, and technical issues, and report on studies 
from Europe, North America, Asia, and the Pacific Region.  The titles of the minitracks reveal some of the variety of 
technologies and hint at the application area: from decision support to security; from data mining to strategic planning.  
Yet, despite this diversity, all of the papers have a common focus: How can information technology be use to improve the 
quality of care, the efficiency of the delivery of health care, and the access to health care?   
In attempting to answer this question, each author has focused on a particular aspect of information technology and 
healthcare.  Their inclusion in this track reflects on the quality, relevance, and importance of their work.  We believe the 
collection of these perspectives provides for stimulating and productive discussions and the generation of new ideas. 
We wish to thank all of the people who have worked so diligently to develop this track; we appreciate the time and 
effort the minitrack coordinators had to spend over the past year.  The high quality collection of papers in the track is the 
fruit of their efforts.  We look forward to the further development of this young track.  We welcome, and strong solicit, 
your participation in this track at future HICSS conferences.  Please contact either of the track chairs with your ideas for 
new minitracks or papers. 
We hope you find the proceedings useful and enjoyable. 
 
William G. Chismar 
 
Information Technology in Health Care Track Chair 
Email: chismar@cba.hawaii.edu 
 
Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2002
0-7695-1435-9/02 $17.00 (c) 2002 IEEE 1
Proceedings of the 35th  Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-35’02) 
0-7695-1435-9/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
