31d SIBERIAN RUSSIAN WORKSHOP AND TUTORIALS EDM'2002, SECTION 2, 1-5 JULY, ERLAGOL 119 
The Device of Digital Data Processing 
from the Fibre-optical .Sensor of Mechanical Values 
Alexander D. Bialik, Ivan A. Voronin 
Novos ib ivsk State Technical University, Novos i b ink,  Russia 
Abstract. In thc work thc crcation of the dcvicc of digital signal processing from thc fibrc-optical sensor of nicchanical values is 
fcaturcd. Thc dcvicc allows to spcnd nicasuremcnts and to producc adjustment of thc scnsor rcniotcly and with a big degree of 
accuracy. The devicc connects to a PC on a thrcc-wire line of link with usagc of the standard transfer protocol of data RS-232C. 
The schcinc is inipleiiicnted with usagc of chips of corporations Atmel (AT90S23 13), Analog Deviccs (AD7705), Texas 
Instrunicnts (TLV5614) and Intcrsil (HIN202CP). 
I. Introduction 
ide application in different branches discover 
fibre-optical sensors (FOS) of physical values, 
that by their unique properties such as the wide 
gamut of operating temperatures, high sensitivity and 
speed, nonsensitivity to extemal electromagnetic 
fields is stipulated. However for automation of the 
process of measurement and processing of the 
obtained data in many cases expediently usage of the 
computer, because of it there is a need of creation of 
the matching device (MD) of the computer with the 
sensor. Thus, it's necessary, that the MD did not 
aggravate metrology parameters of the sensor. But a 
usual MDes, as a rule, being by general purpose 
devices, not fully obey of this requirement [I]. 
We've designed a digital device for signal 
processing of the amplitude fibre-optical sensor of 
mechanical values with usage of the interface RS- 
232C. 
As FOS has a small inertance and high speed 
[2], the measurements of mechanical moving in a 
dynamical mode are possible. 
Properties a designed MD: 
The principles of operation of standard digital 
devices (ADC, DAC and microcontroller) are 
described well in [3]. 
Advantages a MD: 
convenience of signal processing. 
possibility of a distance control of FOS; 
Outgoing from the task, was designed the 
function flowchart of the device which represented in 
a Fig. 1.  
Fig. 1. Thc flowchart of MD. 
The analog signal from FOS goes in 16 bits 
analog-to-digital converter (ADC), where will be 
converted to a digital code. The digit capacity of the 
analog-to-digital converter is selected so that at 
conversion of a signal to a digital form the error of 
conversion did not exceed resolution of FOS. Then 
the signal is transmit to the programmed 
microcontroller (MC). According to the micro 
program of RPROM MC data are transmit to a COM- 
port of a PC (PC) [3] through a converter of levels 
(CL). CL is for conversion of logical levels "0" (5 V) 
and "1" (0 V) to the form: "0" (-12 V) and "1" (+12 
V) [ 11. Such form of transmission allows eliminating 
influence of an electrical noise at data transfer on big 
distances. The digital signal is encoded by the 
standard code 8-4-2-1 and is transmitted in the 
sequential form. 
The pilot signals from the PC go to MC, and 
according to the micro program, are transmitted on 
the 12-th bits four-channel digital-to-analog converter 
(DAC). The addressing to one of channels of the 
DAC is carried out by two bits in a start of a data 
batch; then 12 data bits are transmit. After output of 
data on one of channels of the DAC there is a creation 
of an analog signal on an exit. I lps cMeHe With 
change of the channel of the DAC the installed 
signals on the previous channels do not change. 
Further signals go to controlling inputs of FOS. 
The control of parameters of FOS is done by 
the indirect path. Before us there was a task of 
electronic regulation of 4 parameters of FOS. The 
mechanical control was realized by change of a 
resistance of the variable resistor. The scheme of 
electronic regulation represented in a Fig. 2. To 
change a resistance of a chain linearly, changing 
voltage on a gate of the MOS-transistor, it is 
necessary to select an operating gamut in steep linear 
area of the transmitting characteristic. 
to resistor 
from 3 DAC b 
Fig. 2. Thc schcinc of electronic adjustment. 
ISBN 5-7782-0380-2 0 2002 NSTU 
120 
Uds.V 
3rd SIBERIAN RUSSIAN WORKSHOP AND TUTORIALS EDM'2002, SECTION 2 , l -5  JULY, ERLAGOL 
' 8  
6 
4 
2 
3 3,5 4 4,3 4,5 5 5,5 6 
uss,v 
Fig. 3. Transmitting characteristic of transistor KP305B. 
Thus, with a voltage variation U,, in limits 
2.5. .  .4 V a resistance of a chain will vary under the 
quasilinear law. 
The software was written on the programming 
language C++ in the integrated environment C+t 
Builder5 with usage of the compiler Turbo 
Assembler. 
II. Conclusion 
The designed device allows to rise quality and 
speed of measurements, and also to diminish 
time of processing of the obtained data from 
FOS. 
MD does not aggravate of the metrology 
characteristic of FOS. 
References 
[I] 
[2] 
Novikov U.V. etc. Dcvclopmcnt of matching dcviccs for a 
PC of a type JBM PCN Ekom, M., 2000. 
Kmglov V.V., Bialik A.D. A Diffcrential fibre-optical meter 
of small prcssuresll the Thescs of lntcmational scientific and 
technical conference ccComputcr sciencc and problcms of 
telccomniunications)), Novosibirsk, 1998, pp.43-45. 
[3] Gook M. Hardwarc of IBM PCI/ Piter, SP6,2000. 
Information for Alexander D. Bialik shown on the page 1 IS. 
Infomiation for Ivan A. Voronin shown on the page 1 18 
