Paper accepted for presentation at 2003 IEEE Bologna PowerTech Conference, June 23-26, Bologna, Italy 
Efficiency Analysis of Data Compression of Power 
System Transients using Wavelet Transform 
L. Shang, J. Jaeger, R. Krebs 
Absfroct - This paper analyzes the wavelet transform 
application in the data compression of power system transients 
It studies the influences on the compression efficiency and quality 
by diNerent mother wavelets, scale levels and thresholdings. It 
presents the relation between the compression efficiency and the 
compression accuracy, and shows how to get the optimal 
solution. It shows that the wavelet transform leads to a data 
compression approach with high compression efficiency, high 
compression accuracy, high compression quality and good 
denoising effect, so h a t  the wavelet transform can bring 
remarkable advantages to the fields in which big amounts of data 
are processed like fault recording and SCALMEMSIDMS 
systems. 
Index Term - Data compression efficiency, data compression, 
wavelet, wavelet transform, power system transients, denoising 
I. INTRODUC~ON 
OR analyzing and supervising the performance of power F systems, it is necessary to measure the network data such 
as voltages as well as currents and to collect the operations 
and the states of automatic equipment such as circuit breakers, 
automatic controllers and protection relays. Digital fault 
recorders are installed at strategic nodes of power systems to 
monitor the voltages and currents, and to record disturbance 
incidents. In order to capture a broad range of disturbance 
phenomena including impulsive transients, power quality 
monitors with 1-4- sampling rates are utilized. The 
modem SCADNEMSDMS systems make it possible to 
measure and collect nearly all information in real-time. The 
overall information let us h o w  the situation of power systems 
well and then can maintain a better performance of power 
systems. However, this produces huge amount of data, which 
should be stored and normally transferred to central locations. 
As a result, it leads to a high cost for storing and transferring 
these data. Therefore, the capability to compress the power 
system data is highly desirable and a lot of work has been 
done in this field. 
L. Shang is with the Power Transmission and Dishibution Group in 
Siemens AG, P.O.Box 3220, 91050 Erlangeq Germany (email: 
li.shang@siemens.com) 
J. Jaeger is with the Power Transmission and Dismbution Group in 
Siemens AG, P.O.Bon 3220, 91050 Erlangen, Germany (email: 
johann,jaege~~iemens.com) 
R. Krebs is with the Power Transmission and Dishibution Group in 
Siemem AG, P.O.Box 3220, 91050 Erlangen, Germany (email: 
rainerkrebr~Wemena.com) 
The discrete wavelet transform with orthogonal wavelet bases 
opens the door to an efficient and superior data compression. 
The performance of the data compression based on the 
wavelet transform is much improved and fully supported by 
mathematics. In fact, one of the important starting points of 
the wavelet transform theory was originated from the data 
compression of images. 
In this paper, the basic descriptions of data compression will 
be introduced, the principle of wavelet based data 
compression will be explained, and the data compressing 
efficiency based on the wavelet transform will be presented 
through applying the wavelet transform in the data 
compression of the voltage space phasor of travelling waves. 
It will mainly study and analyze compression efficiency with 
mother wavelet, compression efficiency with scale level, 
compression efficiency with thresholding and compression 
efficiency with compression error etc., which concern the 
practical application aspects. It will show that the wavelet 
transform leads to a data compression approach with high 
compression efficiency, high compression accuracy and high 
compression quality. 
11. DESCRIPTIONS OF DATA COMPRESSION 
A. Approaches of Data Compression 
The goal of compressing a signal is to minimize the storage or 
medium capacity needed to hold or to convey the information 
contained in the signal. 
The main approaches towards the data compression are: 
removing redundancy, thresholding and coding efficiently. 
The removing redundancy is to move away the correlativity 
between data, which can be done through an orthogonal 
transform. The thresholding is to set small data to zero when 
their absolute values are lower than a threshold. The coding 
methods are to code the data with special strategies, which are 
mainly for reducing the transferring volume of data through a 
communication link. The removing redundancy and the 
thresholding will he used here, which are connected with the 
wavelet transform application. 
B. Basic Definitions 
I )  Zero Ratio 
As a natural measurement of the data compression, the zero 
ratio describes the decreasing degree of compressed data. The 
zero ratio is defined as the zero number of the compressed 
data in comparison with the total number of the original 
signal. If the original signal has N samplings and there are 
0-7803-7967-5/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 
M, zeros after the compression, the zero ratio in percent, 
denotes as ZR, is calculated with Equation (I) .  
ZR = O x  100% 
A higher zero ratio means that more data are compressed 
away so that the signal can be represented with less data. If 
the zero ratio equals SO%, then the compressed data needs 
only 20% of the file size of the original signal. Zero ratio is an 
indictor of data compression efficiency. 
Similar to zero ratio, compression ratio is another indictor of 
data compression efficiency. Compression ratio is defined as 
the nonzero number of the compressed data in comparison 
with the total number of the original signal. If the original 
signal has N samplings and there are M, nonzeros after the 
compression, compression ratio in percent, denoted as CR, is 
calculated with Equation (2). 
(1) 
M 
N 
2) Compression Ratio 
CR=-x loo?? (2) N 
It is clear that the compression ratio shows the same meaning 
as the zero ratio. From the definitions, they have a certain 
relation, i.e. ZR +CR = 1. If the compression ratio equals 20%, 
then the corresponding zero ratio is SO%, and vice visa. It is 
no difference which ratio is used for indicating the 
compression efficiency. In this paper, zero ratio is used. 
A reconstructed signal can be obtained from the compressed 
data, Normally, the original signal cannot be reconstructed 
perfectly with the compressed data after thresholding. 
Therefore, a reconstructed signal is an approximate signal and 
there is a compression error generally. The compression error 
is defined by the normalized mean-square error between the 
original signal and the corresponding reconstructed signal. Let 
denote the original signal and ,qn) the reconstructed 
signal, then compression error, denoted as CE,  is described 
with Equation (3). 
3) Compression Error 
(3) 
Ik(n) - x’(n) I/> 
Ik(4 lli 
CE = 
A small CE means that the data compression scheme has a 
high reconstruction quality because less distortion is created 
by the compression. Compression error is an indictor of data 
compression accuracy. 
The thresholding leads to not only the change of waveforms 
but also to the energy loss of the original signal. Another 
useful indictor of data compression accuracy is retained 
energy ratio. Retained energy ratio describes how much 
energy can still be kept in the reconstructed signal from the 
compressed data. It is defined as the energy of the 
reconstructed signal in comparison with the total energy of the 
original signal. The energy of a signal is measured with its 
norm. If original signal is denoted as x(n)  and reconstructed 
signal denoted as x’ (n ) ,  then retained energy ratio in percent, 
denotes as RER, is described with Equation (4). 
R E R I P  
4) Retained Energy Ratio 
(4) 
I-+) 112 XIOVA 
lk(n) 11* 
A higher retained energy ratio means that more information is 
kept after data compression. 
However, measuring compression efficiency or compression 
accuracy alone is not useful indicator for the quality of a 
compression scheme. High compression efficiency and high 
compression accuracy are normally competing objectives. One 
comes at the cost of the other. One should make a comparison 
between both factors and find the best compression quality for 
a given level of tolerable distortion. 
For a fixed compression scheme, a plot of compression error 
versus zero ratio is an indicator of data compression quality. 
Such a curve provides a tool for finding the best choices for a 
given level of tolerable distortion. 
Sometimes such as denoising diuing data compression, the 
perfect reconstruction of the original signal is not expected hut 
high retained energy ratio. Thus, a plot of retained energy 
ratio versus zero ratio can be i i  suitable indicator of data 
compression quality. The hest balance between two factors 
can be found through the curves. 
5) Compression Qualiq 
111. WAVELET TRANSFORM AND DATA COMPRESSION 
A .  Main Points behind Wuvelef based Data Compression 
The application in data compression is one of the most 
successful application area for the wavelet transfonn. There 
are four main points behind the data compression based on the 
wavelet transform. 
1. The discrete wavelet tr.msform is an orthonormal 
transform. Through it, a signal will be represented by 
the orthogonal wavelet coefficients so that the 
redundancy of the signal is removed. 
The wavelet transform has the so called “energy 
concentration” capabiIi5 because of the vanishing 
moments of the wavelets. 
The multiscale representation of a signal through the 
discrete wavelet transfonn makes it possible to deal 
with tbresholding in each scale for obtaining the best 
compression result. 
There are a large number of wavelet selections. It is 
possible to find a suitable one for a fixed signal to 
reach better compression quality. 
Therefore, the discrete wavelet transform provides a high 
efficiency tool and plays an increasing important role in data 
compression. 
B. Procedure of Data Compression Based on the Wavelet 
An original signal is normally purposed in the scale level 0, 
i.e. in the subspace vo. For a given scale level J ,  v, can be 
represented as the following Equation (5) by the discrete 
wavelet transform: 
This means that a signal can he accurately represented with 
the approximation coefficients in i i  suitable chosen scale level 
J (i.e. subspace v,) and the detail coefficients (i.e. wavelet 
coefficients) in each scale level j (i.e. in subspaces w 1 ’  
i s  j 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Transform 
V,=V,@W,OW, -,@...OW, (5) 
J )  through the discrete wavelet transform. 
In data compression, only the detail coefficients are 
thresholded while the approximation coefficients remain 
unchanged. The data compression procedure based on the 
wavelet contains three steps as shown also in Fig. 1: 
Decomposing: choose a suitable mother wavelet and 
a proper scale level J ; then compute the wavelet 
coefficients of the signal at each scale level j . 
Thresholding: choose a suitable threshold method 
and the corresponding threshold value; then threshold 
the wavelet coefficients. 
Reconstructing: make an inverse wavelet transform 
to reconshvct the signal with the approximation 
coefficients in the scale level J and the thresholded 
wavelet coefficients. 
The questions in practical applications are: how to choose the 
mother wavelet and the scale level, how to handle with 
thresholding, and how to reach high compression quality. 
1. 
2.  
3. 
Calculate wavelet coefficients Wx( j ,  k ) 
rn Thresholding -Reconstruction the signal x ' (  n ) 
Fig. 1. Compresion procedure 
IV. POWER SYSTEM TRANSIENTS 
The aforementioned practical application problems will be 
discussed through using the wavelet transform for the data 
compression of travelling waves. With the development of 
computer techniques, the higher and higher sampling rate can 
be in use. The fast power transients such as travelling waves 
lead to huge data amounts which should be one of the focal 
points of the data compression in power systems. For 
reflecting this, a voltage space phasor of travelling waves 
generated by a three-phase short circuit on a transmission line 
is chosen for the study, although the methods and results 
obtained here can also be used for other power system 
transients. 
The original signal (here: a voltage space phasor) shown in 
Fig. 2, which is obtained through the simulations with 
NETOMAC'. It is the voltage travelling waves on a 500kV 
transmission line during a three-phase short circuit fault. It 
contains 8000 samples in 20 ms. The sampling frequency is 
400 kHz. 
I 
0 2 4 6 8 10 11 14 16 18 20 
time (ms) 
Fig. 2. Onginal signal: voltage space phasoroftravelling waves 
V. COMPRESSION A D MOTHER WAVELET 
For comparison the compression efficiency of different 
mother wavelets, the voltage space phasor is transferred into 
three scale levels through different mother wavelets 
respectively. 
Five different mother wavelets from the Daubechies wavelet 
series are used for the study. The Daubechies wavelet series 
consists of the most useful mother wavelets in practice. These 
mother wavelets are: Haar, Db2, Dh4, Db6 and Db8, as shown 
in Fig. 3. 
.:l.oi ~~~ 
4 5  
0 2 , 6 8 1 0  U i I O  I5  
Fig 3 Different mother wavelets 
Fig. 4 displays the corresponding zero ratios in three scale 
levels. It can be seen that: 
All five wavelets reach some degree of the zero 
ratio. 
The Haar wavelet leads to the best compression 
efficiency among these five mother wavelets. 
The smoother and longer mother wavelets lead to 
worse compression efficiency for the voltage space 
phasor of travelling wave data. 
The first point above is a general result because of the 
orthogonality of the mother wavelets. The second and the 
third points are not general results. They come from the 
similarity between the voltage space phasor and the mother 
wavelets: the Haar wavelet has a similar sudden change as the 
voltage space phasor while the smoother longer mother 
wavelets become more and more different with the voltage 
space phasor. Therefore, the general result is that the more 
* 
similarity between the mother wavelet and the signal is, the 
better the compression efficiency. 
Therefore, the compression efficiency is related to the mother 
wavelet as well as the nature of the signals. For this fixed 
voltage space phasor of travelling waves, the most suitable 
mother wavelet is the Haar wavelet. 
80 .  - 
0 60- 
E .- 
Haar 
Db2 
DM 
Db6 
VI. COMPRESSION AND SCALE LEVEL 
From Fig. 4, it can he also noticed that the wavelet transform 
with three scale levels reaches a higher compression 
efficiency than with one scale level. In principle, the more 
scale levels are used, the higher the efficiency. 
However, the energy cannot be centralized endlessly so that 
there is always a limit scale level for the wavelet transform. 
Beyond this level, the degree of the zero ratio cannot be 
increased. And the increase of the scale levels means the more 
calculation and longer computing time. Therefore, a proper 
scale level should be chosen based on the above 
considerations. 
IO0 
80 - E 60 Haar wavelet 
'3 
2 40 
5 20 
0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  
Scale level 
Fig 5. Compression efficiency of m l e  level 
Fig. 5 displays the compression efficiency of different scale 
levels with the Haar wavelet. It can be seen that: 
More scale levels correspond to higher zero ratios, 
i.e. higher compression efficiency. 
The first three scale levels are sensitive for the zero 
ratio. 
After the third scale level, the zero ratio increases 
very slowly when the scale level increases. 
Therefore, the most suitable scale level is 3 for the data 
compression of the voltage space phasor of travelling waves. 
- 
In general based on OUT experiencm, the scale levels should be 
limited to 5 levels since more levels bring benefits hardly. The 
typical scale level is 3. 
VII. COMPREsSION AND THRESHOLDING 
The data compression uses the hard thresholding. There are 
two approaches available for the choice of thresholding 
values. The first is based on keeping the wavelet coefficients 
with larger absolute values. In this case, a global threshold can 
be set, thus only one parameter needs to be selected. The 
second approach applies the level-dependent thresholds. In 
this case, each scale level needs one threshold and the number 
of thresholds corresponds to the sc.ale levels. 
For studying the influence of the thresholding on the data 
compression, the voltage space phasor of the travelling waves 
is decomposed into three scale levels with the Haar wavelet. 
The absolute maximum values of wavelet coefficients on three 
levels are 167.24, 186.33 and 131.72 respectively. They are 
not so much different so that the global thresholding is used. 
The global threshold is set according to the maximum ahsolute 
value of all the wavelet coefficienis, i.e.: 
Where q denotes the global threshold, Wx(j ,k)  presents the 
wavelet coefficients of a signal x ( n ) ,  and is a constant 
(0 5 fi 5 I ). Based on many tests and simulations, the constant 
fi  can be 0.85-0.95 and the typical value is 0.9. 
1 1 = ( 1 - p ) x m a x { l ~ x ( j , k ) l }  ( 5 )  
W 
,I , , , j .  
0 I 10 IS 20 23 30 31 
Thr&old value 
Fig 6 Zero ratio and threshold 
Fig. 6 shows the relation between the zero ratio and the 
threshold. It can be seen that: 
A large threshold leads to a high zero ratio. 
The zero ratio is very sensitive to the value of 
threshold when the threshold is smaller than 2% the 
maximum wavelet coefficients, as shown at point 1, 
This means that there arm2 a lot of sub-zero (close to 
zero) elements after the wavelet transform so that a 
small threshold can win a high compression 
efficiency. 
The zero ratio is sensitive to the value of threshold 
when the threshold is smaller than 10% of the 
maximum wavelet coefficients, as shown at point 2. 
Namely, the zero ratio increases with the threshold 
* 
increasing in this section. This is the reason that the 
typical value of the constant 
The zero ratio increases gradually slowly and then 
nearly stays steady when the threshold becomes 
larger and larger, as shown at point 3. There is a 
limit for increasing the zero ratio through increasing 
the threshold, e.g. ZR = 87.5% in this case. 
On the other hand, a large threshold is normally companied 
with a high compression error. Therefore, for each threshold 
approach, there is always a comparison between the zero ratio 
and the compression quality. 
Fig. I shows the plot of the zero ratio versus the compression 
error. It can be seen that: 
The increase of the zero ratio causes the increase of 
the compression error. 
Below point 1, the compression error is quite small 
(here less than 0.05%). The zero ratio increases very 
much with a small increase in the compression error 
in this section. It corresponds to a small threshold, 
little compression error but high zero ratio so that 
should be used fully for the data compression. 
Between point 1 and point 3, the zero ratio becomes 
saturated with the increase of the compression error. 
It has no meaning to let the compression error 
increase when the increase of the zero ratio becomes 
too slow. Therefore, a good balance between the two 
factors can he found in this section. 
Based on the above analysis, the point 2 can he a good choice. 
In this point, the threshold is ahout 10% of the maximum 
wavelet coefficient, the zero ratio reaches 86.92% with only 
0.45% of compression error. 
is 0.9. 
I) 0.5 I I 5  
Compresslo" emor ( 7 0 )  
Fig. 7 Zero ratio and compression error 
Fig. 8 shows the reconstructed signal from the compressed 
data with the above choice of the threshold, where the original 
signal is displayed with dot line for a comparison. One part of 
the signals is zoomed out shown in down-left. This part is 
displayed again in down-right after shifting the original signal 
for a clear show. It can be seen that the reconstructed signal 
approximates the original signal well. 
The difference between the reconstructed signal and the 
original signal is shown in Fig. 9. It can he seen that the 
difference is a random series and its average equals nearly to 
zero (3.05e-7). This means that the lost information through 
the data compression has the characteristic of white noise so 
that the data compression brings little influence on the signal 
pattern and even leads to a good filtering function. Therefore, 
the original signal can be compressed with high compression 
efficiency and high compression accuracy through the wavelet 
transform. 
\ &- 
Fig 8. Reconsrmcted signal and original si@ 
samples 
Fig 9. Difference bebeen recansmcted signal and onginal signal 
VIII. COMPRESSION AND DENOISING 
As mentioned above, the lost information through the data 
compression is just like white noise. Thus, a logical result is to 
use the data compression for denoising. For studying the 
denoising effect during the data compression, the voltage 
space phasor is mixed with 15% white noise, as shown in 
Fig.10. 
In this case, it is better to use the retained energy ratio as the 
indicator of compression accuracy because the perfect 
reconstruction is not expected. A plot of the retained energy 
ratio versus the zero ratio is then the suitable indicator of 
compression quality. 
Fig. II shows the relationship of the retained energy ratio 
with the zero ratio. It can be seen that: 
The increase of the zero ratio causes the decrease of 
the retained energy. 
Below point 1 (here: ZR = 39% and E R  = loo%), 
it reaches the ideal situation: the increase of the zero 
ratio causes the retained energy ratio remaining the 
same. However, the zero ratio obtained in this 
section is too low to be taken. 
* 
Atter point 3 (here: ZR = 87.49% and RER = 
99.88%), the zero ratio becomes saturated with the 
decrease of the retained energy. It has no meaning to 
let the retained energy decrease without the increase 
ofthe zero ratio. 
The good choice should be found between point 1 
and point 3. When the retained energy is in the given 
tolerable level, the possible high zero ratio is 
preferred. 
Based on the above analysis, the point 2 can be a suitable 
choice for this data compression, where the retained energy 
ratio is 99.91%, the zero ratio is 87.31% and the 
corresponding threshold is 29.78. 
Fig. 12 shows the reconstructed signal from the compressed 
data. It can be seen that the reconstructed signal contains 
much less noise and the pattern of the original signal is well 
kept. 
Therefore, a good denoising effect can be obtained during the 
data compression. This is because the wavelet coefficients 
caused by noise are generally small and mostly centralized in 
high frequency bands, i.e. the first several scale levels, so that 
any thresholding can reach the denoising to a certain degree. 
Voltage mace vhawr wiL 15% white noise kv) 
I 
0 ,ma 2 m  ,Ma 4wo 5wo Mao ,ma 8- 
Samples 
Fig. 10 Signal mixed withnoise 
IW I 
0 IOW 2wo ,OW 40M lM0 6ma ,MO *WO 
sampl<:s 
Fig. I2 Demising during data compression 
IX. CONCLUSION 
Large amount data should be collected, transferred and stored 
for analysing, supervising and controlling the performance of 
power systems. The capability to compress the power system 
data is highly desirable. The wav& transform leads to a new 
data compression approach. In this paper, the wavelet 
transform is used for the data compression of fast power 
transient (voltage space phasor of travelling waves). Through 
the analysis of the relations between compression efficiency 
and mother wavelets, between ,compression efficiency and 
scale levels, between compression efficiency and threshold 
value, as well as the denoising effect during the data 
compression, it shows that the data compression with high 
compression efficiency, high compression accuracy, high 
compression quality and good derioising effect can be reached 
through the wavelet transform. Therefore, the wavelet 
transform can bring remarkable advantages to all fields in 
which big amounts of data are processed like fault recording 
and SCADAEMSDMS systems. 
X. REFERENCES 
[ I ]  Bingham, R. P., Kreiss, D. and .Santoso, S.: Advantages in Data 
Reduction Techniques for Power Quality Instrumentation, Proceedings 
of the Third European Power Quality Conference, Bremen, Nov. 1995. 
Gross, U,: Datenaukreitung ZUT Stirrvngsablaufanalyse in elektnschen 
Enagieversargungsmzen, Uni-Damistadter DiSsertatioR 1994. 
Shang, L. Herold, G., Jaeger, J . ,  Krebs, R. and Kumar, A.: High-Speed 
Fault Identification and Protection for HVDC Line Using Wavelet 
Techniques, Proceeding of IEEE P P l ,  Pono, Sept. 2001. 
Santoso, S., Fellow, E. J. and Grady, W. M.: Power Quality Disturbance 
Data Compression Using Wavelet Timsform Methods, IEEE Tans. an 
Power Delivery. Vol. 12, No. 3, July 1997, pp. 1250-1256. 
S. Mallat, A Wovelet Tour of Si-/ Processing, Academic Press, 1998, 
pp. 165.198. 
Shang, L.: Wavelet Transform Applications in Power Systems, Uni- 
Erlangen Dissertation, 2002. 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[ 5 ]  
[6] 
Fig. 1 I Zero ratio and retained energy 
