KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA 
Architecture for Information Assurance Decision Support 
Systems based on Integration of Knowledge Intensive 
Multi-Agent Systems 
Peter P. Chen 
Computer Science Dept., Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803 
pchen@Jsu.edu, www.csc.lsu.edu/-chen 
Abstract-This paper proposes the architecture for 
integration of information assurance, knowledge base, and 
information fusion with the main purpose for understanding 
forensics and digital evidence.. This architecture will be 
very useful in several applications: ( I )  identification of 
important so f iare  modules needed for a comprehensive 
decision support system for information assurance (or other 
functionalities), (2) a “roadmap” for  planning and 
monitoring R&D activities in information technologv, (3) a 
big picture (bird-eye view) of various R&D program 
activities in major funding agencies (such as DARPA. 
AFOSR. ONR. ARO, NSF, etc.). 
1. INTRODUCTION 
“Information Assurance” is a set of operations that defend 
the global information enterprise through employment of 
protect, detect, assess and respond capabilities, and is 
accomplished by ensuring availability, integrity, 
authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation of data 
and information as it is created, transferred, processed and 
utilized. In order to counter the effect of cyber adversaries 
taking advantage of open-source/publicly accessible attack 
tools for detrimental purposes, new architectures for 
intelligent and well integrated decision support and semi- 
autonomous smart response systems are needed. 
KIMAS 2003, October 1-3.2003, Boslon. MA, USA 
Copyrignl o-7803.7958.603151 7 00 0 2003 IEEE 
In this paper, a comprehensive architecture will be presented 
that integrates many important technical areas including 
information assurance, information fusion, and knowledge- 
based techniques. Some of the techniques developed in 
recent research programs such as Composable High 
Assurance Trusted Systems (CHATS), Organically Assured 
and Survivable Information Systems (OASIS), integrating 
network management and intrusion detection capabilities ( 
Cybenvolf), Evidence Extraction and Link Discovery 
(EELD), New Generation DBMS (Genesis), and Cognitive 
Information Processing will be incorporated in the 
architecture. 
We will present the 3-tier architecture. The first tier consists 
of hardwarelsoftware sensors, agents, network management 
tools, and low-level intrusion detection systems (IDS’S) 
monitoring the activities of computer networks for 
information attacks. At the second tier, the “Knowledge- 
based Information Fusion” capability takes the data from the 
various databases to perform functions such as extracting 
information, integration of information, and making 
inferences from a large amount of data. It also includes 
algorithms and attempts to draw Entity-Relationship (ER) 
diagrams from a given collection of data. Third tier modules 
help commanders, analysts, and policy makers make 
decisions regarding defending against and launching 
information attacks, various courses of action and effects- 
based operations (EBO) to decide what operations are 
needed to achieve certain effects in a given situation. 
Supporting this overall decision support goal includes a set 
of knowledge intensive multi-agent systems. We believe the 
proposed architecture will be very helpful in the design and 
implementation of the next generation of information 
assurance decision support systems by integrating a variety 
of dataiknowledge bases and tools. 
542 
2. WHAT IS INFORMATION ASSURANCE 
Definitions of Information Assurance 
“Information Assurance” is a set of operations that defend 
the global information enterprise through employment of 
Protect, Detect, Assess and Respond capabilities. This is 
accomplisbed by ensuring availability, integrity, 
authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation (based 
on DODD S-3600.1 & AFDD 2-5). 
Value to the Warfighters 
Information Assurance is very important to warfighters 
because it provides: 
Information superiority through assured 
Accurate, trusted, reliable warfighter information 
Survivable information systems and networks 
information operations. 
Some Information Attack Statistics 
Here are some interesting statistical data about recent 
information attacks: ~ ~~ 
It is estimated that no more than 10% of the 
information attacks are detected. 
The estimated cost of the Distributed Denial of 
Service attack happened in February 2000 is over 
$1.2 billions. 
Near 1 million computers are affected by the “Code 
Red” virus, and the estimated cost is over $2.4 
billions. 
In one particular estimate/data-set, there are 
approximately 4,000 denial-of-service attacks per 
week. 
Even though the sophistication of the attacks 
becomes higher as time goes by, the knowledge 
level to initiate some of the attacks actually comes 
downbecause the availability of increasingly 
sonhisticated attack tools. 
A more recent‘survey of cyber attack data can be found in [ 1 
The Need for Integration of Information Assurance, 
Information Fusion, and Knowledge-based Techniques 
In many research organizations, there are research groups 
focusing on (but not limited to) the following three 
important areas: information assurance, information fusion, 
and knowledge-based techniques. We believe it is crucial 
that these three groups should work closely with each other 
because these three areas are related to each other as shown 
in Figure 1. Note that all these three groupdareas need to 
interact with database and knowledge bases (DKB) to 
perform their functions. In other words, D/KB is the 
necessary core or foundation for each of these three 
functions and the integration of them. 
Figum 3. The Need to Integrate Knovkdge-based Tsshntques, 
Information ASSYRIICII. and Information Fusion 
Note: DKB stands brDaWKmvkdge Bare 
The Need for an Integratinn Architecture 
All the research programs mentioned in the section above 
are somewhat independent. However, if we look at deeper 
on what these programs intended to do, we can find some 
common threads. What is needed is the architecture of a 
comprehensive system that integrates different technologies 
including the technologies in the three important areas 
mentioned above: information assurance, information 
fusion, and knowledge-based techniques. 
KlMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA 
543 
3. ARCHITECTURE FOR A DECISION SUPPORT 
SYSTEM INTEGRATING I FORMATION 
ASSURANCE, INFORMATION FUSION, AND 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED TECHNIQUES 
We have developed the architecture for a decision support 
system that integrates information assurance, information 
fusion, and knowledge-based techniques. This architecture 
is illustrated in Figure 2. For the time being, we are focusing 
on building a decision support system for “Information 
assurance;” however, the architecture proposed here is very 
general and can be used for systems for other focuses or 
orientations. 
At the bottom of Figure 2, there should be a module of 
hardware/software that consists of hardwarehftware 
sensors, agents, and low-level intrusion detection systems 
(IDS’S) that monitors the activities of computer networks for 
information attacks. The data collected from the computer 
network will be fed into several databases: 
Network and caDabilitv database: it keeps track of 
the capabilities and configurations of all the 
computer network of interest in friendly or hostile 
locations. 
Post-attack database: It keeps track of the past data 
on information attacks either at this site or other 
sites. The data include the traces of the attacks and 
the assessments of damages. 
Intelligence database: It keeps track of the 
intelligence data including potential hackers, 
hostile organizations, attack habits and methods. 
KlMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA 
Figure 2. Architecture of A Decision Support System for 
Information Assurance Using Knowledge-based Information Fusion 
Advanced I 1;; 
Situafion Awareness 
Real-time data sources: It provides real-time data 
feeds on what is happening in its own computer 
network and other sites. 
In the middle of Figure 2, there is a large comprehensive 
module called, “Knoweledge-based Information Fusion,” 
that takes the data from various databases mentioned above 
and a knowledeehase to perfom various functions including 
the following: 
Information Extraction: This module extracts the 
relevant information from various data sources. 
sources. A framework and the algorithm to 
analyze this problem can he found in 2. 
sensorslsources give you different data values 
about the same objecthack, which one do you 
believe and how to you choose from them. This 
module should be able to assist you to make 
decision in such a situation 2. 
Link Analvsis: This module discovers the linkages 
(relationships) among data (entities). As 
demonstrated in the comnuter software nrototwes 
Conflict Resolution: When different 
.. 
Vata Reduction and lnle~ralion: This module 
reduce5 the hrge amount of data intn rc1ev;int form 
and formats. I t  also intcgrates data in various 
forms and formats. 
Data Mining: This modulu analyzes large amuunt 
of data to deduce the hidden relationships of data 
Correlation Analysis: This module discovers the 
functional relationships between data. 
Credibilitv Assessment: This module assesses the 
credibility and validity of data from different 
developed in several groups i n  the DARPA‘s 
l:.ELD (Evidence Extraction and Link Discovery) 
programs, the dgorithms attumpts to draw an 
Entity-Relationship (ER) diagram [3 ,2 ,4 -8 ]  from a 
given collection of data. 
544 
. . .  
Reasoning: This module derives conclusions and 
consequences from a given set of inputs based on a 
set of reasoning rules and procedures. 
Please note that besides various data sources and a 
knowledge base mentioned earlier, this comprehensive 
module, “Knowledge-based Information Fusion,” also 
interact in both directions with a collection of DattemS 
and semantic models. Knowledge Intensive “multi- 
agent system” could be very useful in the construction 
of the “Knowledge-based Information Fusion,” module. 
How to help the commanders, analysts, and policy 
makers to make decisions? In order to do so, we need 
other modules: 
Advanced Intrusion Detection Svstem (IDS): This 
is a high-level software module that does more 
sophisticated intrusion detection. 
Vulnerahilitv & Risk Analvsis: This module 
identities the vulnerability of the computer network 
and the level of risks under different types of 
attacks. 
Damage Assessment: This module assesses the 
amount of damages for an information attack, no 
matter whether the attack happens in the past, now, 
or in the future. 
- Non-Conventional Techniaues: This module 
consists of different non-traditional techniques for 
information assurance. For example, it may 
include treating a computer network as a bio- 
system and the information attacks as some kinds 
of viruses or diseases. 
I A  Metrics and Svstems Analvsis: This module 
provides a set of metrics to measure the efficiency 
and effectiveness of information assurance system, 
systems analysis techniques. 
Defense &Attack Tools: This module is a 
collection of tools for defending information 
attacks and for launching information attacks. 
Effect-Based Oneration (EBO) Tools: This module 
interacts with external environments such as Air, 
Space, and Information to decide the operations 
needed to achieve certain effects in a given 
situation. 
Course-of-Action: This module analyzes the 
situation and presents a set of courses of actions. 
Situation Awareness & Earlv Warning: This 
module takes inputs from various modules such as 
Advanced IDS, Vulnerability & Risk Analysis, 
Damage Assessment, Non-Conventional 
Techniques, and IA Metrics & Analysis. It 
evaluates the options provided by the Course-of- 
Actions and issues instructions to EBO tools and 
Defense & Attack tools to appropriate course of 
actions. 
Benefits and Applications of the Proposed Architecture 
The architecture described above will he very useful in 
several applications: 
Identification of important software modules 
needed for a comprehensive decision support 
system for information assurance (or other 
functionalities), 
A “map” for planning and monitoring R&D 
activities in information technology, 
A big picture (bird-eye view) of various R&D 
program activities in major funding agencies (such 
as DARPA, AFOSR, ONR, ARO,NSF, etc.). 
545 
KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA 
ACKNOWLEGMENT 
4. CONCLUSION 
Information assurance (IA) becomes a very critical function 
for government agencies and commercial companies, 
particularly after the 9-1 1 attack. Information attacks 
become more sophisticated in the past decade. In order to 
defend information attacks, we need better forensic tools 
and an integrated approach to information assurance, 
particularly the integration of information assurance with 
information fusion (IF) and knowledge-based (KB) 
techniques. In this report, we have reported two important 
tasks a survey of forensic tools and an architecture of a 
decision-support system that integrates IA with IF and KE3 
techniques. 
We have also presented a comprehensive architecture that 
integrates many important areas of R&D activities including 
information assurance, information fusion, and howledge- 
based techniques. We believe the proposed architecture can 
be very helpful to the managers, researchers, and developers 
in the IT areas. Specifically, the following future R& D 
directions should be very interesting: 
Develop further this architecture diagram (Figure 
2) to incorporate same omitted but somewhat 
crucial technologies. 
Compare and complement previous work in C4ISR 
architecture [9, 10 
Develop the architecture for major areas outside of 
the information assurance area. Perhaps, each area 
bas a diagram similar to but different from Figure 
2. 
Try to map the existing and announced DARPA, 
AFOSR, or AFRL programs into the modules of 
the architecture diagram in Figure 2 (and its 
revisioniextension), 
Incorporate this architecture diagram into the long- 
range plans (such as 10-year plan) of AFRL 
research activities. 
Attempt to implement software prototypes of some 
ofthe modules specified in this architecture 
diagram. For example, the information validity 
assessment software prototype (shown in Figure 3) 
implemented on two Oracle 8i DBMS's by the 
author's research group in another project 
[ChenOlb] can be extended to this architecture. 
Furthemore, we can try to integrate some of the 
prototypes developed in DARPAIAFOSFUAFRL 
programs to demonstrate the feasibility ofthis 
architecture. 
The author would like to thank Ray Liuzzi, Joe Giordano, 
and John Graniero of AFRL/IF for their excellent comments 
and suggestions. This research was supported in part by 
AFOSR Grant No. F49620-01-1-0264, F49620-03-1-0239, 
F49620-03-1-0238, F49620-03-1-0241, and AFRL Contract 
No. F30602-02-MV021. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
2. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
CSI, Computer Crime and Security Survey. 2003. 
P.P. Chen, "Information Validity Assessment in 
Integrating Heterogeneous Data Sources," in Proc. 
of 4th Internafional Conference on Information 
Fusion, Montreal, Canada, 2001. 
P.P. Chen, "Entity-Relationship Model: Toward a 
Unified View of Data," ACM Transactions on 
Database Systems, I ( ] ) ,  March 1976. 
P.P. Chen, "Reconstructing the Information 
Warfare Attack Scenario," Proc. of Infowar 
Symposium, Washington, D.C., May 1998. 
P.P. Chen, "ReconostNcting the Information 
Warfare Attack Scenario (slides only)," in Proc. of 
Infowar Symposium, Washington, D.C., 1998. 
P.P. Chen, Akoka, J . ,  Kangassolo, H., Thalheim, 
B., ed. Conceptual Modeling: Current Issues and 
Future Directions. Lecturing Notes in Computer 
Science. Vol. No. 1565, Springer-Verlag. 1998. 
P.P. Chen, Embley, D.W., Kouloumdjian, J., 
Liddle, S.W., Roddick, J.F., ed. Advances in 
Conceptual Modeling. Lecturing Notes in 
Computer Science. Val. No. 1727, Springer- 
Verlag: Berlin. 1999. 
P.P. Chen, "Entity-Relationship Modeling: 
Historical Events, Future Trends, and Lessons 
Learned," in Software Pioneers: Contributions to 
Software Engineering, M. Broy, Denert, E., Editor. 
Springer-Verlag: Berlin, NYC2002. 
A.H. Levis, Wagenhals, Lee W., "C4ISR 
Architectures: I. Developing a Process for C4ISR 
Architeciure Design," Systems Engineering, 3(4): 
p. 225-247,2000, 
L.W. Wagenhals, Insub Shin, Daesik Kim, 
Alexander H. Levis, "C41SR Architectures: 11. A 
Structured Analysis Approach for Architecture 
Design," Systems Engineering, 3(4): p. 248-287, 
2000. 
546 
