 Continuous Audit:  The Motivations, Benefits, Problems, and Challenges 
Identified by Partners of a Big 4 Accounting Firm. 
 
 
DeWayne Searcy 
University of Miami 
dsearcy@miami.edu  
 
Jon Woodroof 
University of Tennessee 
jwoodroof@utk.edu 
 
Bruce Behn 
University of Tennessee 
bbhen@utk.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Early efforts regarding research on a new area of 
interest are, by nature, exploratory.  Before theoretical 
models can be built and before meaningful empirical 
research can be performed, a careful process of 
identifying the appropriate research questions and 
problems must be undertaken.  This is the current state 
of research regarding the relatively new area of the 
continuous audit (CA).  Though the concepts of CA 
have been around for almost a decade, and recent 
advances have made the technologies both widely 
available and very affordable, firms have yet to make 
significant steps toward implementation.  Thus, there is 
a need for exploratory surveys of key audit personnel 
in charge of providing assurance services for major 
clients to bring to light the issues regarding technology, 
people, and processes with which auditors and their 
audit clients are wrestling.  This paper discusses the 
results of a survey of the U.S. assurance partners of a 
Big 4 accounting firm. 
The objective of the survey was to get the 
partners’ perceptions and thoughts on the viability of 
the continuous auditing, the current state of the CA in 
the audit environment, the impact that CA 
implementation might have, and the various roadblocks 
to CA implementation.  In addition, various 
demographic data was collected.  So that the open-
ended questions of the survey instrument could be 
systematically categorized and analyzed, and to 
minimize interpretation bias, QSR NUD-IST© 
(Nonumerical Unstructured Data-Indexing, Searching, 
and Theorizing) Version 4 software was used to code 
responses and capture emergent themes.  
The process we have is good but is 
designed for the annual audit…  We 
will need the ability to push a button 
at any point in time and have the 
system summarize for the 
engagement team process issues 
identified to-date that can lead to 
risk that the financial statements are 
inaccurate, rather than rely only on a 
traditional review of workpapers, 
manual summarizations of issues and 
follow-up.   
[We need to be able to] use 
technology to actually audit as 
opposed to using technology to 
automate manual auditing 
procedures. 
These quotes were provided to the authors by Big 
4 audit partners who see a future where new 
information technologies enable more frequent web-
based financial reporting and the emergence of the 
continuous audit (CA).  The purpose of this paper is to 
present the results of this survey, revealing the current 
state of the CA and the hurdles to overcome in its 
implementation. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 Continuous Audit 
According to the CICA/AICPA Research Report a 
CA is, “a methodology that enables independent 
auditors to provide written assurance on a subject 
matter using a series of auditors’ reports issued 
simultaneously with, or a short period of time after, the 
occurrence of events underlying the subject matter 
[1].” 
To accomplish that feat, a CA relies heavily on 
information technology.  As one Big 4 partner 
commented, “As we evolve toward [continuous] audits, 
the use of technology tools that assist with auditing 
through our clients’ systems will become increasingly 
important.”  While the concept of continuous auditing 
is over a decade old, the rapid advancements in 
technology have now made continuous auditing 
feasible [2,3].  Examples of some of the technological 
advancements include broad bandwidth, web 
application server technology (e.g., Macromedia’s 
Cold Fusion), web scripting solutions (e.g., Netscape’s 
JavaScript), web services technology, and ubiquitous 
database management systems (e.g., Oracle, Access) 
with standard connectivity (ODBC). 
A CA leverages technology and open database 
architecture to enable auditors to monitor their clients’ 
systems over the Internet using sensors and digital 
agents.  Any discrepancies between the client’s records 
and the rules defined in the digital agents are 
transmitted via email to the client and the auditor.  At 
that point the auditor can determine the appropriate 
action to take.  For example, a digital agent performing 
analytical procedures on a client’s accounts would 
email the auditor an exception report on those accounts 
that fluctuate outside the parameters defined in the 
digital agent (e.g. accounts receivable is significantly 
higher than prior year).  But the CA does not stop 
there.  Once an account has been triggered, the digital 
agent moves to the transactional level to identify the 
transaction(s) causing the problem (e.g., an 
exceptionally large sale posted on December 25th).  
The details are emailed to the auditor.  In this example, 
once the transaction is identified, a digital agent would 
send a confirmation to the customer to verify the sale.  
After the customer verifies the details of the sale, the 
auditor receives the confirmation via email. 
Real-time Reporting Requirement 
It is important to note that providing continuous 
assurance requires that the reports on which the 
assurance is provided must be available in real-time, 
and real-time reporting requires that all information 
reflected in the reports (including estimates and market 
values) be collected in real time.  This is a critical 
criterion.  Although technologies are currently 
available that enable real-time reporting of financial 
information, without a commitment by companies to 
implement these technologies and make key financial 
figures available to auditors in real-time, a continuous 
audit is not feasible. 
The CA debate has made a recent shift.  In the 
past, CA has focused primarily on technological issues.  
What is currently being debated is not “Can we do it?”, 
but “Will we do it?”.  Is there a demand for this 
product, and, if there is, is anybody willing to pay for 
it?  Will auditors and their clients be willing to retool 
so that they are competent utilizing the available 
technologies?  Can we define procedures and processes 
that will make the move to the CA environment 
manageable for both large and small firms? 
Assuming the answer to these questions is “yes”, 
when and how CPA firms move toward offering the 
service is still unsure.   In the current environment, 
there may be multiple forces driving the adoption and 
implementation of the CA concept.  These would 
include 1) the market, 2) the government, and 3) 
companies themselves. 
CPA firms who currently provide auditing services 
may soon have to move toward some form of 
continuous auditing to compete in the marketplace.  
This is especially true for firms auditing public 
companies.  As one Big 4 assurance partner stated, 
My clients continue to read about the 
leading edge companies and their 
rapid reporting capabilities.  I think 
the driver for these discussions is the 
thought that some day soon the 
market will expect much more rapid 
reporting from the best performing 
companies.  The benefit of this 
information being audited is the 
integrity of the data.  I believe this 
will be a requirement in the very 
near future. 
In the aftermath of the Enron hearings and 
investigations, it may be the government that makes a 
push for more rapid reporting.  A recent Associated 
Press wire (March 7, 2002, by Scott Lindlaw) reported 
that the White House has proposed that investors be 
given quarterly access in “plain English'' to corporate 
information needed to judge a company's financial 
performance and risks.  The White House appears to 
agree that investors can benefit from more frequent 
reporting.   
Notwithstanding the driving forces coming from 
the market and the government, companies themselves 
may adopt CA as a tool to help manage their 
reputations.  The CA may be equally as beneficial to 
companies who enjoy a good reputation and want to 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
enhance it as it as it would be to those companies 
whose reputations have been damaged by recent 
events.  The increase reporting of a company’s 
information should benefit the company.  A company 
increasing its reporting cycle should reduce uncertainty 
and enhance investors’ perceptions of the company.  
The audit of the more frequent information will ensure 
“the integrity of the data.”  
Some form of CAs may be a required in the future 
for CPA firms auditing public companies.  What is 
more, CPA firms that currently audit private companies 
can also benefit from offering CAs.  CPA firms must 
continuously seek more efficient methods of 
conducting audits that allow their scarce resources to 
be utilized in the most cost-effective and value-
maximizing manner. 
Evolutionary Stages of CA 
Because of the requirement that all information 
reflected in financial reports be collected in real time, 
CAs will not (indeed cannot) be implemented quickly.  
It will take several years for the CA to be widely 
implemented.  We expect that efficiencies made 
available by CA technology will gradually penetrate 
the existing audit environment rather than revolutionize 
it.  Evolution of the CA should follow the following 
stages.  In the initial stage, CA technologies will be 
used to reduce the amount of work done between the 
year-end and the audit report.  In the second stage, 
these efficiencies will be applied to facilitate the audit 
of a quarterly close.  In the final stage of CA evolution, 
the granularity will continue to increase until audited 
financial reports are able to be generated on a 
continuous, real-time basis.  
What will cause the adoption of this technology to 
be evolutionary rather than revolutionary are various 
impediments to CA implementation regarding people, 
process, and technology.  These impediments were 
identified and discussed by the partners responding to 
our survey.  Along with these impediments, partners 
discussed the viability of the CA, the current state of 
the CA in the audit environment, the impact that CA 
implementation is expected to have.  In addition, 
various demographic data was collected.    
Survey 
The survey was administered over the web.  The 
address of the web survey was embedded in an email 
that was sent to all U.S. assurance partners of a Big 4 
accounting firm (The survey was sent out in September 
of 2001, before the Enron scandal).  It was sent to 
approximately 500 partners; 217 partners responded to 
the survey.  The survey itself had two parts.  Part I of 
the survey consisted of 14 questions measuring the 
partners’ perceptions about the potential value and 
impact of a CA, as well as the content of any 
partner/client discussions on CA (5 point Likert scale 
used).  
Part II of the survey collected some demographic 
data on a client selected by each partner, asked about 
the timing of engagement work, and had the partners 
identify and discuss various impediments to CA 
implementation in the areas of people, process, and 
technology.  So that the open-ended questions of Part II 
of the survey instrument could be systematically 
categorized and analyzed, and to minimize 
interpretation bias, QSR NUD-IST© (Nonumerical 
Unstructured Data-Indexing, Searching, and 
Theorizing) Version 4 software was used to code 
responses and capture emergent themes. 
Survey Results 
The remainder of the paper presents the results of 
the survey.  These results will be discussed in six 
sections:  1) predictions about capital markets, 2) 
discussions with clients, 3) user expectations, 4) 
impediments to CA implementation, and 5) solutions to 
impediments. 
1. Predictions about Capital Markets 
 
Capital markets are moving towards a 
continuous reporting model. 
Response % n 
Strongly 
Disagree 
7.37% 16 
Disagree 0.46% 1 
Not Sure 29.49% 64 
Agree 53.00% 115 
Strongly Agree 9.68% 21 
Capital Markets are moving towards a 
continuous assurance model. 
Response % n 
Strongly 
Disagree 
17.97% 39 
Disagree 0.46% 1 
Not Sure 48.39% 105 
Agree 29.49% 64 
Strongly Agree 3.69% 8 
Table 1:  Predictions about Capital Markets 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
According to Table 1, when asked if capital 
markets are moving towards a continuous reporting 
model, less than 8 percent of the partners surveyed 
disagreed.  And when asked if capital markets are 
moving towards a continuous assurance model, 
although almost half were not sure, only 18 percent of 
the partners surveyed disagreed.  Responses to these 
two questions indicate that assurance partners believe 
that capital markets will be expecting new reporting 
and audit models in the near future. 
2. Discussions with Clients 
 
Have you had a discussion with any of your 
clients about ways to reduce the lag between the 
end of the period and the issuance of the audit 
report?  
Response % n 
Yes 78.34% 170 
No 21.66% 47 
Have you had a discussion with any of your 
clients about audited quarterly financial 
reports? 
Response % N 
Yes 16.59% 36 
No 83.41% 181 
Have you had a discussion with any of your 
clients about rendering opinions on information 
other than financial statements? 
Response % N 
Yes 23.04% 50 
No 76.96% 167 
Have you had a discussion with any of your 
clients about providing assurance on real-time 
reports of any nature? 
Response % N 
Yes 5.99% 13 
No 94.01% 204 
Table 2:  Discussions with Clients 
As can be seen in Table 2, over 78 percent of the 
partners indicated they have had discussions with some 
of their clients regarding ways to reduce the lag 
between the end of the period and the issuance of the 
audit report (i.e., audit report lag).  Of those partners 
answering in the affirmative, almost 36 percent 
indicated the discussions centered on shifting more 
work to interim dates and accelerating a hard close to 
earlier months.  Other discussions held with clients 
varied from general discussions on joint actions aimed 
at reducing the audit report lag to ways of accelerating 
the earnings sign-off.  
Just over 16.5 percent of partners said they had 
discussion with their clients regarding auditing 
quarterly financial statements.  One partner stated that 
there was an interest in audited quarterly financial 
statements from larger institutions.  Another mentioned 
the clients probably believe the firm audits the quarters 
anyway.  When asked if they have had discussions with 
their clients on rendering opinions on information other 
than financial statements, 23 percent said they had.  
According to the partners, the types of information 
their clients are interested in having an opinion given 
on are: 
• Non-financial and financial information 
reported more frequently than financial 
statements. 
• Compliance with established procedures, 
controls, or policies of outside agencies. 
• Performance metrics 
In summary, there has been some discussion with 
clients on providing assurance services beyond the 
traditional audit; however, the move toward real-time 
reporting has received scant attention.  While 78 
percent of the partners have had some form of 
discussions with clients regarding reducing the lag 
between the end of the period and the audit report date, 
the discussions are anchored in the traditional audit 
model mindset.  In other words, the bulk of the 
discussions are on the audit team performing 
traditional audit procedures at earlier dates in the year.  
The objective is to shift more work during the period 
instead of after the period end.  The same audit is 
performed, just earlier.  While over 33 percent of the 
partners surveyed believe that capital markets are 
moving towards a continuous assurance model (Table 
1), less than 6 percent of the partners indicated they 
had discussions with any of their clients about 
providing assurance of real-time reports of any nature.  
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 3. User Expectations 
 
Continuous auditing on continuous reporting 
will increase users’ expectations about auditors’ 
ability/responsibility to report going concern 
problems more timely. 
Response % n 
Strongly 
Disagree 
4.15% 9 
Disagree 0.92% 2 
Not Sure 10.14% 22 
Agree 55.30% 120 
Strongly Agree 29.49% 64 
Continuous auditing on continuous reporting 
will increase users’ expectations about auditors’ 
ability/responsibility to detect fraud. 
Response % n 
Strongly 
Disagree 
10.60% 23 
Disagree 0.46% 1 
Not Sure 23.04% 50 
Agree 49.77% 108 
Strongly Agree 16.13% 35 
Continuous auditing on continuous reporting 
will increase users’ expectations about auditors’ 
ability/responsibility regarding the degree of 
reliability of financial information. 
Response % n 
Strongly 
Disagree 
8.76% 19 
Disagree 0.46% 1 
Not Sure 5.99% 13 
Agree 58.53% 127 
Strongly Agree 26.27% 57 
Table 3:  User Expectations 
Given that a significant number of surveyed 
partners believe that capital markets are moving in the 
direction of continuous reporting and continuous 
auditing, how will user expectations be affected?  This 
is the focus of Table 3.  As can be seen, most partners 
surveyed believe that continuous auditing of 
continuous reporting will increase users’ expectations 
about auditors’ ability/responsibility to report going 
concern problems more timely.  Eighty-five percent of 
the partners surveyed believe that continuous auditing 
of continuous reporting will increase users’ 
expectations about auditors’ ability/responsibility to 
detect fraud.  And 65 percent of the partners surveyed 
believe that continuous auditing of continuous 
reporting will increase users’ expectations about 
auditors’ ability/responsibility regarding the degree of 
reliability of financial information.  This is an 
interesting finding in light of the Enron debacle.   
4.  Impediments to Reducing Post Year-end Audit 
Work 
When asked to indicate the total annual audit 
hours that represent the audit work performed after the 
client’s financial year-end, almost three-quarters of the 
partners indicated at least 30 percent of the total audit 
hours were for post year-end work.  Over one-half said 
it was at least 40 percent, while nearly 40 percent of 
the partners said at least 50 percent of the audit hours 
represent work performed after year-end.  The partners 
were asked to comment on the major impediments in 
reducing the number of days between the period end 
and the date of the audit report by half.  There were 
three major impediment categories given, 1) People, 2) 
Process, and 3) Technology.  The partners provided 
comments on each of the three major impediment 
categories for both the client-side and the audit team.   
People Impediments 
The lack of resources, including time constraints, 
was the most frequent comment received from the 
partners regarding client-side people impediments 
(24% of partners).  The same impediment was the third 
highest audit team impediment mentioned with almost 
21 percent of the partners commenting on it.  Many of 
the partners basically indicated their clients are at full 
capacity and the client’s staff would have to work 
overtime to accommodate earlier audit schedules.  
“Having the appropriate resources—both financial and 
IT related,” was another resource deficiency comment 
received.  On the audit team side, the “lack of 
manhours” was a frequent comment from the partners.  
One partner stated, “We run our business so lean these 
days there is little availability of people if problems 
arise or if someone leaves the firm.”    
Over 22 percent of the partners indicate changing 
the mindset of the client is the biggest client-related 
people impediment.  As one partner put it, “Timely 
completion is not emphasized/valued by upper 
management.”  Another one stated, “Client is resistant 
to speeding-up the process.” The key point here might 
not be that clients are resistant to accelerating the 
process, but that accelerating the process is not a high 
priority.  The view of many partners can be 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 summarized by the following partner’s comment, 
“Management probably spending as much time 
preparing it’s Board and analysts presentations during 
the [time] up to press release as it does on closing the 
books and preparing the financial statements.”  The top 
priority is getting information ready for the earnings 
announcement, not the audited financial statements.  
An ideal state might be to fit the audit process within 
the earnings announcement timeline.   
Twenty partners did comment that there would 
have to be a change in the audit team’s mindset to 
reduce the audit report lag.  One partner commented, 
needing to change the “mindset that we need to do the 
same things, only faster, more efficiently, instead of 
doing different things.  Audit firms seem to change 
more slowly.”  A second partner stated, “There will be 
many issues including new competition for this 
business.  The surviving firms will have to truly thing 
out-of-the-box to stay in business.” 
Even if the client’s and the audit team’s mindset 
were changed, the appropriate skill level appears 
lacking.  As one partner stated, there is a “lack of 
skilled people [at the client] to properly analyze the 
financial data to detect errors.”  Another commented, 
“Systems would have to be better understood by more 
of client’s staff.”  Most of the comments from the 
partners that identified lack of skills/training with the 
client’s staff were non-specific in nature.  However, the 
partners were more specific when identifying the audit 
team members’ deficiencies.  Below are some of the 
specific comments partners made in highlighting audit 
team members’ lack of skills/training in reducing the 
audit report lag in half: 
• “Audit team must be trained to better use 
technology and rely less on manual 
procedures.” 
• “Lack of understanding of crucial controls.” 
• “Need better IT skills and understanding of 
system controls.” 
• “Lack of managerial and time planning skills.” 
• “Our audit is based on a do and review 
model—the doers are inexperienced and 
incapable of identifying and resolving issues.” 
• “Need training to focus on true risks.” 
• “Lack of understanding process controls.” 
• “Better analytical tools and training to spot and 
detect key indicators.” 
Some partners even mentioned the education 
received from colleges should be changed to account 
for the new technologies available and how it relates to 
the audit process.  There appears to be some consensus 
that to significantly eliminate the audit report lag 
requires increased training at the collegiate and firm 
level, in addition to increased training of the client’s 
staff. 
Process Impediments 
One partner encapsulated the biggest client-side 
process impediment mentioned in the survey when he 
stated, 
If the client’s controls are not top-
notch, we have no chance at 
continuous auditing.   
Many of the partners mention the less than 
adequate control environment existing in many of the 
companies they audit.  The partners were very blunt in 
their assessment, with one stating, “Clients do not have 
strong controls that are documented.”  Another 
concluded, the client’s “control environment is not to 
the point to allow total system based audit.”  While the 
inadequacies of the control environment top the 
partners’ list, their clients’ closing process was a close 
second with over 26 percent of the partners identifying 
that impediment.  The third most identified client-side 
process impediment was the consolidation process, 
which coincides closely with the closing process. 
The closing process and the consolidation process 
received similar comments from the partners.  The 
most identified problem with those processes was the 
fact that both are still largely manual processes that are 
very labor intensive (16.6% of partners).  The 
automation of the closing and consolidation process 
must precede any attempt at compressing the audit 
report lag. 
The partners also mention that many of the 
accounts are not adjusted until year-end and, as a 
result, they would have to re-audit those accounts at 
year-end if audited earlier.  Lastly, with regard to the 
consolidation process, a major impediment is the lack 
of coordination from global subsidiaries.  The shear 
complexity of consolidating a global entity is over-
whelming and leads directly to longer sign-offs. 
The final client-side process impediment to 
discuss is the use of judgments and valuations in the 
financial statements.  As one partner stated,  
Closing the books requires more than 
posting all subsystems to the G/L, it 
also needs a review of estimates and 
complex accounting judgments. 
Another partner added,  
Accruals and reserves require some 
level of substantive evaluation, which 
typically occurs post period end. 
These statements also represent the mindset of the 
partners being grounded in the traditional audit model.  
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 This is not more evident than the comment by one 
partner stating,  
The accuracy of reserve estimates is 
improved with an increasing amount 
of subsequent payment data. 
Regardless of the impediments imposed by the client, 
the partners had issues with the current audit process 
itself.  Almost one-quarter of the partners commented 
the audit process was a hindrance to reducing the audit 
report lag.  As one partner put it, the audit is  
geared for [an] annual push, as 
opposed to continuous information 
flow.  
Similar to the comments on the closing process, 
many partners mentioned the audit process was “still 
manual intensive,” and “tend to drift towards a 
substantive rather than process approach.”  As more 
than one partner asserted, the focus needs to be on 
processes, not year-end balances. 
The second most mentioned process impediment 
on the audit team side was the review process.   The 
partners mentioned that the review process is just too 
“cumbersome.”  Another problem was that reviewers at 
the manager, partner, and concurring review levels 
want “one more look” before signing-off.  One partner 
observed that the  
inefficient review of audit 
workpapers and our annual report 
creates rework, [which result in the] 
client receiving several sets of 
changes to draft financial statements. 
There are two more areas worth noting, the 
documentation requirements and the handling of 
unusual/complex transactions.  One partner stated that 
the  
audit process has become too 
complex and too form-driven.  
Concerns over many forms and 
complexity could hinder being able 
to see the full issues and big picture. 
Another partner mentioned,  
In our effort to reduce risk and push 
more work into the pre year end 
period, we have greatly expanded 
our audit documentation 
requirements.  This diverts 
significant attention to ‘getting the 
forms filled out’ from getting the job 
done.   
Lastly, one partner succinctly commented on the 
handling of unusual/complex items: 
While much of this can be addressed, 
there will be times that require 
additional thought, e.g., year-end 
transactions, changing economic 
events, that may require not meeting 
the earlier reporting dates.  This 
needs to be able to be done without a 
usually negative reaction by analysts 
and the markets, sometimes things 
should not be rushed.   
Based on the partners’ comments, the current audit 
model must change before significant audit report lag 
reductions are viable. The new audit model should be 
process-based and not substantive testing-based.  One 
must keep in mind that some transactions and/or events 
will not fit cleanly in a continuous auditing 
environment.  However, the bulk of transactions 
handled throughout a year do not fall into that 
category.  The goal should be to automate the 
recurring/normal audit and review process and use the 
freed capacity to expeditiously handle the 
unusual/complex items that arise throughout the year. 
System Impediments 
Inadequate and disparate clients’ systems are the 
biggest system impediment in eliminating the audit 
report lag, as identified by the assurance partners.  
Over 20 percent of the partners commented on the 
unsophisticated systems operating most clients’ 
businesses, while almost the same percentage 
mentioned the systems the clients use lack any level of 
integration.  As one partner said, “Usually poor 
integration of different systems within the same 
company results in too much manual intervention.”  
Another partner concluded, “The client is light years 
away from the technology to effectively close and 
report earlier.”   
On the audit team side, the need for effective tools 
was the most frequent comment received from the 
partners.  Below are some representative comments 
received: 
• “Need better tools to monitor the financial 
data.” 
• “Need tools to audit through the technology 
system...” 
• “We simply need tools that are much more 
robust for working remotely out at clients 
locations.” 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 Exploratory Regression Analysis 
It was decided to use regression analysis on the 
relationship between the audit report lag and the 
impediment categories (Question 16 and 18, 
respectively). The impediment sub-categories 
discovered from the QSR NUD-IST© analysis were 
used in the regression model.  The dependent variable 
(ANN216) was calculated by taking the difference 
between the estimated audit report lag five years hence 
and the current audit report lag.  The independent 
variables were coded 1 or 0 depending on whether the 
partners identified the impediment sub-category.  
Variables to control for client size was also included in 
the regression models.   
The exploratory regression analysis involved 
several steps.  First, a stepwise regression was 
performed using all 24 impediment sub-categories and 
3 control variables.  In addition, a least squares 
regression was run on the full model to compare to the 
results of the stepwise regression.  Based of the results 
of those regressions, the significant variables were 
identified and another regression was run (Table 4). 
 
  Sum of Mean 
Source DF Squares Square 
Model 3 2327 775.9 
Error 182 14848 81.58 
Corrected Total 185 17176  
    
F Value Pr > F   
9.51 <.0001   
    
R-Square 0.1355   
Adj R-Sq 0.1213   
    
Variable DF Estimate Pr > |t| 
Intercept 1 -8.8772 <.0001 
CTA 1 0.0005 0.0099 
PEA321 1 -5.8847 0.0001 
SA522 1 -5.1421 0.0266 
    
Model:    
ANN216 = – 8.87 + 0.00047(CTA) – 5.88(PEA321)
                   – 5.14(SA522) 
    
CTA: Total Assets   
PEA321: Lack of audit team skills/training 
SA522: Lack of audit team connectivity 
Table 4: Regression Analysis 
Based on the regression results, the average 
reduction in the audit report lag expected within the 
next five years is almost 9 days.  The two significant 
impediments are lack of audit team skills/training in 
reducing the audit report lag in half, as well as, the lack 
of connectivity between the audit team and the client.  
The presence of insufficient skills and training with the 
audit team results in the difference in the audit report 
lag increasing by almost six days.  Similarly, the lack 
of system connectivity increases the difference by just 
over five days.  Lastly, the larger the size of the client 
(as measured by total assets) the smaller the difference 
between the audit report lag expected in five years and 
the current audit report lag.   
The results of the regression model are not 
surprising.  To-date, current audit training focuses on 
the traditional year-end audit model. New training and 
skills in the information systems domain, among 
others, are necessary to eliminate the audit report lag.  
Another crucial element in eliminating the audit report 
lag is increasing the integration and connectivity 
between systems.  This is especially important for 
firms moving toward a continuous audit model. 
4.  Solutions to Impediments 
As discussed above, the assurance partners 
identified several impediments to reducing the audit 
report lag.  Fortunately, many of the partners also 
offered their thoughts of how to overcome those 
impediments.  This section details the solutions 
identified by the partners for the People, Process, and 
Technology Impediments discussed above. 
Solutions to People Impediments 
The partners identified several areas where 
training should be increased.  The areas ranged from 
general accounting and business knowledge, to specific 
IT knowledge, to better training in internal controls.  
One partner surmised, “Our training has been lacking 
over the years and our people aren’t coming out of 
college with necessarily what it takes to succeed as 
auditors.  Part of the problem is that we expect 
everyone to be good accountants and auditors and that 
is difficult to do with the vast complexity of accounting 
rules to apply these days.”  Another partner stated, 
“[Our people] need a MUCH STRONGER 
understanding and ability to execute and to understand 
audit theory.”   
Many partners stated the audit staff would need to 
increase their IT skill-sets.  One partner mentioned the 
increased training should begin in school. While 
another commented the firm should hire more 
experienced professionals.  What is needed is, “Quality 
team members that understand the technology and how 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 to EFFICIENTLY integrate this into an audit 
approach.”   
Several partners identified flexibility in the 
scheduling process as a potential solution.  One partner 
recommended the firm should “attempt a one-time 
major rescheduling of engagements.”  Another partner 
stated the desire to schedule one year in advance where 
possible. While a third partner flatly stated that 
reducing the audit report lag is a “manpower allocation 
issue…our resource allocation issues are terrible.”  It 
might be easy to identify the scheduling shortfalls, 
actually changing the process is much more 
challenging.  As one partner said, reducing the audit 
report lag “requires major analysis and rethinking of 
[the] client base and [a] clean sheet of paper approach 
to scheduling the jobs.” 
Solutions to Process Impediments 
While over 14 percent of the partners gave specific 
solutions to the audit process similar to the opening 
quotes, many partners commented that it was the client 
where the real problem, thus solution, lies.  One partner 
said, “Our approach is geared to the client’s 
processes—we can adapt.”  Another one mentioned, 
“We are dependent on client timing, and, for certain 
issues, there is little likelihood that the client can 
expedite the process in any consequential way.”  And 
one partner identified probably the tallest hurdle that 
must be overcome, “I think we currently have the 
capability yet some clients are not willing to give use 
the level of access needed to overcome this issue.”  
Definitely the audit profession has to work closely with 
their clients in developing and integrating this new 
audit methodology.  
Many partners indicated that the firm must work 
with their clients in strengthening and testing the 
control environment.  In addition, they mentioned that 
the audit team must improve their understanding of 
clients’ systems and the controls over them. This 
relates to what was alluded to earlier—the new audit 
methodology must be process based and control 
dependent. 
Solutions to System Impediments 
There were not many solutions identified with 
handling the system impediments with just over 20 
percent of the partners providing any specific details.  
The solutions centered on IT tools and connectivity.  
Some partners mentioned they needed, “better tools to 
analyze processes” and “software auditing tools to run 
audit procedures directly within clients’ systems.”  
Others mentioned the need for “improved tools which 
are compatible with clients systems,” and the 
“implementation of a client database that would 
automatically notify team members of the impact of 
new accounting standards impact on companies in the 
client’s industry, news regarding clients and C level 
executives.”   
“As we evolve toward real time audits, the use of 
technology tools that assist with auditing through our 
clients systems will become increasingly important.” 
That partner’s comment is stating exactly what 
continuous auditing will do.  The technology is now 
available; however, is a CA a value-added service.  
Does continuous auditing provide value to the clients? 
 
 Percent 
of 
partners 
(n=122) 
Provides credible, timely information to 
financial statement users, enhances 
public perception and understanding of 
events impacting company (i.e., 
eliminates surprises, reduces insider 
trading). 
41.0% 
Value to the markets will drive the 
reporting of more frequent information, 
and the audit thereof, as much as value 
to the client. 
16.4% 
Helpful to internal decision-makers. 5.7% 
Table 5: Value in Continuous Auditing 
Over one-half of the partners agreed that there is 
some value to the clients in reporting information more 
frequently than they currently report.  Of those that 
agreed, an overwhelming majority (71.3%) said there 
is also value to the clients in having that information 
audited.  Table 5 lists the most frequent comments 
made by the assurance partners in why they agreed that 
there is value in continuous auditing. 
Based on the comments from the partners it 
appears external users of the financial statements will 
drive the move toward more frequent reporting of 
financial information, with only 5.7 percent of the 
partners stating that more frequent reporting would be 
helpful to internal decision-makers.  Reducing 
uncertainty and enhancing public perception are the 
biggest factors in the value-added service of increasing 
the frequency of reporting financial information.  
Those factors are extremely important in light of the 
Enron scandal.  The public appears to want increased 
visibility and the partners appear to agree that 
increasing the reporting of information is one way to 
increase the public’s perception of a client.  The 
auditing of that information should only increase that 
value. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
 Limitations 
There are a few limitations to this research project 
that deserve mention.  First, because of how the survey 
was administered (through a web form), there may well 
be some level of response bias.  It is possible that the 
partners who were less literate with regard to 
technology may have been a significant percentage of 
those who did not respond to the survey. 
Second, it is possible that those surveyed didn’t 
know enough about CA to be able to give a substantive 
opinion.  To attempt to address this, we described CA 
in the first few paragraphs of the survey itself. 
Third, this paper, by the very nature of the project, 
was not theory based.  Some would say that without 
theory, there is no research.  We would disagree only 
with regard to early studies of the subject of research.  
As was mentioned in the abstract, early efforts 
regarding research on a new area of interest are, by 
nature, exploratory.  There is a certain amount of 
preliminary, exploratory work that must be done before 
theoretical models can be built and before meaningful 
empirical research can be performed. 
Conclusion 
“I believe the fast paced nature of the markets will 
ultimately mean that those companies which provide 
more frequent information will be viewed favorably in 
the marketplace. In addition, if that information is 
audited, it will lend more credibility than if not.”  This 
observation by one of the partners surveyed provides 
the motivation for moving clients toward a CA.  The 
partners surveyed have focused the discussion on 
continuous auditing by identifying the impediments to 
its implementation as well as some solutions to 
removing those impediments. 
The biggest impediments appear to be the mindset 
of the client, the lack of controls at the client, and the 
lack of skills and training with the client’s staff and 
audit team members.  The solutions identified center 
around increasing training and improving audit tools.  
In addition, the controls at the client must be improved, 
as well as, the firm must demonstrate the value of 
continuous auditing to the clients.   
Research into this domain is at its infancy and 
theoretical as well as empirical research is needed.  The 
audit domain is changing and it is imperative that the 
research community has a voice in the change.  
Practitioners and standard setters alike will look to the 
research community for guidance on how to implement 
continuous auditing techniques and technologies, as 
well as determining the consequences and benefits. 
While the anticipated benefits of CAs may be 
high, the survey indicated several hurdles that must be 
overcome before CAs becomes a reality.  
Notwithstanding the technical hurdles of moving from 
manual, disparate systems to integrated information 
systems, two of the biggest hurdles are 1) client buy-in 
and 2) staff training.  While clients are always eager to 
reduce audit hours, most are accustomed to the annual 
audit process and all it entails.  Transforming a client 
from the annual audit to a CA will not be easy; 
however, the CPA firm must be ready as clients begin 
to realize the financial incentives for moving toward 
CAs (e.g., lower cost of capital, and faster reporting).  
In addition, CAs will require CPA firms be permitted 
direct access to their clients’ systems.  Clients are 
already uneasy about the level of access audit firms 
have now. Allowing direct access to their information 
systems will require very high levels of trust and 
commitment.   
Focused training in the CA approach will be 
necessary, along with increased training in information 
systems.  The toolset of the new auditor should include 
various aspects of information and web technology in 
order to be able to design and maintain the process for 
continuous auditing.  As a partner of a small CPA firm 
commented, “Education of the CPA, especially [for] 
the smaller firms, in how [to] provide these services 
must be addressed.” In addition, the training should 
begin at the collegiate level.  Audit and accounting 
information systems courses should begin addressing 
the continuous auditing domain.   
References 
[1] Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. Research 
Report on Continuous Auditing. Toronto, 1999.  
[2] Groomer, K., Murthy, U., “Continuous Auditing of 
Database Applications: An Embedded Audit Module 
Approach,” Journal of Information Systems, Spring, 1989. 
[3] Kogan, A, Sudit, E. and Vasarhelyi, M., “Continuous 
Online Auditing: A Program of Research,” Journal of 
Information Systems, Vol. 13(2). 
 
 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
