Open Source or Commercial Products for Electronic Data Capture 
in Clinical Trials? A Scorecard Comparison 
CH Elsner", M Egbring', H Kottkamp', T Berger', S Zoller', G Hindricks' 
'Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany and 'HHL Business School Leipzig, Germany 
Abstract 
Collection and organization of data in Clinical Trials 
requires a sophisticated information management system. 
An ideal Sysrem should be easy accessible over web- 
technology and should provide high security of data. 
When deciding for  a solution meanwhile even mid- 
and big-sized companies also evaluate Open-Source 
Platforms againsr pure Commercial Solutions as rhe use 
of Open-Source Products seems to ger more and more 
feasible: Early Open-Source disadvantages like limited 
supporr and limited userfriendliness seem to disappear. 
With this work the authors intended to discuss a basic 
scheme for which Sofhvare and Srraregy ro choose: 
Objective was to develop a Scorecard for decision 
support with parameters of the trial, user-needs, scale 1 
dimension of the trial, financial budget, IT-ressources 
and long term objectives of the Companies IT-Strategy. 
The Scorecard can be obtained free from the aulhors. 
1. Introduction 
In Multicentre Studies the collection, organization and 
statistical analysis of studydata requires a sophisticated 
information support system. An ideal system should be 
easy accessible and should provide high security. For this 
reason Web-based or Web-enabled Remote-Data-Entry is 
seen as the most promising technology. This way of Data 
Management is ideal for data entry from distributed 
locations that have little or no computer infrastructure. 
1.1. Authors' experience and objective 
In the field of Data Collection for Clinical Trials the 
Authors have experience with OPEN-Source engineered 
products set up in a LAMP andlor PHP and ODBC 
environment [I], have used the PhOSCom [21 Platform 
and have used professional tools (Oracle Clinical@, 
SAS@ and Business Objects@)[3]. 
The objective of this work was to develop a Scorecard 
for the evaluation of any Clinical Trial Setting to 
determine which Software and Strategy to choose. For 
this target to achieve, especially the experience from the 
use of the Oracle Clinical@ 4 / SAS@ 8.2 and the use of 
the PhOSCom Platform where compared and discussed. 
2. Actual situation: market shares 
5% 6% H ClinTrial 
In-House 
Solutions 
Solutions 
Commercial 
DOracle Clinical 
0 Other 
48% In-House 8 
Figure 1. Market Shares for April 2002: Different 
Solutions for Clinical Trial Data Management [31 
A look into the market shares for April 2002 shows a 
high percentage for the commercial market leaders 
Phaseforward@ and Oracle@. But In-house and mixed i* 
house and commercial solutions have already a share of 
14% - these solutions are specially found in mi&size 
trials and not FDA-relevant clinical trials. 
Analysing this 14%-Share further it turns out that there 
is only one remarkable Open-Source Solution in use at 
this point of time: The PhOSCoTM-Software (Predecessor 
is the Software ClinWare@). For this reason our 
discussion will focus on the comparison of PhOSCoTM 
with available Commercial Products. 
2.1. Procedure in scorecardsetup 
What are the most obstacles in Remote-Data Entry and 
what key requirements have to be evaluated for a 
Companies' Software Selection? 
For the generation of the Scorecard the Keypoints 
from known projects [I] 121 [3] were collected and put in 
relation to the common variables of a clinical trial. 
Additionally the parameters of the Companies IT- 
Strategy and IT Environment were put into equation for 
the scorecard. The resulting Questions were clustered into 
groups to determine a score for each single Keypoint and 
determine a score fur the best recommendation. 
a 2 7 ~ 7 m 3  si7.w o 2003 IEEE 371 Computers in Cardlology u)o3;jO:371-373. 
3. Identification of key criteria 
The following Criteria were identified to be crucial in 
Setup of a Clinical Trial Data Management Environment: 
3.1. Process scalability and flexibility 
Depending on the Trial's scale and potential diversity 
of future 'Ilials a Remote-Data-Entry solution should be 
more or less open from a process-oriented point of view. 
To identify the individual requirements, questions for 
Trial Settings with rapid changing requirements were 
clustered. For those it is crucial to be able to 
accommodate the software in different ways: fast 
performing tasks inhouse, easy working with partners, 
cooperation with other entitities (academia or other 
P h m a )  or any other model representing any 
combination. In this point Open-Source Software seems 
to have a clear advantage 14). 
3.2. Technology integration 
From a technology point of view the scalability and 
flexibility has to be seen more from the GUI, the database 
end and the intercomponent communications. 
The decision, which software to choose depends on a 
variety of factors of the in-house IT-infrastructure. How 
big is the amount of data being managed, what flexibility 
is needed in database-interconnectivity and in database- 
diversity? How do different solutions fit into the actual 
lT-Infrastructure of a company? Is there a need to have 
database-clusters and what Backupconcepts are used as 
standard? Also the PhOSCoTM Software is based on open 
standards like lava I SQL I XML with effective 
possibilities for integration with downstream 
applications, it may not always be feasible to choose. 
As a bottom line choosing Open Source - especially 
PhOSCoTM from this point of view seems for example 
especially feasible, when You have to keep Your Trial 
Software in a changing long-term hybrid communication 
model with the possibility of online working. 
3.3. Rollout process 
A simple and easy rollout process seems to be crucial 
- adequate to trial dimension and complexity. For the 
Scorecard a Cluster of Questions was setup to determine 
those variables. 
While the environment must be validatable, all other 
factors can't be bought at the expense of the need for a 
complex or lengthy installation process. In the actual 
PhOSCoTM V1.3 specially Installation Process and GUI 
are not ideal for less complex Data Entry Scenarios, 
where for example a normal javascripted webfrontend 
(also from FDAs view) is enough. 
In a capsulated standard Clinical Trial Environment 
with data from very distributed locations benefits and 
savings from Database- and Softwarelicenses can be 
overweighted by costs for installations and distributions 
of - for example - preinstalled laptops. 
3.4. CRF-to-bedside time 
A crucial factor in fast-pacing Trial Environments is 
the easy internalisation of the development of eCRFs and 
shortest possible time to first patient visit, using existing 
clinical staff. 
Depending on the Setting of Trial Form Distribution 
and Handling of Development and Version Management 
it is worth to score the Performance of the Solutions 
according to the Trial Setting. Commercial Solutions like 
ClinTrialm or Studybuilder@ IS] offer convenient version 
management and different distribution of CRFs on 
Handhelds, WWW and Paperbased. 
The PhOSCoTM Plattform also offers a quite 
convenient e C W  Management but no different 
distribution management per se. For the Scorecard 
Analysis Questions for the Processes around the specific 
Clinical Trial Settings were setup and pictured in 23 
items. 
Depending on Complexity of CRFs. Processes, 
Distribution, potential Version Management and People 
involved a Recommendation can be given. Overall the 
recommended solution must seek to reduce the number 
and complexity of tasks required together with the 
number of people involved. 
3.5. Provider dependency 
Avoiding a dependency on special companies seems to 
be a critical success factor in every project. The Trade- 
Off having to do this is often the need for a special, 
capsulated, single and cheap solution and no local IT- 
Ressources. The danger of this dependency is in terms of 
risks regarding software delivery and future maintenance 
as well as the danger of limited capability to scale up to 
the requirements of the programme. 
Especially for larger-scale trials international service 
partners must be readily available to complement the 
internal resources, and the business concept has to be 
open to allow the addition of further partners when 
required. 
3.6. Liiecycle and version management 
Depending on the Spectrum of Trials being managed 
and the IT-Strategy there are some remarkable 
advantages in the use of Open-Source Software. For 
example the need for a simple and preferably automated 
process for maintenance of trial customisation and the 
software itself during the lifecycle of a trial, together with 
the capability of normal business change control 
management. 
The Questionaire includes for example questions on 
Importance of fast Internationalisation and multilingual 
capabilities. 
372 
3.7. Legal regulations 
The Scorecard was put up with a special sequence of 
questions determining the need for special regulations 
regarding legal aspects and Software validation in a 
special Trial Setting. It turns out that the use of software 
under the regulations of the GNU [61 [7] has some 
specialities which can be a benefit or disadvantage for a 
company - a decision mostly basing on a general strategy 
to take back the ownership of a product back in house. 
One mayor obstacle in Open-Source - the time- 
consuming process of Software-Validation seems to k 
solved with PhOSCoTM, as the tools for automated 
validation give a wide perspective mostly not found in 
the available commercial products. 
4. Discussion and results 
How is actual Situation at Companies having to decide 
between the two different approaches? A trend is heading 
clearly to Open-Source Products being developed from a 
core-version to individual needs of a company. 
Of course implementing such a system is a major 
challenge, according to Sylvia Collins, who did this for 
Novartis [8]. Strong leadership, change management and 
broad authority were required. Most importantly it needs 
to be pushed forward as a business development. not an 
IT development. 
As described above based on the popular PhOSCoTM 
product, the system at Novartis is continually being 
developed. It is deployed on 3000 laptops worldwide and 
has been deployed on 150 trials within 18 months. 
Database licence savings alone have been over $50 
million US Dollars [8]. The configuration and 
deployment of the clinical report forms takes around 9 
weeks but Novartis hopes to improve this considerably. 
The PhOSCom product is available for purchase, on a 
per trial or corporate basis, and is supplied with full lava 
source code for customisation and integration. With 
Open-Source Packages like PhOSCoTM even huge trials 
can be managed at low cast for software licenses. Overall 
choosing a professional environment makes trial control 
and management in points of standard integration and 
CRF-Design more mnvenient but also much more costly 
and not in every case more flexible. 
Specially for Companies heading to a global Open- 
Source Strategy and/or having to keep Your Trial 
Software in a changing long-term hybrid communication 
model, PhOSCoTM seems a viable alternative. 
The Scorecard resulting from our work can be 
obtained free from the authors and is a 26 page 
questionnaire with chapters as described in 3. of this 
Paper and clustered questions on: A.Needs in Project- 
Management and Remote-Work Components at 
Studysites, B.Determination of Study-Size, Volume of 
Data and complexity of CRFs, C.Determination of 
needed Software-Components and their Scalability, 
D.Determination of IT-Knowledge, Ressources and 
Future Strategy for the Project, ESituation and special 
Needs in Hardware and Security. 
The Scorecard System allows to determine a Product 
Recommendation and weights the different portions 
visually. The Questionaire may be useful for other groups 
e.g. for determination which environment may be feasible 
for their single study approach, but also for project 
planning and further development of the questionnaire. 
References 
[I]  M. Egbring. G. Hindricks, H. Kottlramp, Ch. Elsner. A 
Rea-Time Monitoring Tool for Multicenbe Studies in 
Cardiology. In: Journal of Computers in Cardiology 
Volume 2000; 27: 183-184. 
[2] See URL http://www.phosco.de 
[3] M. Egbring, I. Politz, Ch. Elsner. Experiences with a corn 
bination of Oracle Clinical@ 4 / SAS@ 8.2 / MedDRA@ 4 
and Business Objects@ 4. In: Proceedings of MedNet 2002 
7th World Conference on the Internet in Medicine, 
Amsterdam 2003; 157-59. 
141 T. H. Muller, M. Linzbach, S.  Haseloff, B. Troschke. Ein- 
bindung eines Web-basierten Randomisielungsdienstes in 
die Open-Source Studiensoftware PhOSCoTM. In: 
Informatik, Biometrie und Epidemiologie in Med. u. Biol. 
2003; 41/3:376-378. 
[SI See URL http://www.studybuilder.com 
[61 See URL http://www.gnu.org 
171 Ch. Elsner, M.Berli. Workshop and Tutorial on the Use of 
Open-Source Software in Healthcare Applicalions. In: 
Proceedings of MedNet 2002,7th World Conference on the 
Internet in Medicine, Amsterdam 2033; 1:12-13. 
[SI Malorye Bmnca Who's holding up EM3 implemenlalion? 
In: Bio-IT World (online), Bio-IT Ressource, 2002 
URL www.bio-itworld.com/news/020503_reportl928.hanl 
Address for correspondence. 
Christian Elsner 
Thomasiusslr. 9 
04109 Leipzig 
Ch.Elsner@gmx.de 
Germany 
313 
374 
