IFWE-49 
A 46-GHz Distributed Transimpedance Amplifier 
using SiGe Bipolar Technology 
Steffen Kudszus, Arvin Shahani, Shanthi Pavan*, Derek K. Shaeffer, Maurice Tarsia 
Big Bear Networks, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA 
*now with the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India 
Abstroct - In this work we present a transimpedance 
amplifier (TIA) with a typical 3-dB handwidth of 46 GHz, 
suitable for 40 Gb/s data communication links, realized in a 
commercial SiGe BiCMOS technology. The amplifier uses a 
traveling-wave topology and achieves a typical transim- 
pedance of 47 dBCl and a low input-referred current noise of 
24 pA Hz.O5 averaged between 0 and 40 GHz. The amplifier is 
especially designed to he integrated with a photodiode in a 
hybrid photoreceiver, using bond wire interconnects. A set of 
photoreceivers was successfully tested over a temperature 
range from 0 to 70 C. The low noise of the TIA results in a 
large dynamic range of the receivers and error-free operation 
was achieved up to an overload optical input power of more 
than +3 dBm 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The ongoing rise of internet traffic is raising the dc- 
mands for bandwidth and capacity in the backbones and 
nodal points of the global networks. Current approaches 
are exploiting wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) to 
combine up to 160 channels with 10 Cb/s per fiber. To 
reduce costs and increase capacity per channel, bit rates of 
40 Gbls are highly desirable, provided that these cutting- 
edge tcchnology systems can economically compete with a 
4 x IO Gbls solution. One step to reach this goal is the 
demonstration of high-speed silicon at 40 Gbls, due to its 
reproducibility, maturity and reliability at minimum cost 
When considering the analog functions in an optical 
communication link, the first electrical component after 
the photodiode in a fiber communication system is the 
transimpedance amplifier (TIA). The TIA converts the 
photocurrent into a voltage, as shown in Fig. 1 .  The TIA is 
the first electrical amplifier in the receiver chain and thus 
sets the input sensitivity of the receiver after the photo- 
diode. The high requirements on noise and bandwidth for 
these amplifiers were mostly met by amplifiers using 
Ill. 
$ P D  
Fig. I .  Block diagram of a typical receiver chain 
0-7803-7695-1103/$17.W 0 2W3 IEEE 
Fig. 2. 
expensive 111-V technologies, especially InP [2]. Never- 
theless, the progression from laboratory setups to products 
for 40 Gb/s transmission systems raises the demand for 
more cost effective ICs on silicon. 
In this paper, we present a fully linear transimpedance 
amplifier for 40Gbls fiber links, using a commercial 
O.18um SiGe BiCMOS process [3], which is well suited 
for OC-768 photoreceiver applications. A traveling-wave 
amplifier (TWA) topology was used in order to get high 
bandwidth and ease the assembly with a hybrid photo- 
diode. The TIA was especially optimized to meet the 
photodiode mount. The amplifier has a power dissipation 
of 300 mW from a single -5.2 V supply and achieves a 
handwidth of 46GHz and a transimpedance of 220Q. 
Prototype photoreceivers, that incorporate the alpha- 
version of this TIA and a photodiode with a responsivity 
of 0.6 A N ,  achieved a flat frequency response with a 
38 GHz bandwidth and a low integrated input-referred 
current noise of 5.8 PA, resulting in a large dynamic range 
up to +3 dBm optical input power. 
Chip photograph of the distributed TIA (1.2 x 3 mm’). 
U. CIRCU~T DESIGN ’ 
A typical photoreceiver chain is shown in Fig. 1. The 
photodiode and thc TIA arc packaged in one module to 
form the photoreceiver . The output signal can be ampli- 
tied by a limiting amplifier (LA), which provides the re- 
quired signal levels for the clock and data recovery (CDR) 
block. Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of the amplifier and 
its application in a photoreceiver. The Photodiode will 
generate a photocurrent, which flows over a bond-wire 
1387 
2003 E E E  M’IT-S Digest 
pholodiode bond wires TIA 
#I 11, 
I T  T T I  
TIA j O N D U  
I_..__________.______ 
Fig: 3. Block diagram of the photoreceiver . , 
connection to the input of the amplifier. The output volt- 
age signal of the amplifier is then ac coupled to a 50-Ohm 
termination. In our specific application, we implemented 
on-chip DC blocking capacitors, to allow separate biasing 
of the photodiode. The value of the blocking capacitance 
can be increased in the photoreceiver using external com- 
ponents, to provide the desired flat low-frequency 
response of this interface. 
A. Circuit topology 
A single-ended traveling-wave topology was chosen for 
the amplifier [4] to achieve the wide bandwidth necessary 
for 40 Gbls data signals and also to ensure a fully linear 
operation of the amplifier. Five gain stages are combined 
with transmission lines at the input and output, as shown in 
the schematic diagram in Fig. 4 and in the chip photograph 
in Fig. 2. The die size of 1.2 x 3 nun2 is determined by 
step field requirements rather than design limitations. We 
implemented an active load at the end of the input trans- 
mission line to set the operating point of all stages and to 
compensate for process and temperature variations. A 
significant advantage of the traveling-wave concept com- 
pared to a lumped feedback-amplifier design [5 ]  is the 
insensitivity to the input load, which is highly reactive 
when using a photodiode and can significantly vary with 
the bond wire length in a hybrid photoreceiver assembly. 
This amplifier was especially developed to meet the needs 
for a hybrid photoreceiver, combining a photodiode and 
the amplifier using standard bond-wire connections. Fig. 5 
OUTPUT 5oR 
..................... 
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the distributed TIA. 
Fig. 5.  
illustrates the input configuration in more detail. The 
photodiode, in a first approximation, can he modeled as a 
single capacitance with a series resistor. The bond wire is 
mainly an inductance. For the definition of the input 
characteristic of the TIA, we extended the model for the 
bond-wire connection using the topology shown in Fig. 5 
to allow for a full 4-port configuration and to capture the 
influence of the DC block on the ground wires. 
The input of the TIA can be modeled by a series con- 
nection of six transmission lines, which are loaded with the 
input capacitance of each gain stage. To obtain the desired 
input impedance, the simple formula for the characteristic 
impedance of this artificial transmission line in ( I )  is used, 
where L' and c' are the inductance and capacitance per 
unit length of the transmission line segments and Cm is the 
input capacitance of each individual stage. To avoid too 
low an input impedance, we need to minimize Cm and use 
high impedance transmission lines, which were realized as 
microstrip lines in this design. The minimum line width set 
by the technology design rules allows microstrip lines with 
up to 75 Q characteristic impedance. The use of this 
minimum line width results in significant losses on the 
long input line of the TIA. 
Equivalent circuit model for the TIA input. 
i c, c l  + c ' I  zo =z, = 
B. Loss compensation 
To compensate for the losses and to reduce the input 
capacitance Cm, the gain-cell topology shown in Fig. 6 
was chosen. The emitter followers EFI and EF2 reduce the 
input capacitance and the transmission lines TLI and TL2 
are optimized to achieve a negative input resistance, simi- 
lar to the method presented in [61. This is illustrated by the 
Smith chart in Fig. 7, which shows an input reflection 
coefficient SII > 1. Furthermore, the use of transmission 
lines to generate hand-limited feedback within the cascode 
configuration of transistors TI and T2 results in a broad- 
band and well-controlled peaking characteristic in the 
1388 
- I oUTPUT VEE 
................... . 
Fig. 6.  
frequency response of the amplifier. This configuration is 
less sensitive to potential instabilities especially at the cut- 
off frequency of the amplifier, as compared to the com- 
monly used inductive peaking, which introduces an induc- 
tive element or transmission line section at the output of 
the gain cell. The output reflection coefficient SZ2 is also 
highly reflective. 
Since this method needs reliable modeling of the trans- 
mission lines to prevent instabilities, we developed 
accurate models for the passive structures and imple- 
mented these in both Agilent ADS and Cadence design 
environments. Various geometries of microstrip lines were 
simulated in electromagnetic field simulators (Ansoft 
HFSS and SONNET), and scalable models using lumped 
and distributed circuit elements were generated based on 
the simulated s-parameters. 
Schematic of the gain cell. 
111. MEASURED RESULTS 
A. Amplifier characterization 
The amplifier was first electrically characterized by 
measuring s-parameters on the die-level. Ground-Signal- 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Frequency [GHz] 
On-wafer measured and simulated s-parameters and Fig. 8. 
measured stability factor K of the "LA. 
Ground probes were used on the probe station, allowing 
for reliable calibrations to the probe tips up to 50 GHz. 
The s-parameters were taken by a 50 GHz VNA system 
(HP8510C). We carefully controlled the input power to be 
sure not to drive the amplifier into saturation. The 
measured and simulated s-parameters are shown in Fig. 8. 
Good agreement could be achieved. The amplifier is un- 
conditional stable as indicated by the K-factor and the 
reflection coefficients plotted in Fig. 8. The input-referred 
current noise spectrum and the group delay of Sz, was also 
measured and is illustrated in Fig. 9. The spectral noise is 
less than 32 pA Hz? up to 40 GHz, with an average 
0 10 20 30 40 
Frequency [GHz] 
20 1' I I I I 
0 10 20 30 40 
Frequency [GHz] 
On-wafer measured input-referred current noise and Fig. 9. 
group delay of the TIA. Fig. 7. Input and output reflection coefficients of the gain cell. 
1389 
I I I 
1 ............ ................ j .... ~~~~~~~~~~~~i ............................... 4 ... <.............. 
L I I I I 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Frequency [GHz] 
Fig. 10 
density of 24 pA Hz~'.', and a group-delay ripple of ahout 
More than SO dices were measured and sorted for further 
integration into photoreceivers. All devices were fully 
functional and well within the specifications required for 
OC-768 photoreceivers. The average bandwidth of the 
measured TIAs was 46GHz for an average transim- 
pedance 47 dBR. Fig. IO shows transimpedance measure- 
ments of 15 representative amplifiers calculated from the 
s-parameters using matrix transformations. 
B. Photorece/iver characterization 
Measured transimpedance of 15 representative TlAs 
IO ps. 
A set of prototype photoreceivers using a photodiode 
and this TIA, with pigtailed optical input and V-connector 
output, were also tested. A typical frequency response and 
eye diagram is given in Fig. 1 I .  This photoreceiver uses 
the first generation of the presented TIA with a slightly 
reduced bandwidth of 40 GHz and higher peaking at the 
cutoff frequency. The design of the new amplifier reduces 
this overshoot and jitter. 
Nevertheless, the photoreceiver passed an initial BER 
test in an unoptimized test bed and we achieved error free 
operation. The overload performance was also measured 
and a maximum optical input power of more than +3 dBm 
can he accepted by the receiver. From the measurement of 
the output noise voltage and the transimpedance, we calcu- 
lated an integrated input-referred current noise of about 
5..9 PA, which corresponds to the on-wafer measured 
average input-referred current noise of 24 pA HzO.' of the 
TIA. The performance of the photoreceiver was verified 
from 0 to 70 C case temperature, proving the functionality 
of the temperature-compensated bias circuitry. 
........ .......... ....... I 
. . . . . . . . . . .  * , .. . . ~  . 
I I 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Frequency [GHz] 
Fig. 11 
bandwidth of 46 GHz, 47 dBR transimpedance, an 
average input-referred current noise of 24 pA HzO.', and a 
flat frequency response enahled the production of a high 
performance photoreceiver. Reproducibility was demon- 
strated, making this chip a low-cost high performance 
product for 0C-768 applications. 
Photoreceiver transfer characteristic and eye diagram. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMEN'I 
The authors would like to thank Carlos Bowen, Jason 
Cancio, Fred Sugihwo, Sumit Verma and David Pritzkau 
for layout and testing. 
REFERENCES 
[ I ]  G. Freeman, et al., "40Gb/sec Circuits Built from a l2OGHz 
ft SiGe Technology," Proc. Gallium Arsenide Integrated 
Circuit (GaAs IC) Symposium, pp. 89 - 92,2001 
[2] D. Streit; et al., "InP and GaAs components for 40 Gbps 
applications" Proc. Gallium Arsenide Intcgrated Circuit 
(GaAs IC) Symposium, pp. 247 - 250,2001 
[3] A. Joseph, et al., "A 0.18um BiCMOS Technology Featur- 
ing 120/100GHz (ft/fmax) and ASIC-compatible CMOS 
Using Copper Interconnects," Proc. BCTh4, pp. 143-146, 
2001. 
[4] J.B. Beyer, P. Shasny, I.E. Nordman, R.C. Becker and G. 
Hohenwmer, "MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design 
Guidelines", IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech,, vol. 
M7T-32, pp. 268-275, 1984. 
[SI J .  S. Weiner, A. Leven, V. Houtsma, Y. Baeyens; Y.K. 
Chen, P. Paschke, "SiGe Differential Transimpedance An- 
plifier with SOGHz Bandwidth," Proc. Gallium Arsenide 
Integrated Circuit (GaAs IC) Symposium, pp. 61 - 69,2002 
[6] K. W. Kobayashi, R. Esfandiari; A.K. Oki, "A Novel HBT 
Distributed Amplifier Design Topology Based on Attenua- 
tion Compensation Techniques", IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., vol. 42, pp. 2583-2589, 1994. 
V. CONCLUSION 
We have presented a distributed transimpedance ampli- 
fier fabricated in a production SiGe BiCMOS process. The 
1390 
