The 14' IEEE 2003 International Symposium on Persona1,lndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedlngs 
Efficient Spreading Factor Selection for 
Retransmissions of Non-Real Time Data in 
DS/CDMA Systems 
In-Ho Lee 
Dept. of Electi-ical Engineering and Computer Science 
The Hanyang University of Korea 
Ansan, 425-79 I .  Korea 
inho~wnl.hanyang.ac.kr  
ilhsfrucl-In this paper, it is shown that. in DSiCDMA mobile 
systems. halving or  doubling the spreading factor (HSF or DSF) 
when retransmission is requested possibly improves the  
throughpiit. Given transmit power, DSF essentially decreases 
probability of packet error (PPE) by increasing the signal energy 
per information bit. It, however, doubles the time duration 
needed for transmitting the original packet. On the other hand, 
HSF increases PPE. It, however halves the time duration 
required to carry the original packet. Thus, the efficiency of HSF 
or DSF as a retransmission strategy depends on the amount of 
increased or reduced PPE after HSF or DSF is selected, With 
achieving given residual error probability (REP) in CDMA 
systems, the effective throughput is evaluated in this paper to 
f i n d  conditions with which HSF or  DSF achieves better 
performance than using the original one. Analytic results show 
that HSF or  DSF performs better when relatively small or big 
changes i i t  their PPE's are present. respectively. 
I. I N ~ K O D U C T I O N  
In wireless data com~nunications. the channel experiences 
burst errors and packet dropouts due to hostile fading, over- 
rising interference. inadequate haildoffs and so forth. For the 
error recoveiy. retransmission of the lost information is widely 
accepted with forward error correction (FEC) mechanisms [ I ] .  
The retransmitted is sometimes the whole part or certain partial 
infbrmation of the lost packet. depending 011 different auto- 
iliatic repeat request (ARQ) strategies [2],  [3]. In practical 
systenis. since the nzmiber of uliowobie retransmi.ssions (NAR) 
is liinited to avoid unacceptable time delay. residual packet 
error is inevitably produced (41. The retransmission efficiency 
is often evaluated by residual errors and the number of 
resulting retransmissions [5] .  
On A K Q  schemes, the retransmission number is restricted 
according to different characteristics of two data service types. 
One of two types is real time data service, which has tight 
liniitatioii of transmission delay. The other is non-real time 
data service. which has some tolei-ance to transmission delay. 
As a result. the NAR involves in acceptable ti-ansmission 
delay. Also. limited NAR reluctantly causes residziui error 
prohahilin (REP). In this paper. non-real time data trans- 
inission is assumed to evaluate widely a throughput, 
depending on NAR and REP. 
Considering data transinissioii in wireless channel, the 
Dongwoo Kim 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
T h e  Hanyang University of Korea 
Ansan, 425-791. Korea 
dkim@hanyang.ac.kr 
I'Ii ib i i ir ih n a s  rupponrd h) Korea Kcsearch Foundalion Grant iKKF-2002-  
u-i 1-00l338'~). 
1471 0-7803-7822-9/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE. 
characteristic Of the time-varying multipath fading channel 
must be reflected, because a practical wireless channel induces 
a time-varying response with bursty errors due to multipath 
fading and shadowing effects. Then, a throughput is changed 
according to the fading channel conditions. It means that it is 
difficult to achieve an optimum throughput. Besides, it can say 
that a variable is needed to be matched to the prevailing 
channel conditions. In  this paper, a spreading factor, as  the 
variable for matching, is considered in DSiSSMA systems 161. 
In this ,study, it is shown that doubling or hulving the 
spreading ,factor ( DSF or  HSF ) possibly improves the 
throughput that is the amount of  successful packets per delay. 
If the spreading factor doubles, the probobili/y ofpacket error 
(PPE) per transmission decreases. It. however, increases the 
time duration that is required to carry an original packet. On 
the other hand, if the spreading factor halves, the PPE per 
transmission increases, but the demanded time duration 
diminishes. We  use the expected number of rerransniissions 
(ENR), as a performance measure, that depends on the PPE 
per trans-mission and time duration. Thereby, an effective 
throughput. which is based on ENR and REP. is considered to 
compare fairly with' performances in point of the ENR. 
The effective throughput for DSF? HSF or  original spread- 
ingfacror (OSF) is obtained when target REP is given in this 
paper. Then, it is shown that HSF or  DSF works better, for the 
respective small o r  big changes in their PPE's per transmission, 
than using OSF. Consequently. at the beginning of retrans- 
inission, an adequate spreading factor can be formed for 
improving the retransmission efficiency based on the ratio of 
the PPE's per transmission between HSF and OSF as well as  
between DSF and OSF. 
11. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
We consider transmission of equal size packets in a mobile 
wireless comniunication channel. One  packet transmission 
inay incur errors. Let us assume that the PPE per transmission 
is unchanged during retransmissions. Also, we assume error- 
t'see feedback since it is usually short and well protected. The 
system deliberates the cases of HSF and OSF in fig. 1 as  well 
as  DSF in fig. 2 when the retransmission is required. In the 
case of  using O S F  o r  HSF, fig. I shows that one  packet 
advances to be accepted at receiver. Similarly. fig.2 illustrates 
The 14” IEEE 2003 lntemational Symposium on PersonalJndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings 
Figure I ,  The state diagram for retransmission of one packet in OSF 
Figure 2.  The state diagram for retransmission ofane packet in DSF. 
an advance of one packet in the case of  using DSF. In fig. 1 
and 2, the number in the circles represents the frequency of 
transmissions. x, and denote NAR’s in OSF and DSF, 
respectively. P., and PI, denote the probabilities of the packet 
error in OSF and DSF, respectively. When H S F  is selected, 
the system is the same as that for OSF but NAR since NAR 
must be changed by the difference of  PPE‘s between OSF and 
HSF. In fig. 2, it is considered that two successful trans- 
inissions are needed since DSF reduces the information rate in 
half. Also, the first of  two transmission can not be decided 
whether it is successful in transmission since cyclic 
redundancy check (CRC) is located in the second transmitted 
packet. In this paper, we would like to present that it exits the 
range of PPE where the system for HSF or DSF has better 
performance than OSF, which is based on given REP. 
111. EVALUATION OF THE PERFORMANCE 
PPE is defined as the probability of packet error in a single 
transmission and denoted by P., where spreading factor s is 
selected. Thus, spreading factor s/2 and 2s mean HSF and 
DSF, respectively. According to the characteristics of HSF 
and DSF, PPE’s are expressed as  
where a and 4 ( 1  a; LZm) denote the increased amount of 
the PPE in HSF, OSF and DSF, respectively. Then, the 
performance of HSF, OSF or DSF depends on a, 0 and PA. 
A. Residual Error Probability (REP) 
REP is defined as the probability of  the transmission failure 
after NAR is exceeded and denoted by E,. Form fig. 1 and 2, 
REP’S are obtained as 
1 2  
E,=<’,,.  E,=P.’”.and E , = ( 2 f , % - P i r  . (2 )  
where l, m and n are NAR’s in HSF, OSF and DSF, 
respectively. Using (2), NAR’s for given REP are obtained by 
NAR generally increases as  PPE increases, and spreading 
factor reduces. 
B .  Expectation Number of Retransmission (ENR) 
Let N ,  denote the number of  retransmission where original 
spreading factor s is selected. x, 2 and 21, denote the numbers 
of  retransmission in HSF and DSF, respectively. From fig. 1 
and 2, ENR’s in HSF, O S F  and DSF are obtained by 
E [ N , ]  =mp,”’-’ + ( m -  I)P,”’-’(l - P,)+. ..+(I - P , )  
(4) 
Using ( I ) ,  (3) and (4)-(6), ENR’s for given REP are obtained 
by 
(7) 
1472 
The 14n iEEE 2003 International Symposium on Persona1,lndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings 
C. h;//>lfiive T I ~ r o ~ i ~ l ~ p ~ i t  
111 order to compare with the efficiencies o f  ENR's for 
respective HSF. OSF and DSF under given REP. an effective 
throughput i s  reasonably considered. The effective throughput 
tor  OSF. which repi-esents the amount o f  successful 
retransmission per delay in information data, is written as [7] 
(I - E, ). B 
L,, (21+ 6 )  17. 
\Yhere 
B = information data bits. 
L,! = the number o f  packets in information data, 
E[IV,] =the ENR when s, OSF, is selected, 
T =the propagation delay. 
6 = the time required to transmit a packet plus receiver 
processing time tor checking an erroneous packet. plus the 
time to transmit an acknowledgement. and 
i s  REP. 
IV .  NUMERICAL RESULTS 
In  ( I O )  and (1 I), the effective throughputs include the 
constant pait which can be ignored to compare with them 
Thus, ( I O )  and (I I )  can be rewritten simply as 
where C is constant, and c = ( I  - ) ' . 
L,, -(21+6) 
Therefore, using (7)-(IO) and (l4)-(16). in fig. 4 and 5. we 
numerically compare with the obtained throughputs for HSF. 
OSF and DSF for 1 percent REP. respectively. Fig. 4 
illustrates the change o f  the throughputs versus a for ni, HSF 
and OSF. In fig. 4, the throughputs for OSF are unchanged 
since they are not related to a. Those for HSF, however. 
decline as a increases. In addition, the throughputs are 
obtained under three kinds o f  N A R  for OSF, and increasing in 
essentially implies that PPE in OSF  increases. Fig. 5. illustrates 
the change o f  the throughputs versus 0 for n. OSF and DSF. 
Unlike fig. 4, in fig. 5 ,  the throughputs for OSF decline as 0 
increases, and those for DSF are unchanged. Moreover. the 
throughputs are obtained under three kinds o f  N A R  for DSF. 
and increasing n essentially means that PPE in DSF increases. 
In fig. 4 and 5 .  the intersecting points are the standards to 
select the efficient one o f  HSF, OSF and DSF. Then. that is 
shown that the specific spreading factor exists to obtain the 
increasing throughput which is changed by the NAR. aand D, 
We found that the throughput for HSF increases as a and 0 
decrease. The throughput, however. for DSF increases as a 
, 
and 0 increase. Accordingly, if the PPE's per transmission in 
HSF. OSF and DSF are estimated respectively, the adequate 
spreading factor can be selected for improving the throughput 
for the observation of the throughput response by the change 
of the REP, fig. 6 and 7 are inserted. Like fig. 4 and 5, fig, 6 
and 
hi  the case of HSF or DSF, the number of packets in 
iiilbrniation data and ENR are considered since REP and delay 
art. constant. In fig. 3. it is shown that the number o f  packets is 
ill DSF or HSF, respectively, ~ h ~ ~ ~ ,  if HSF, OSF or DSF is 
selected. the nu~ilber of packets' is LH/Z, L~?, or ZL,, 
resuectivelv As a result. usine ( I  I ) .  the effcctive t h r o i i ~ h m ~ t c  
doubled or SillCe ~n~orlnation rate is or halved by the aand  Dthat are the error probability ratios. i n  addition. 
show that the throughputs are changed, but REP is 
percent. In the comparison with fig. 4 and 6, it indicates that -.r--- , ~ o \ ~  ,, .~~~ ~~ ~ Ibirespec&e HSF and DSF are obtained by 
1473 
The 1 4Ih IEEE 2003 International Symposium on Personal,lndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings 
the efficiency of HSF for I percent REP is better than for IO 
percent REP. Also, fig. 5 and 7 show that the efficiency of  
DSF foi- I percent REP is better than for IO percent REP. 
V. CONCLUSION 
111 this paper. we have studied spreading factor selection to 
improve the retransmission performance in wireless com- 
inunication systems. The effective throughputs for respective 
I-ISF. OSF and DSF were evaluated, based on ENR on ARQ 
scheme. Using the results in simulations, it was shown that the 
throughput depends oil NAR and the ratio of  PPE's between 
HSF and OSF as well as between DSF and DSF. These results 
also demonstrate the need to select the adequate spreading 
factor in order to improve the retransmission throughput. 
Simulation results indicate that the efficient selection of the 
spreading factor gives more benefit for the throughput when a 
or 0 is smaller or  larger, 1-espectively. Iwaddi t ion ,  the  
el'liciency of HSF or DSF increases as REP reduces. For 
1 4 p = c 1  2 I /  >\? \ 
h\ 1 10 
a 
Figure 6. Throuphpot vers~is U Ibi HSF and OSF when REP IS 10 
p c r c e n ~  "0 and ..A'' ?mean l l ie  cases of OSF and HSF. respectively. 
5 
Figure 7. l'hroughpat ?j' YC~ELIS p for OSF and DSF when R E P  is 10 
pcrcent: ''D and . - O ' m e ~ n  the cuses of OSF and DSF. respecrively. 
considering the changing PPE with time, when the selection of 
a spreading factor is required, it is needed that the present and 
future channel information which is based on variable P.,, a 
and 0 between the first retransmission and the allowable 
retransmission. In the approach, accurate prediction on PPE in 
time-varying channels is prerequisite for improving the 
performance. However, i t  is very difficult to predict the 
information in the far future since the fading channel can be 
rapidly changed. Therefore, first of all, further study may be 
conducted to make a strategy for the accuracy of the 
vrediction in the near future. 
1474 
The 14" IEEE 2003 International Symposium on Persona1,lndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings 
I ' r r f bmm~e O F  FCC and ARQ error control in hurniy clianiirls 
uiidcr delay c o n s t r a i i i t i  IEEE PTC'VS. vol. 2. PP. 1390-1394, 18-21 
May Ili98. 
131 M A .  Kousa and M Kab~nan.  .'Ai1 adaptive error coiitrol system using 
liyhrid ARQ S C I I C I I I S S . ~ ~  IEFE Tivnr. Coiaintsi.. vol. 39. 110. 7 . IPP. 1049- 
IIl57.1ui 1991. 
141 0. tiarg. R Kimura and F. Adaclii. .'Elfcc1 of limited number of 
rctraiisiii issioiis of RCI'T hybrid ARQ For DS-CDMA mobile radio.'. 
13oc. 01 !he j ih In!einoiionuI Syrriposisni on W m l e r s  Personol 
,iliilr~iiiedio ('UiiiniiiiiiCNriOnS. pp. 97 I -975. 2002. 
D Kim and I .  H. Lcr. Y h  doubling l l ie  spreading gain IO improve 
rCtraiisinissioii efficiency iii USK'DMA systems." submitted to /€ICE 
I)om on Comman.. Mar. 2003 
K. K. Morrou. Jr. and 1. S .  Leltnen. .'Bif-to-bit error dependence iii 
SSMA packet systems will> random signature seqaences." 
. Comniim.. vol. 3 7 . ~ 0 .  IO. pp. 1052-1061.0ct. 1989. 
K.J.R. Lia .  and S.1 Marcus. ..Jointly optiimirrd hit-rateldelay 
coiitiol policy For wireless packet i networks with fading channels.'' IEEE 
I)om Coernien.. "01 50. !IO. 3. I'P 484-494. Mar 2002. 
li] 
161 
1475 
