An OC-768 Transponder for 40 and 43 Gb/s Short-Reach Links 
John Paul Mattial, and the Big Bear Networks Technical Team 
Big Bear Networks, Sunnyvale, California 
ABSTRACT 
This presentation will review several aspects of an OC- 
768 transponder that has been successfully implemented for 
data rates of 40 to 43 Gbis. The high-level operation is 
described, as well as selected details of a chipset designed 
specifically for this transponder. Measurements 
demonstrate that the performance has significant built-in 
margin and is suitable for long-term operation over short- 
reach OC-768 fiber links. 
INTRODUCTION 
An optical transponder converts data between a serial 
optical stream and several parallel electrical streams. There 
is a continuing trend for optical-system manufacturers to 
employ transponders in long-reach, intermediate-reach, and 
short-reach links, for economy of both resources and cost. 
This paper focuses on an optical transponder that 
operates at data rates of approximately 40 Gh/s for short- 
reach links (< 2 km), and also supports operation at 43 Gb/s 
for applications including forward-error correction. (Unless 
otherwise noted, we refer to these line rates collectively as 
simply “40 Gbis” for brevity: Similarly, “10 Gb/s” and “2.5 
Gbis” refer to the divide-by-4 and divide-by-I6 rates, 
respectively.) Applications for the transponder often reside 
inside of a central office, transferring data between two core 
routers, or a router and the client-side of a long-haul system. 
These applications require high standards of reliability over 
the operating range. 
This paper is organized as follows: a description of the 
high-level transponder operation will be presented. Next, 
we will discuss the choice of fabrication technology for the 
ICs that were implemented. We will then present some of 
the implementation details of both the transmitter and 
receiver chains. 
TRANSPONDER BLOCK DIAGRAM 
The block diagram is shown in Fig. 1. Our summary of 
the transponder operation begins with the transmit direction, 
in which the 16:l SFI-5 MUX block takes the 16 lanes of 
data as well as a deskew lane. The data and deskew lanes 
have arbitrary phases relative to one another, and are 
physically implemented as differential traces running at 2.5 
Gbis. The deskew operation is built to conform to the 
serdes-framer interface SFI-5 specification [ 11 and is 
described in more detail below. After skew in the data is 
removed, the data are multiplexed to 40 Ghis. This data 
stream is fed to the modulator driver, which amplifies the 
signal to a level suitable for an electro absorption modulator 
(EAM). The EAM imposes the electrical data onto an 
optical signal being fed from a CW laser, and the optical 
data are sent out over fiber. 
-: 
In the receive direction, the photodiode converts thc-~ 
optical signal into an electrical current, which is then 
amplified by the transimpedance amplifier (TIA). The 
signal is sent to the limiting amplifier (LA), at which point 
the decision threshold is introduced. Clock and data 
recovery (CDR) occurs, and the data are demultiplexed by 
1:16. Finally, the deskewing information is generated, and it 
is sent along with the 16 data lanes to the framer at 2.5 Ghis. 
I 
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the transponder. The right and 
left sides schematically show the optical and parallel- 
electrical interfaces, respectively. The input and output 
electrical interfaces each have 16 lanes of data and 1 
lane of deskew, the latter of which is labeled DSC. 
We have designed and implemented a chipset for the 
transponder in SiGe [2] that includes the following ICs: the 
16:l SFI-5 clock-multiplier unit (CMU) and MUX, 
transimpedance amplifier (TIA), limiting amplifier (LA), 
and 1:16 SFI-5 CDR/DEMUX. The packaging for the 
CMUMUX, modulator driver, LA and CDRDEMUX were 
designed intemally as well. The remaining parts are 
purchased commercially. 
Our constituent components are engineered so that the 
transponder operates with a case temperature range of -10 
to 70 degrees C, as required by the applications. The overall 
power dissipation is 25 W. 
Both the 16:l MUX and the 1:16 DEMUX conform to 
the SFI-5 specification, which simplifies the PC board 
design by automatically removing the skew between 
different 2.5 Gbis data lanes. The SFI-5 specification is 
designed to correct for the skew that could be introduced 
through 8 inches of FR4 as well as an electrical connector. 
Substantial amounts of skew can arise on these lanes since 
the propagation time for signals between the transponder to 
the framer is significant compared to the bit time. The skew 
can be cxacerbated by process and temperature variations in 
the ICs as well. 
’ Now with Tarkus Consulting. Email: jpmatlia@TarkusConsuIting.com 
0-7803-7833-4/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 27 2003 IEEE GaAs Digest 
In order to correct for the skew, a 17th lane is added to 
the 16 data lanes. The data on the 17th lane is constructed 
from the other sixteen in the following manner: an 8 bytes 
header, 8 bytes of information from lane IS, then lane 14, 
and so on until 8 bytes of lane 0 have been sent. The pattern 
‘m then repeats starting at the 8-byte header. 
~ 
TECHNOLOGY CHOICE: SiGe vs. InP 
Choosing a fabrication technology was the first step for 
assuring proper operation of the ICs that needed to be 
designed. Meeting the product specifications required that 
the decision include diverse criteria. The relative merits of 
the two finalist technologies, SiGe and InP, are summarized 
in Table 1. 
If the speed of the technology were paramount, InP 
would have been well positioned. At the time of the 
investigation, production-level technologies for InP had f f s  
nearing 200 GHz, and technologies in development were 
close to 300 GHz. SiGe on the other hand was considerably 
less, running at approximately 120 GHz in production-level 
wafers, and 200 GHz in development. Since using ff as a 
proxy for speed must he done with care, we verified the two 
production-level technologies using test circuits (such as 2: 1 
MUXs and 1:2 DEMUXs). The test results indicated that 
SiGe would provide adequate performance. 
Other criteria shown in Table 1 also weighed heavily. 
Production-level technologies in InP had superior 
performance in both speed and drive voltage, hut SiGe was 
superior in the remaining criteria. For instance, the 
minimum lithographic features were approximately 10 times 
larger in InP, and InP had about 1/3 of the thermal 
conductivity of SiGe; both of these factors contribute to 
increased complexity of packaging for InP. The number of 
transistors that is possible in a SiGe IC is orders of 
magnitude larger than that of InP. The reliability of SiGe 
subsumes a long history of silicon, with many applications 
in consumer and nonconsumer fields. SiGe also leverages 
the economies-of-scale of generic silicon. Finally, there is 
an important nontechnological consideration for this 
application: customer acceptance. To use the router 
application as an example, SiGe electronics have easy 
customer acceptance, whereas InP was considered an 
“exotic” technology, and therefore adding to the perceived 
risk of an overall project. For business reasons, this last 
element weighed quite heavily for the acceptance of the end 
product. 
Table 1. Summary of InP vs. SiGe Attributes for 40 Gb/s 
Transponder Electronics 
TRANSMITTER CHAIN 
The 1 6 1  SFI-5 CMUMUX is physically implemented as 
2 ICs: a 16:4 SFI-5 MUX, and a 4:l CMUMUX. Detailed 
descriptions of the circuits summarized here can be found in 
[3] and [4]. 
An abbreviated block diagram for the 2-die solution is 
shown Fig. 2. Each of the ~ 1 7  lanes of incoming data is 
buffered before the phase-and-data recovery (PDR) occurs. 
The PDR is necessarily implemented on a lane-by-lane 
basis, and is built using an Alexander phase detector (APD) 
[SI in conjunction with a 1-of-16-phase selector. The phase 
selector also includes a self-calibration loop, to insure proper 
operation over process and temperature variation. 
.~~~~ 
DSC 
- ,  
. . .  . . .  . . .  . .  . 
0 . .................................. 
Y : 4 1  CMUlMUX ..................................................... 
Fig. 2: Abbreviated block diagram of the 16:l SFI-5 
CMUIMUX. The deskew lane is labeled as DSC. 
Next, the data are demultiplexed by 1:8 in preparation for 
a slower CMOS logic block. Since each of the 17 lanes is 
entering the deskew block with an arbitrary phase, a circular 
FIFO is used first in the logic block to convert from the 
individual lane phases to the single-phase domain of the 
remainder of the circuit. Moreover, the FIFO also absorbs 
any PLL wander in the source framer. The CMOS block 
then deskews the incoming data and sends it to the 128:4 
MUX, which is composed of a binary tree of 2:1 selectors. 
We note that all of the clocking for this IC is derived from a 
5 GHz clock sent from the 4: 1 IC. 
The four 10 Gb/s data outputs are sent synchronously to 
the 4:l CMuiMUX IC. The 4:l MUX is also implemented 
as a binary tree of selectors, and a block diagram of the final 
selector stage is shown in Fig. 3(a). As seen by the circuit 
schematic of the latch in Fig. 3(b), the digital-circuit 
topology is fairly conventional, as are most of the highest- 
speed digital circuits throughout the ICs presented here. 
However, great care must be taken in their implementation 
in order to achieve high performance. One example of this 
is seen in the block diagram: Delay compensation insures 
proper timing over process, temperature, and supply voltage 
28 
DELAY 
CLK 
CLKP 
CLKN 
DP 
DN QP 
QN 
VB 
(b) 
Fig. 3: (a) Block diagram of the final 2:l selector 
stage and (b) schematic of single latch in the 4 1  MUX. 
variation. Finally, after the last 2 1  selector stage, the signal 
is sent to a traveling-wave amplifier before going off-chip. 
One of the input 10 Gb/s streams to the 4:l is also fed to a 
delay-lock loop for the 5 GHz clock, so that the arriving 
data are latched at the proper time. The 5 GHz clock is a 
divided down version of a local 20 GHz clock that is 
generated with an on-chip voltage-controlled oscillator 
(VCO). The VCO uses a coupled-oscillator architecture and 
is critical to providing a low-phase-noise sinusoid, so that 
the overall SONET jitter-generation specification can be 
met. Measurement of the output of this stage shows that it 
mects both the wide- and high-band jitter specification. The 
measured jitter in the output eye is 880 fs RMS. Also, by 
using a fixed pattern, the VCO and selector circuitry are 
measured to have approximately 175 fs ofRMS jitter. 
After the MUX, the signal is sent to a multistage 
modulator driver. These ICs are fabricated in GaAs and 
wcre purchased externally since there are several 
commercially available amplifiers. GaAs is well suited 
because the transistor count of the circuits is not high, and 
the circuits require large output swing and bandwidth over 
the entire operating range. This block provides 3 Vpp 
swing to the EAM. 
There are many aspects to verifying the performance of 
the transmit chain. One example is the optical output, 
shown in Fig. 4. The figure also shows a SONET eye mask 
that is expanded by 13%, demonstrating that there is suitable 
margin in both the electronics and optics. 
The performance of the SFI-5 circuitry is demonstrated 
via a jitter-tolerance measurement. This result is seen in 
Fig. 4: Optical output of the transponder at 43Gb/s. The 
SONET eye mask is expanded by 13%, and has no 
violations, demonstrating margin in the electronics and 
optics. 
1 10 100 1K 10K 
JmER FREQUENCY (Hr )  
Fig. 5: Plot of the jitter tolerance of the SFI-5 receiver in 
the 16:4 MUX. Squares and diamonds represent data 
taken by jittering the data-input and CMU reference- 
clock signals, respectively. 
Fig. 5 along with the jitter-tolerance specification for 
comparison. The lower-frequency data in this plot were 
taken by introducing sinusoidal jitter to the data-input 
reference clock, which could only be jittered to 
approximately 150 Hz due to test-hardware limitations. The 
remainder was taken by jittering the 5 GHz reference to the 
16:4. Examining the slow speed portion of the jitter- 
tolerance performance shows that the IC can correct for 42 
bits of static skew, well in excess of the specification. 
5. RECEIVER CHAIN 
The optical receiver uses a photodiode copackaged with 
an intemally designed TIA [ 6 ] ,  which is fed to a LA [7]. 
The decision threshold is introduced at the LA, which is 
packaged separately in order to reduce switching noise from 
the CDR. The front end of the photodiode, TIA, and LA 
29 
detectors, which are operating at half-rate and out of phase 
from each other. As a consequence of this architecture, the 
latches from the dual-APDs also yield the first 1:2 stage of 
demultiplexing. These two outputs are then fed to a 2:16 
demultiplexer, which is composed of a binary tree of 1:2 
CHARGE LOOP 20GHz stages. Finally, the demultiplexed data are then sent to a 
logic block that generates the SFI-5 deskew information. 
Generation of the deskew information is significantly less 
involved than recovery; however, all logic at high speeds 
must be executed with care. Finally, the 16 data lanes and 
deskew lane are sent off-chip and to the electrical connector 
of the transponder. 
As with the transmitter, there are many aspects to 
verifying the performance of this chain. Figure 7 shows the 
recovered clock (divided down to 672 MHz) for 43 Gb/s 
operation as well as the output of the deskew lane. Another 
CDWDEMUX. verification of the performance is found in the jitter- 
tolerance measurement. For this purpose, we have 
constructed a jitter-tolerance-measurement apparatus; the 
results show that the receiver meets the ITU-specified jitter- 
tolerance mask, as can be seen in Fig. 8. Finally, long-term 
loop-back measurements demonstrate that all of the 
electronics and optics have an intrinsic hit-error ratio that is 
less than lo.'', with 97% confidence. 
D15-W 
~ i ~ ,  6, fireviated block diagram of the 1:16 
-G.8251 TOLERANCE 
W 
n n 
Fig. 7: CDR output for 43 Gbls operation: the recovered 
clock (divided down to 672) and the deskew lane are 
shown. 
meet the sensitivity specification of 4 d B m  for a IO1* bit- 
error ratio, with significant margin over the operating range. 
The CDR is based on dual-APDs operating at half rate. 
A detailed description of the circuit summarized here can be 
found in [XI, and an abbreviated block diagram is shown in 
Fig. 6. The recovery process begins by the lower loop 
locking to a frequency provided by an off-chip reference. 
This lock brings the on-chip VCO inside of the frequency 
pull-in range of the phase detector formed by the upper 
loop. The upper loop is based on two Alexander phase 
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 l o  100 loo0 
JITTER FREQUENCY (Wiz) 
Fig. 8: Measured jitter tolerance at 40 Gbls for two CDRs. 
The ITU-specified tolerance mask, G.8251, is also shown. 
[I] Optical Intemetworking Forum, Implementation 
i agreement OIF-SF15-OI .O, Jan. 29,2002. 
[2] A. Joseph, etal., Proc. B U M ,  p. 143-146,2001, 
[3] M. Xu, et al., Proc. ISSCC, p. 238,2003. 
[4] D. Schaeffer, et al., Proc. ISSCC, p. 236,2003. 
[ 5 ]  J. D. H. Alexander, Electron. Lett., p. 541, 1975. 
[6]  S. Kudszus, etal.,  Proc MT, p. 1387,2003. 
[7] A.Shahani, et al., unpublished. 
[8] A. Ong, et al., Proc. ISSCC, p. 234,2003. 
30 
