Perspectives On Cognitive Informatics
*
Zhongzhi Shi   Jun Shi 
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology 
 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100080,China 
 Email: shizz@ics.ict.ac.cn
                                                                
* This project is supported by High-Tech Programme 863 (2001AA113121), National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(90104021, 60073019ˈ60173017), and Beijing natural Science Foundation (4011003)
Abstract: From a scientific perspective explaining how 
the brain thinks is a big goal. Cognitive informatics 
studies intelligent behavior from a computational point 
of view in terms of  updated research efforts and 
progresses of  brain science and neuroscience. Cognitive 
informatics is the interdisciplinary study of cognition. 
Cognition includes mental states and processes, such as 
thinking, reasoning, remembering, language 
understanding and generation, visual and auditory 
perception, learning, consciousness, emotions, etc.  In 
this paper we will point out basic research topics of 
learning, memory, thought, language, and neural 
computing  which are active fields related to cognitive 
informatics. 
Keywords: cognitive informatics, learning, memory, 
thought, language, neural computing, cognitive science, 
artificial intelligence 
1. INTRODUCTION 
From a scientific perspective explaining how the brain 
thinks is a big goal. Cognitive informatics studies 
intelligent behavior from a computational point of view 
in terms of  updated research efforts and progresses of  
brain science and neuroscience. Cognitive informatics is 
the interdisciplinary study of cognition. Cognition 
includes mental states and processes, such as thinking, 
reasoning, remembering, language understanding and 
generation, visual and auditory perception, learning, 
consciousness, emotions, etc. [8]. In 1956  appeared 
following cognitive theories: Miller’s theory of human 
short-term memory [5], Chomsky’s analysis of formal 
grammars [3], Newell and Simon’s Logic Theorist [6]. 
At the present there are three cognitive 
scientist scholars: (1) Research on human cognition; 
(2) Explore cognition of implementation in humans or 
computers; (3) Study cognition independently of the 
cognitive agent’s environment.   
From the informatics point of view, we can divide it into 
external and internal information processing of human 
brain. Previous information processing is focuses on 
external information processing. Cognitive informatics 
is going to research on the internal information 
processing mechanisms and natural intelligence in the 
brain [17]. Cognitive informatics in general seeks to 
understand human cognitive functions in terms of 
mental states and processes. It is expected that the 
investigation into cognitive informatics will result in 
fundamental findings towards the intelligence essence 
and new generation of information technology. 
Brain science points out that perceptive lobes have 
special  function separately, the occipital lobe processes 
the visual information, the temporal lobe processes 
auditory information, the parietal lobe processes the 
information from the somatic sensors. All of three lobes 
deal with information perceived from the physical world. 
Each lobe is covered with cortex where the bodies of 
neurons are located. Cortex consists of primary, 
intermediate and advanced areas at least. Information is 
processed in the primary area first, then is passed to 
intermediate and advanced area.   
Comparing with computer system, the brain is 
same as hardware and the mind looks like software. 
Most work in cognitive science assumes that the mind 
has mental representations analogous to computer data 
structures, and computational procedures similar to 
computational algorithms. Connectionists have proposed 
novel ideas to use neurons and their connections as 
inspirations for data structures, and neuron firing and 
spreading activation as inspirations for algorithms. 
Cognitive science then works with a complex 3-way 
analogy among the mind, the brain, and computers. 
Mind, brain, and computation can each be used to 
suggest new ideas about the others. There is no single 
computational model of mind, since different kinds of 
computers and programming approaches suggest 
different ways in which the mind might work.  
The mind contains  perception, rational, 
consciousness and emotion [16]. In this paper we will 
discuss basic research topics related to cognitive 
informatics, such as learning, memory, thought, 
language, and neural computing etc. 
Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’03) 
0-7695-1986-5/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
2. LEARNING 
Learning is the basic cognitive activity and 
accumulation procedure of experience and knowledge. 
Through learning the system performance will be 
improved. perceptual learning, introspective learning, 
implicit learning are active research topics in the 
learning area. 
Perceptual learning should be considered as an 
active process that embeds particular abstraction, 
reformulation and approximation within the Abstraction 
framework. The active process refers to the fact that the 
search for a correct data representation is performed 
through several steps. A key point is that perceptual 
learning focuses on low-level abstraction mechanism 
instead of trying to rely on more complex algorithm [2]. 
In fact, from the machine learning viewpoint, Perceptual 
learning can be seen as a particular abstraction that may 
help to simplify complex problem thanks to a 
computable representation. Indeed, the baseline of 
Abstraction, i.e. choosing the relevant data to ease the 
learning task, is that many problems in machine learning 
cannot be solve because of the complexity of the 
representation and is not related to the learning 
algorithm, which is referred to as the phase transition 
problem. Within the Abstraction framework, we use the 
term perceptual learning to refer to specific learning task 
that rely on iterative representation changes and that 
deals with real-world data which human can perceive.
In contrast with perceptual learning cognitive 
leaning is a leap in the process of cognition and generate 
knowledge through clustering, classification, 
conceptualization and so on. In general, there are 
inductive learning, analogical learning, case-based 
learning, explanation learning, evolutional learning  
connectionist learning [15]. 
   The core issue of cognitive learning is self-
organizing principles. Kohonen has proposed a self—
organizing maps which is a famous neural network 
model. Babloyantz  applied chaotic dynamics to study 
brain activity. Haken has proposed a synergetic 
approach  to brain activity, behavior and cognition. 
Introspective learning is an inside learning of brain, 
which means without input information from outside 
environment. We have proposed a model for 
introspective learning shown in Fig. 1. This model 
consists of 7 parts, such as expectant objective, 
evaluation, explanation, reconstruct strategy, meta 
cognition, case bases and knowledge base.  
The term implicit learning was coined by Reber to 
refer to the way people could learn structure in a domain 
without being able to say what they had learnt [9]. Reber 
first proposed artificial grammars to study implicit 
learning for unconscious knowledge acquisition. It will 
help us to understand the learning mechanism without 
consciousness. Since middle of 80’s implicit learning 
become an active research area in psychology.  
3. MEMORY 
A brain has distributed memory system, that is, 
each part of brain has several types of memories that 
work in somewhat different ways, to suit particular 
purposes. According to the stored time of contents  
memory can be divided into long term memory, short 
term memory and working memory. Research topics in 
memory exist coding, extract and retrieval of 
information. Current working memory attracts more 
researchers to involve. 
Working memory will provides temporal space and 
enough information for complex tasks, such as 
understanding speech, learning, reasoning and attention. 
There are  memory and reasoning functions in the 
working memory. It consists of three components: that 
is, central nervous performance system, video space 
primary processing and phonetic circuit. 
Fig.1 Introspective learning 
Behavior Fail
Reconstruct 
Strategy ExplanationEvaluation
Expectant
Objective
Meta 
Cognition
Case     
Bases 
Knowledge
Bases
Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’03) 
0-7695-1986-5/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
Memory phenomena have also been categorized as 
explicit or implicit. Explicit memories involve the 
hippocampus-medial temporal lobe system. The most 
common current view of the memorial functions of the 
hippocampal system in declarative memory [10]. There 
are a lot of research issues which are waiting for us to 
resolve. What is the readout system from the  
hippocampal system to behavioral expression of 
learning in declarative memory? Where are the long-
term declarative memories stored after the hippocampal 
system? What are the mechanisms of time-limited 
memory storage in hippocampus and storage of 
permanent memories in extra- hippocampal structures?  
Implicit memory involves the cerebellum, amygdala, 
and other systems. The cerebellum is necessary for 
classical conditioning of discrete behavioral responses 
under all condition. It is learning to make specific 
behavioral responses. The amygdalar system is learning 
fear and associated autonomic responses to deal with the 
situation. 
4. THOUGHT 
Thought is a reflection of essential attributes and 
internal laws of objective reality in conscious, indirect 
and generalization by human brain with consciousness 
[11]. In recent years, there has been a noteworthy shift 
of interest in cognitive science. Cognitive process rises 
man's sense perceptions and impressions to logical 
knowledge. According to  abstraction degree of 
cognitive process, human thought can be divided into 
three levels: perception thought, image thought and 
abstraction thought. A hierarchical model of thought 
which illustrates the characteristics and correlations of 
thought levels has been  proposed in [12][15]. Fig 2 
shows the hierarchical thought model of brain. 
Fig. 2 Hierarchical thought model of brain 
Perception thought is the lowest level of thought. 
Behavior is the objective of research in perception 
thought. Reflection is a function of stimulus. Perception 
thought emphasizes stimulusreflection schema or 
perceptionaction schema. The thought of animal and 
infant usually belong to perception thought because they 
can not introspect, and also can not declare empirical 
consciousness [11]. In perception thought, intelligent 
behavior takes place without representation and 
reasoning. 
Behavior-based artificial intelligence has produced 
the models of intelligence which study intelligence from 
the bottom up, concentrating on physical systems, 
situated in the world, autonomously carrying out tasks 
of various sorts. They claim that the simple things to do 
with perception and mobility in a dynamic environment 
took evolution much longer to perfect. Intelligence in 
human have been taking place for only a very small 
fraction of our evolutionary lineage. Machine 
intelligence can take evolution by the dynamics of 
interaction with the world. 
Image thought adopts intuitive imagery as thinking 
element. Intuitive imagery is one kind of information 
which acquires through processing perceptual 
representation, but does not yet generate concepts of 
language. Typical image thought is pattern recognition 
which can deal with pattern information, such as 
character, image, speech, classification and recognition 
of objects, and so on [11].  
Based on perceptual knowledge, the process which 
reflects the common properties and exposes internal 
relations of distinct objects through concepts, judgment 
and inference is called abstraction thought [11]. 
Concepts are no longer the phenomena, the separate 
aspects and the external relations, while  reflect the 
essences and internal relations of objects. Judgment 
represents the certain relations between conceptions. 
Inference acquires new knowledge from existing 
knowledge. There are existing  deductive reasoning, 
inductive reasoning, and abductive reasoning currently. 
By means of judgment and inference one is able to draw 
logical conclusions. Logical knowledge is capable of 
grasping the development of the surrounding world in 
its totality, the internal relations of all its aspects. 
Abstraction
Attention focuses consciousness to produce greater 
vividness and limits the number of thoughts that can be 
entertained at one time. Attention forces human thinking 
process from parallel  to sequential in terms of leaping 
from image thought to abstraction thought. 
5. LANGUAGE 
Language is fundamentally a means for social 
communication. Language is also often held to be the 
mirror of the mind. Chomsky developed 
transformational grammar that cognitivism replaced 
behaviorism in linguistics [3].  
Through language we organize our sensory 
experience and express our thoughts, feelings, and 
expectations. Language is particular interesting from 
Attenti
Audio Vision Motor
Image 1 Image 2 Image 3 
Abstraction 
Thought
Image 
Thought 
Perceptual
thought
Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’03) 
0-7695-1986-5/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
cognitive informatics point of view because its specific 
and localized organization can explore the functional 
architecture of the dominant hemisphere of the brain 
.
    Fig. 3  Wernicke-Geschwind model [4] 
Recent studies of  human brain show that the written 
word is transferred from the retina to the lateral 
geniculate nucleus, and from there to the primary visual 
cortex. The information then travels to a higher-order 
center, where it is conveyed first to the angular gyrus of 
the parietal-temporal-occipital association cortex, and 
then to Wernicke’s area, where the visual information is 
transformed into a phonetic representation of the word . 
For spoken word the auditory information is processed 
by primary auditory cortex. Then the information input 
to higher-order auditory cortex, before it is conveyed to 
a specific region of the parietal-temporal-occipital 
association cortex, the angular gyrus, which is 
concerned with the association of incoming auditory, 
visual, and tactile information. From here the 
information is projected to Wernicke’s area and Broca’s 
area. In Broca’s area the perception of language is 
translated into the grammatical structure of a phrase and 
the memory for word articulation is stored [4]. Fig. 3 
illustrates the Wernicke-Geschwind model of language 
processing in brain.   
6. NEURAL COMPUTING 
Neural computing studies on the essence and 
capacity of information processing with 
nonprogramming, adaptive and brain paradigm [13]. 
Different areas in the brain perform different 
functionally significant tasks. Information geometry 
emerged from studies of the intrinsic structure of the 
manifold of probability distributions and is applicable to 
a wide variety of information systems. Information 
geometry provides a new tool for neural computing. 
In 1985 Amari has presented information geometry 
for neural information processing[1]. Based on 
information geometry we have proposed neural field 
theory [14 ]. The research object of neural field theory is 
referred  to try to understand the transformation 
mechanism,  dynamical behavior, capability and 
limitation of neural networks models,  by  the study of 
globally topological and geometrical structure on 
parameter spaces of neural networks models . The body 
of work is primarily devoted to investigate  the global 
structure properties in the non-linear manifold by the set  
of all neural networks, the information processing 
mechanism about organizing and embedding 
submanifold by simple models into the manifold by 
general richer information systems. The research is also 
viewed to explore deeper  theoretical  foundation  and  
new  approach  to develop the key concept and 
framework of neural information  processing, and to 
pursue new  breakthrough  in  the research of 
computation model for understanding of human-like 
recognition mechanism. Fig. 4 shows you the neural 
field model. 
Field Action Model   y  Output 
Units
                                 
 . . .
W2: Field Action Weight
                                                 
                                                             
            . . . Hidden Units 
z
 W1˖Field Organization  Weights
. . .
                Fig. 4   Neural field model 
The basic ideas of information geometry for neural 
information processing can be described as follows: 
consider a neural networks set including modifiable 
parameters, such as weights and threshold,  summarized 
in a vector form T = (T1, T2, ….Tn )  , then the set of all the 
possible neural networks realized by changing T forms a 
n-dimension manifold N or submanifold embedding into 
more complex information processing manifold S, i.e. in 
many case, the set of a family of neural networks model 
can be represented by a finite dimension submanifold N, 
where parameter T play the role of a coordinate system 
in S. Under the framework of information geometry, for 
an adaptive system, one of the important problems we 
confront is to explore the new mathematical tools such 
as geometrical and topological structure on the 
parameter space that can be applied to describe the  
organization mechanism about how submanifold is 
Input Units
  x  Field Organization model 
Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’03) 
0-7695-1986-5/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
embedded into a larger manifold, and provide an 
unifying approach to formulate  the general principle 
about architecture-based learning by using the 
mechanism of  embedding neural networks submanifold 
into the manifold by more richer information processing 
system. Neural field theory attempts to address the 
problem about geometrical and topological code 
mechanism by all information system. The goal of doing 
this is to study the optimal hybrid  between field 
organization model and field action model with the 
architecture of simple complexes on parameter space, It 
will give a new framework of neural information 
processing. 
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE 
Cognitive informatics studies intelligent behavior 
from a computational point of view in terms of  updated 
research efforts and progresses of  brain science and 
neuroscience. Cognitive informatics is the 
interdisciplinary study of cognition. This paper has 
pointed out the active topics of cognitive informatics 
containing learning, memory, thought, language, neural 
computing etc. It is possible to break down the progress 
of artificial intelligence and information technology by 
the investigation into cognitive informatics.  
At the present cognitive informatics will play more 
important role in understanding intelligent behavior. 
Winston pointed that we are much better situated to 
undertake the mission of understanding human 
intelligence than 10 years ago [18] Neuroscience has 
launched revolutionary improvements in experimental 
methods. The incremental efforts in brain science and 
neuroscience provide us exciting solid foundation to 
explore intelligent behavior. Over 50 years research 
artificial intelligence accumulate rich experiences and is 
conscious of the intelligence lies in the use vision, 
language, and motor systems, not behind them. I believe 
that we can make great progress of cognitive informatics 
in ten years. Let us work together to contribute our 
intellect and capability to promote the development of 
cognitive informatics. 
REFERENCES
[1] Amari,  S., Differential Geometrical Methods in 
Statistics, Springer Lecture Notes in Statistic, 28, 
Springer, 1985 
[2] Bredeche, N., Zhongzhi Shi, Zucker, J. Perceptual 
learning and abstraction, Proceedings of ICCI’03, 
2003
[3] Chomsky, N., Syntactic Structures, The Hague: 
Mouton. 
[4] Mayeux, R. And Kandel, E.R. Disorders of 
language: the aphasias. In: Kandel, E.R., Schwarz, 
J.H. and Jessell, T.M. (eds).  Priciples of Neural 
Science, 3rd ed., Elsevier, 1991, pp. 840-851 
[5] Miller, G.A., The magical number seven, plus or 
minus two: some limits on our capacity for 
processing information, Psychological Review, 
63:81-97, 1956 
[6] Newell, A., Shaw, J.C., Simon, H.A., Empirical 
explorations with the logic theory machine, 
Proceedings of Western Joint Computer Conference, 
New York: IEEE, 1957 
[7] Norman, D.A., Perspectives on Cognitive Science, 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corp, 1981 
[8] Rapaport, W.J., Cognitive Science, Grove’s 
Dictionaries, New York, pp. 227-233, 2000 
[9] Reber, A.S.  Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 
6, 855-863, 1967 
[10] Richard, F.T. and J.J. Kim. Memory system in the 
brain and localization of a memory. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA, Vol93, pp. 13438-13444, Nov. 
1996
[11] Shi, Zhongzhi, Zhihua Yu, Cognitive Science  and  
Computer, Science Universal Publishers (in 
Chinese), 1990.  
[12]  Shi, Zhongzhi,. Artificial Thought and Intelligent 
Systems. AI Summer School'94, 1994 
[13] Shi, Zhongzhi, Neural Computing, Publishing 
House of Electronic Industry, 1994 
[14] Shi, Zhongzhi, Zhang Jian, Liu Jimin, Neural Field 
Theory-A Framework of neural Information 
Processing Neural Network and Brain Proceedings, 
1998, 421-424 
[15] Shi, Zhongzhi, Advanced Artificial Intelligence,
Science Press of China, 1998 
[16] Thagard, P., Mind: Introduction to Cognitive 
Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996 
[17] Wang, Yingxu, On cognitive informatics. The 
Proceedings of the First IEEE International 
Conference on Cognitive Informatics, 2002 
[18] Winston, P.H., Why I am optimistic, Invited 
Speaker, AAAI-99, 1999. 
Proceedings of the Second IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’03) 
0-7695-1986-5/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE
