MDl (Invited) 
14:OO - 1 4 ~ 3 0  
Advances in interactive, holographic 3D displays 
Chris Slinger, Colin Cameron, Stuart Coomber, Richard Miller, Doug Payne, Allan Smith, 
Mark Smith, Maurice Stanley 
Innovative Displays Group, QinetiQ Malvern, St Andrews Road, Great Malvern, Worcestershire, WR14 3PS, UK. 
cslinger@QinetiQ. corn, +44 1684 895670 (td), +44 1684 896530 (fax) 
Introduction 
Reconfigurable computer generated holography - sometimes known as electroholography [ 1,2] - is the only 
technique capable of using computer held data to generate interactive, high quality, 3D images containing all the 
depth cues used by the human visual system. Possible applications for such a display systems include oil and gas, 
aerospace, automotive and medical data visualisation. The need for such displays is increasing as the ability of 
computers to gather and generate large multidimensional data sets continues to outstrip the capabilities of existing 
and planned display technologies. 
between IO9 to 10"pixels to be calculated and displayed at interactive rates. These pixel counts are necessary in 
order to generate images which are both big enough (upwards of 300 nun width) and possess a large enough field of 
view (FOV) to permit simultaneous, multiuser viewing. 
pixel counts at interactive rates. Advances in several key areas may now make such high performance 
electroholographic systems practical in the near future. 
Practical applications of electroholography require computer generated hologram (CGH) patterns of 
Until recently, it has not been possible to envisage viable techniques to calculate and display such large 
CGH design algorithms 
Efficient algorithms for calculation of the CGH pixel patterns are vital [3]. Diffraction specific (DS) algorithms 141 
allow full control of the amount of information present in the 3D image whilst maintaining useable image sizes and 
FOV. In this way computation effort is not wasted in calculating images which are over-resolved. Image detail can 
be tuned to match the demands of the chosen application. DS can also be implemented efficiently on a variety of 
computer architectures. 
Computer architectures 
One of the most cost effective means of calculating CGH patterns is to use clusters of commodity PCs [3]. Such 
architectures are becoming the norm in a variety of high performance computing applications. They take full 
advantage of the rapid, commercially driven, advances in processor power, currently increasing at a rate of -10 
times every 3 years. Computers based on field progammable gate arrays (FPGAs) may prove to be even more 
attractive in the longer term. 
CGH display engines - the Active Tiling" system 
Once calculated, the 2D holographic pixel pattern must be displayed and replayed by a laser reference to yield the 
required 3D image. One very scaleable solution, which can give the required pixel counts, is the Active Tiling (AT) 
system [Z]. The AT system exploits the existing and projected strengths of both electrically addressed SLM 
(EASLM) and optically addressed SLM (OASLM) in an optimal way, trading the high temporal bandwidth of the 
former for the large spatial bandwidth of the latter. An Active Tiling channel uses optics to replicate or 'tile' the 
output from a fast EASLM over an area of the OASLM. In one configuration, shutters are opened in turn to build 
up the pattern on the write side of the OASLM, the shutters being synchronised to the appropriate frames of the 
EASLM. In this way, the whole of the OASLM can be updated at video rates. Each Active Tiling channel is 
modular and carefully designed such that multiple channels can he stacked together in parallel to deliver the required 
pixel counts. This parallel approach also minimises the required data feed rates for each channel. 
diffract a coherent readout wave. After passing through Fourier transforming and magnification optics, the desired 
3D image is formed in space and can be viewed and manipulated. Interacting with *e image is an important 
element of the system in many applications. Intuitive interaction using voice, gesture and haptics has been 
Once the CGH pattern has been built up and displayed on the AT channels, the pattern can be used to 
0-7803-7500-9/02/$17.00@2002 IEEE 29 
developed [SI. The synergistic effects of 3D sound can also be exploited to enhance the ease of image interaction 
and modification. 
Recent results 
A variety of technical demonstrators have been produced to verify key aspects of the QinetiQ system. These include 
fixed colour and monochromatic images from the CGH with pixel counts in excess of 2x109. Figure 1 shows digital 
photograph of a typical 3D image. 3 0  images of width in excess of 300 mm have been demonstrated in this way. 
A 4 channel AT system has also been designed, built and demonstrated. This system generates 3D, full 
parallax monochrome images from reconfigurable CGH containing 10’ pixels (20480 wide x 5120 high, 6.6 
pixel spacing), a significant advance on the 36 x IO6 pixel systems previous best published in the literature. At a 
size of 450 mm x 220 mm x I IO mm, this 4 channel AT system is compact and modular, and is scaleable to the IO9 
to 10” pixel counts required for a practical electro-holographic 3D display system. 
Results and images from the most recent developments in this technology will be presented at the meeting. 
F‘igure 1. Left: digital photograph of a full parallax, 3D image produced from a CGH. Blurring at  the front 
and back of the photograph illustrate aspects of the true 3D nature of the image. Note the specular 
highlights and transparency of the windows of the car. Right: photograph of a 4x1 channel AT system, 
delivering CGH of 10’ pixels. At the front of the image is the =Si, ferroelectric liquid crystal OASLM, 
having an active area of 140 mm x 35 mm. 
Acknowledgements. 
The authors gatefully acknowledge the work of all members of the HI project team at QinetiQ and our academic 
and commercial collaborators. Funding from Holographic Imaging LLC (Royal Oak, Michigan, USA) is also 
acknowledged. 
0 QinetiQ 2002. Published with the permission of Holographic Imaging LLC. 
References. 
1. St-Hilaire P, Benton SA, Lucente M, Underkoffer I, Yoshokawa H, “Realtime holographic display; 
improvements using multichannel acousto-optic modulator and holographic optical elements“, Proc. SPlE 
1461, p.254-261 (1991). 
Slinger CW, Bannister B, Cameron C, Coomber SJ, Cresswell I, Hallett P, Hughes J, Hui V, Jones JC, 
Miller R, Minter V, Pain D, Scattergood D, Sheerin D, Smith M, Stanley M, ”Progress and Prospects for 
Practical Electro-Holographic Display Xystems’! Proc SPIE 4296, p.18-32 (2001). 
Cameron C, Payne DA, Stanley M, Slinger CW, “Contputationnl challenges ofemerging novel true 3 0  
holographic displays”, Proc SPlE 4109, p.129-140 (2000). 
Lucente M, “Computational holographic bandwidth compression ”, IBM Systems Jml. 35, p.349-65 
(1996). 
Anderson P, Slinger CW, “Virtual replacesphysical - key research within replacement realiry ”, Proc. 
IMechE S732/004/2000, (23 May, 2000), subsequently published in the IMechE seminar publication 2000- 
18, Virtual Design & Manufacture, p.35-47 (Professional Engineering Publishing, London, 2000). 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
30 
