CHARACTERIZATION OF 40 GBlS RECEIVERS 
USING IMPULSE RESPONSE METHOD 
Sumit Verma, Mark Selker 
Big Bear Networks 
1591 McCarthy Blvd 
Milpitas, CA 95035 
e-mail: sverma@higbearnetworks.com 
(408) 434-3459 
Abstract 
Much work has gone into verifymg the validity of using the impulse response for characterizing 
the frequency response of high-speed photodiodes and photo receivers. Here we expand on this 
work by showing its validity as applied to understanding 40 Gb/s digital receiver performance. 
We show that using a measured impulse response of a photo-receiver/ 50 GHz (or faster) 
sampling oscilloscope pair, 40 Gb/s eye diagrams can be accurately simulated. Simulation of 
eye diagrams is an extremely important step in understanding and predicting digital sytem 
performance. Using the impulse response method, impairments leading to eye closure can be 
detected without the need for expensive equipment required for experimental performance 
verification. 
Introduction 
Using the impulse response to characterize system performance is a cornerstone of linear 
system theory. The impulse response can be measured on electro-optic receivers using short 
optical pulses, which are separated in time adequately to allow the full time evolution of the 
response. The optical pulses can be generated using commercially available mode locked lasers, 
and the system response viewed using a high bandwidth sampling oscilloscope, and a data 
acquisition system. This type of experimental system allows the acquisition of the basic 
information necessq  to simulate and predict system level performance of digital receivers. 
Measurement 
The use of the impulse response to characterize photo-receivers has been studied 
extensively. Much of this work has been performed at NIS?I~ including detailed analysis of the 
nopideal behavior of sampling scopes that are required for this application. Researcher’s were 
able to correlate a magnitude response measurement via this method against a heterodyne 
technique to better than +/- 0.1 dB to 25 GHz, and +/- 1.0 dB to 50 GHz’, thereby demonstrating 
the capability of the impulse response measurement. The experimental set-up for the impulse 
response measurement is shown in figure 1. 
0-7803-7143-7/02/$10.00 02002 IEEE 3 
Figure 1: Setup for Impulse Response Measurement 
When using the impulse response measurement it is important to choose the proper 
optical power level to drive the DUT. Typical Mode Locked Lasers used for this application 
have a very high peak to average power ratio. Calculations for our system reveal a duty factor of 
approximately 2,000 or equivalently, 33 dE3. Hence, if +3 dBm is the safe upper linear limit for a 
DUT, and padding 6 dB for margin, the proper input level for the DUT is -36 dBm average 
optical power. The two optical attenuators provide independent control of optical levels into the 
DUT and the trigger photo diode. Once proper triggering is achieved, the scope is set to 
intemally average a few of the samples (approx 64 - 256 ave) to improve signal to noise ratio, 
and a commercially available data acquisition system is used to download the data. Figure 2 
shows an example impulse response of a 40 Gb/s receiver, as well as the step response obtained 
by direct integration of impulse response. After some straightforward data processing, which 
will be described later, an FFT algorithm can be used to bring the data into the frequency 
domain. Note that both magnitude and phase information are gathered in this technique. Finally, 
the frequency response derived is the combination of both the DUT and the sampling head itself. 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
+ 0.5 
f 0.4 
U 
- ? 0.3 
i 
- - 
B 0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0 . 1  
0 . 2  
0.3 
0.4 
0 50 100 750  MO 250 300 350 4W 450 500 550 600 650 7W 750 800 850 900 950 1000 
"e (PS) 
Figure 2: Example Impulse Response Measurement and Derived Step Response 
4 
The fact that the frequency response measured is the combination of the receiver and 
sampling head can be useful if the system as a whole is to be used as a “reference receiver”. 
Many standards bodies refer to reference receivers for use in applications where it is necessary to 
ensure interoperability among different manufacturer’s equipment. For example, in the 10 G 
transponder arena, a reference receiver is clearly called out in Annex B.2 in ITU G. 9573. 
Current thinking is that a reference receiver for 40G applications will be required as well, with a 
time domain, rather than a frequency domain specification. The desired 40G reference receiver 
would have very little ringing in the impulse response, leading to very little undershoot in the 
step response, and have an adequately fast response time (FWHM pulse width for impulse 
response, 10 - 90% rise time for step response). One important application of this work is the 
ability to unambiguously characterize a photo receiver, sampling oscilloscope, and data 
acquisition system for application as a reference receiver. 
We also analyzed the frequenc response of our photodiodes and photo receivers using 
the filtered intensity noise technique4? This technique was employed both as check on the 
veracity of our impulse response measurements and a way to separate the amplitude response of 
the DUT and the measurement equipment. Figure 3 shows the setup for the filtered intensity 
noise measurement. 
Output - 14 dBm 
Figure 3: Setup for Filtered Intensity Noise Measurement 
Effective implementation of the filtered intensity noise technique re uires that the optical 
bandwidth of the selected filter be chosen appropriately. It has been shown that the average 
RIN (Relative Intensity Noise) level into .the DUT is proportional to 1BW opt. Hence, selecting 3 
nm as our optical bandwidth provides us with - 10 dB of RIN “gain“ with respect to the 
unfiltered EDFA ASE bandwidth of * 30 nm. The tradeoff for this gain is the RIN Bandwidth. 
Simulations6 have shown that up till 50 GHz, less than 0.5 dB RF droop exists for a 3 nm filtered 
optical noise source. The microwave amplifier is needed to overcome the noise level of the 50 
GHz Electrical Spectrum Analyzer. The RIN ”gain” from the optical fdter allows us to be able 
to use just one such amplifier, and not have the added uncertainty of cascading two such devices. 
Repeatable experiments have shown us that the gain profile of the microwave amplifier becomes 
stable if allowed to come to thermal equilibrium for approximately 30 min. The gain profile 
visible on the Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (ESA) is the cascaded response of the DUT, the 
Microwave Amplifier and the ESA it self. However, we can use a 50 GHz Vector Network 
Analyzer to get the magnitude response of the microwave amplifier, and divide it out to get the 
response of the DUT and ESA cascade only. In addition, we can correct for the response of the 
ESA by comparing its response to that of an RF power meter for sinusoidal inputs. After 
calibration against an RF power meter we believe the corrected response to be accurate to ? 0.25 
1 
5 
dB. Figure 4 shows the frequency response of a 50 GHz ESA. Note that although we only get 
the amplitude response using this method, it is very informative to compare to the impulse 
response method, and helps distinguish between the response of the test equipment and the DUT. 
0 5 10 15 22 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Freq(GHz) 
Figure 4: Raw Frequency Response of an ESA against an RF Power Meter 
Good agreement between the impulse response and filtered intensity noise techniques can 
be seen in the comparison shown in Figure 5. Agreement to - 1 dB is achiexd out to 25 GHz. 
Note that there is a 21-point smoothing over 601 points (50 GHz) for the intensity noise data, and 
the measurement is uncorrected to allow for direct comparison. The discrepancy around 25 GHz 
is due to the spectrum analyzers frequency response (See figure 4). The two curves in figure 5 
continue to agree well out to approximately 42 GHz, and then begin to deviate. This deviation is 
likely due to the roll off of the oscilloscope frequency response as well as the decreased signal to 
noise ratio of the ESA at these frequencies. The plot in Figure 6 shows the difference in the 
magnitude response between the impulse response method and filtered intensity noise method for 
three different devices. The good agreement to 25 GHz is seen more clearly here, and with the 
exception of the feature around 25 GHz, there is also good agreement out to 42 GHz. Another 
way of interpreting the data in Figure 6 is that it represents the frequency response of the scope 
sampling head compared to the frequency response of the ESA. 
6 
0 5 10 15 m 25 35 4 0  4 5  
FR(( ( G H 4  
Figure 5 :  Magnitude Response of a 40 Gb/s Receiver via both methods 
0 5 t o  15 20 25 30 35 40 45 3 
Freq (GHz) 
Figure 6:  Delta Magnitude via both methods for 3 different 40 Gb/s receivers 
I 
Eye Diagram Generation 
While previous work focused mainly on obtaining the frequency response of the photo 
receiver, here we are concemed with the ability to use this measurement as part of a method to 
generate eye diagrams and understand the implications at the system level. Eye diagrams are 
also generally measured with a sampling scope with the frequency response of the sampling head 
included in the eye measurement. Therefore, it is of interest to understand the response of the 
combination of the photo receiver and sampling head. During the characterization using the 
impulse response, it is effective to think of the combination of the photo diode and oscilloscope 
as our receiver. However, since our actual system will use only the photo-receiver, we need to 
ensure that the sampling oscilloscope has sufficient fidelity that the photo receiver performance 
alone is not obscured. More specifically, when we view the eye diagrams in comparison to 
experimentally observed eyes we need the combined oscilloscope photo receiver performance, 
but the communicatiots link will only see the photo receiver response. 
In order for us to understand the photo receiver response without undue effect from the 
sampling scope’s response, we would ideally like that response to be as close to flat in amplitude 
(with linear phase) as possible, over the frequency range of interest. Commercially available 50 
GHz sampling scopes have been tested to exhibit good frequency response flatness and close to 
linear phase response up to -30 GHd. This should be adequate for 40 Gb/s NRZ coded systems, 
but might be insufficient for RZ. That is because RZ coded streams typically require twice the 
bandwidth of NRZ codes, given that they use pulse widths that occupy half the bit period. The 3 
dE3 bandwidth of the ideal NRZ pulse for 40 Gb/s is - 18 GHz, but information is required 
beyond this point in frequency space. 
In order to create an acceptable eye diagram, a time span of the impulse response out to 
about 1 ns is required. This is because the longest test pattem that’s usually used in pattem 
generators is PN 3 1, which implies that the max number of consecutive 1’s is 3 1, and 
consecutive 0’s is 30. One nanosecond actually represents 40 bits at 40 Gb/s, and hence, is a 
long enough time evolution. Our studies indicate that most photo receiver impulse response 
measurements will settle in this time frame. Often times however, reflections will be visible in 
the 1 ns time window. Since these have been found to exist around the 800 ps mark, a 
convenient way to move them beyond t l ~  1 ns point is to add a 1.85 mm adaptor after the DUT. 
Since 1.85 mm adaptors have good fidelity out to and beyond 60 GHz, its insertion should add 
little distortion to the measurement, but add just enough delay to push the reflection beyond the 
relevant time window. M e r  the measurement, post processing of the data is necessary. The 
measured impulse response should be carefully zeroed once it settles. One way to accomplish 
this is by adding an offset to the data such that the integral of the time samples in the “settled” 
part of the response goes to zero. Taking an FFT of the data gives us the desired frequency 
response (magnitude and phase). Given an adequate estimation of the transmitted pulse, an eye 
diagram can be readily simulated. The transmitter pulses (representing transmitted symbols) are 
convolved with the receiver impulse response and then summed over the symbols to produce the 
output time sequence. The output time sequence is then periodically time shifted and 
8 
superimposed as would occur using a Digital Communications Analyzer (DCA), to create an 
eye diagram. If propagation effects are important, the frequency response can be used in 
conjunction with split step Fourier methods to obtain the response of the fiber. Optical system 
simulators that combine all of the aforementioned features are currently commercially available6. 
We have used this technique to generate simulated eye diagrams and we have compared 
them against experimentally obtained eye diagrams. An example of this is shown in figure 7. 
The eye in both cases is highly 'skewed' due to nomideal phase / group delay response oFthe 
receiver. The ability to predict this nomideal eye behavior with just information derived from 
the impulse response measurement (and an adequate estimate of the input eye diagram to the 
receiver) is a very promising result. Figure 8 shows the measured and simulated eyes into a 40 
GHz photodiode, both showing good agreement with each other. This is approximately the eye 
diagram input to the receiver, since most of the transmitter energy is within the pass band of the 
photodiode, and the PD has excellent magnitude flatness and phase linearity. The capability of 
simulating nomideal eye behavior without the need for expensive 40 Gb/s test equipment is very 
exciting, and has implications for both design and analysis of high-speed receivers. 
, . .. . . ... .. . . ..... ". .. . .. 
Figure 7: Measured RX Eye (left), Simulated eye (right) 
Figure 8: Measured PD Eye (left), Simulated eye (right) 
9 
Conclusion 
We have utilized application of the impulse response at microwave frequencies in order 
to characterize high bit rate photo receivers. This characterization allows us to thoroughly 
understand the behavior of the photo receiver and the concomitant equipment required to view 
the response of the photo receiver. We have also utilized the data obtained using these 
techniques to simulate apriori, the eye diagrams that the photo receiver (DUT) generates and 
these simulations compare well with experiment. This indicates that it might be possible to 
obtain indications of system performance without having to utilize a full 40 Gb/s test bed. 
Having a properly simulated eye diagram gives up the first key step in estimating a digital 
receiver’s bit error rate performance which is the ultimate key performance parameter in digital 
communications. 
10 
References: 
Tracy S. Clement, Paul D. Hale, Kevin C. Coakley, and C.M. Wang, “Time-Domain 1 
measurement of the frequency response of high-speed photo receivers to 50 GHz”, Symposium 
on opticalfiber measurements, (Sept. 2000) 
* Paul D. Hale, Tracy S. Clement, Kevin C. Coakley, C.M. Wang, Donald C. DeGroot, and 
Angelo P. Verdoni “Estimating the magnitude and phase response of a 50 GHz sampling 
oscilloscope using the ‘nose to nose’ method”, 55‘* ARFTG Conference Digest (June 2000) 
ITU-T Recommendation G.957 “Optical Interfaces for equipments and systems related to the 
synchronous digital hierarchy” (06/99) 
D.M. Baney, W.V. Sorin, and S.A. Newton, “High-Frequency Photodiode Characterization 
Using a Filtered Intensity Noise Technique”, ZEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Vol. 6, No. IO  
(October 1994) 
Gregory E. Obarski and Jolene D. Splett, “Transfer standard for the spectral density of relative 
intensity noise of optical fiber sources near 1550 nm”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. BNol. 18, N0.6 (June 
2001) 
For example, V i 1  Photonics Inc. Transmission and Component MakerTM 
11 
