A Highly Reliable Broadcast Scheme for IEEE 802.11 Multi-hop Ad Hoc Networks
Shiann-Tsong Sheu†, Yihjia Tsai‡, and Jenhui Chen‡
†Department of Electrical Engineering,
‡Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
Tamkang University, Tamsui, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
E-mail: stsheu@ee.tku.edu.tw; jenhui@tkgis.tku.edu.tw
Abstract—In wired networks, the broadcast data packets can be
easily and safely delivered to destinations. Nevertheless, it is a big
challenge to transfer the broadcast frames over the IEEE 802.11
based multi-hop ad hoc wireless networks due to the high bit error
rate, the high collision probability, and the lake of acknowledge-
ment (ACK). Unfortunately, most of routing protocols need the
broadcast function to exchange important information between
nodes. From our observations, the efficiency of the routing proto-
col, such as DSR and AODV, finding the path from source to des-
tination is strongly depending on the supported broadcast scheme
in the underlying media access control (MAC) protocol. In this
paper, we will first investigate the uncertain broadcast problem
in the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol while delivering the necessary
broadcast frames. Since no acknowledgement will be sent by any
recipient of the broadcast frame in IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol, we
will propose a highly reliable broadcast scheme to solve such un-
certain problem. The proposed scheme, which is still compatible
with standard, can efficiently minimize bandwidth consumption as
well as propagation delay.
Index Terms— ad hoc, broadcast, multicast, MAC, RTS/CTS,
WLANs, MANET.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ad hoc wireless networks are constructed by several mo-
bile handsets or laptops and characterized by multi-hop wire-
less connectivity, constantly changing network topology and
the need for efficient dynamic routing protocols. There is no
stationary infrastructure or base station to coordinate packets
transmissions and advertise the information of network topol-
ogy. According to these characteristics, each mobile node in
the multi-hop ad hoc networks must act as routers, relaying data
packets to their neighboring mobile nodes. Since network re-
source is limited, any transmission will interfere the neighbors
which also have packets to transmit in the same radio channel.
In order to route packets to all members in the network, one of
the main actions of a mobile node is the dissemination of con-
trol messages to all other nodes that share the same physical
channel. This procedure is known as intra-team broadcasting
and is discussed in [8]. The existence of a reliable and resource-
efficient broadcast protocol in a multi-hop ad hoc wireless net-
work is indispensable due to the increased amount of circulating
control information.
Wireless applications are becoming popular for high-speed
communications in some areas, where wiring for conventional
networking is difficult or not economic. The IEEE 802.11 stan-
dard provides detailed medium access control (MAC) and phys-
ical (PHY) layer specifications [5] for wireless local area net-
works (WLANs). A mobile ad hoc networks (MANET) work-
ing group [9] has been formed within the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) to develop a routing framework for IP-based
protocol in ad hoc networks.
In conventional networks, there are many kinds of data
needed to be transmitted by using broadcast method, e.g., ad-
dress resolution protocol (ARP), routing information exchange,
and advisement messages, etc. Any network node needs ARP
to retrieve the MAC address information of other network node
with a particular IP address or vice versa. The ARP packets are
broadcasted to achieve this goal. Lack of this scheme, nodes
may fail to reach the others due to insufficient network infor-
mation. Besides, there are many routing protocols using broad-
cast approach to perform their routing procedure. For example,
the dynamic source routing (DSR) protocol [6] and ad-hoc on-
demand distance vector (AODV) protocol [10], [11] are two fa-
mous routing protocols for multi-hop ad hoc wireless networks.
Both of them are on-demand routing protocols and are basing
on the concept of source routing. To perform the route discov-
ery, the source mobile node broadcasts a route request (RREQ)
packet that is flooded through the network in a controlled man-
ner and is answered by a unicast route reply (RREP) packet
from either the destination mobile node or another mobile node
that knows a route to the destination. Obviously, the correctness
of the DSR and AODV protocols are relying on the efficiency
of the broadcast scheme in the MAC protocol.
In IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol, regardless of the length of the
broadcast frame, no request-to-send (RTS) and clear-to-send
(CTS) exchange shall be used. In addition, no acknowledge-
ment (ACK) shall be transmitted by any recipients of the broad-
cast frame. Therefore, source node has no idea about the status
of the transmitted broadcast frame. In DSR and AODV pro-
tocols, the request will be blocked if its source node has not
received a valid route within route discovery timeout. Once
the route discovery timeout is up, it is very hard to tell the
timeout is caused by no path exists or resulted from losing
RREQ broadcast frame. Consequently, the reactive nature of
on-demand routing protocols can not obtain any benefit from
saving bandwidth than traditional proactive protocols. Hence, it
is desired to design an efficient and reliable broadcast transmis-
sion scheme for the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol to realize the
multi-hop ad hoc wireless networks. The problem of designing
an optimal broadcasting protocol so that bandwidth consump-
tion or time delay are minimized has been proved as NP-hard in
[1], [2]. We therefore resort to heuristics, aiming at providing
upper bounded performance with respect to these metrics.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. At first,
in Section II, we describe the uncertain broadcast problem in
610
0-7803-7400-2/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEE
Multi-hop MANET. In Section III, we present the proposed
broadcast transmission scheme for IEEE 802.11 wireless net-
works. Some of simulation models and results are defined and
given in Section IV. Finally, some conclusions and discussions
are presented in Section V.
II. UNCERTAIN BROADCAST PROBLEM IN MULTI-HOP
MANET
In the IEEE 802.11 Standard, the broadcast frame and the
RTS frame are sent using same physical carrier sensing. They
are transmitted only when the sensed channel idle time reaches
the DIFS period as mentioned above. The key distinguishing
feature of broadcast frames in wireless link is the lake of ac-
knowledgements. Since the IEEE 802.11 WLAN adapter is
designed as half-duplex mode, sender can not detect the col-
lisions on its broadcast frame. This incurs a server problem
for all protocols or applications which need broadcast control
frames to retrieve useful information from networks. For ex-
ample, the DSR and AODV protocols need broadcast RREQs to
perform route discovery procedure. We can imagine that as the
RREQ frame travels from a source to various destinations, the
frame loss probability (without recovering) is proportional with
the number of hops in its journey. Even though some RREQs
are fortunately surviving after passing a number of consecutive
contentions, the available paths by receiving the RREP frames
from either destination or intermediate node which has the valid
route to destination may not include the best route. This means
that such routing protocols will work well in wireless network
under the constrain that any node can successfully detect neigh-
bors’ broadcasts without loss as in the wired networks. Unfor-
tunately, to apply such routing protocol for IEEE 802.11 based
multi-hop ad hoc networks requires the IEEE 802.11 protocol
providing reliable broadcasting. In the following section, we
will propose a simple and efficient reliable broadcast scheme
with limited bandwidth consumption to overcome the uncertain
broadcast problem.
III. RELIABLE BROADCAST TRANSMISSION SCHEME
If the radio link between two neighboring nodes is symmet-
ric, the broadcast sender will successfully receive the identical
broadcast frame sent from its neighbor in the near future if the
initial broadcast is success. Based on this concept, one way
of a mobile node to recognize if its broadcast transmission is
successfully received by all its neighbors can be accumulating
the number of the same broadcast frames rebroadcasted from
neighbors within a specified observing window. Nevertheless,
how to give an appropriate observation window becomes an is-
sue. A shorter observation window will cause excessively re-
dundant rebroadcast overheads. On the other hand, a longer
observation window will slow down the flooding speed. The
CSMA/CA protocol assuming nodes contending channel in a
distributed manner, it is very hard to measure a precise delay of
each transmission to help determining the observation window
size. Therefore, we propose an efficient duplicated broadcast
scheme, which does not need the observation window, in the
following subsection.
SIFS
DIFS
BACK Window
RTS/BROADCASTBROADCAST
begin to receive
the BACKs from
neighbors
end of receiving
BACKs from
neighbors
#
#: collision
Fig. 1. An illustration of the BACK scheme.
A. Duplicated Broadcast Scheme
Upon a node successfully transmitting a broadcast frame,
all the recipients of this frame will forward it as fast as they
can. Unfortunately, it is quite often the neighbors of a node can
hear each others in wireless LANs. Hereafter, the expected se-
vere contentions will make the following broadcastings fail. In
the IEEE 8021.11 MAC protocol, each broadcast frame will be
transmitted once in a mobile node, the flooding may not cover
all members in the ad hoc wireless networks. The simple way
of enlarging the flooding area (flooding fraction) is to increase
the number of transmissions of a broadcast frame in every mo-
bile node. If each node transmits a broadcast frame twice, the
flooding fraction will become higher than that with single trans-
mission. In general, given a larger number of duplicative trans-
missions, a wider flooding area and a higher flooding fraction
will be obtained. From the network’s point of view, it is not
wise to transmit too many identical broadcast frames in a node
since too much overhead will significantly degrade the network
throughput. Obviously, it is a tradeoff between the flooding
fraction and the control overhead. Thus, it is worthy to design-
ing an efficient scheme with minimal broadcast transmissions
to enhance the flooding capability in the complicated multi-hop
ad hoc wireless networks.
An efficient broadcast scheme should prevent a node from
transmitting redundant broadcast frames. In fact, rebroadcast-
ing is necessary only when there is any neighbor does not
receive the broadcast frame. To achieve this goal, there are
two important information must be obtained by the broad-
cast sender: the number of active neighbors and the number
of neighbors which have successfully received the broadcast
frame. The former information can be determined by main-
taining a local connectivity table (LCT) in each node. Each
time a node receives a frame, it will update its LCT accord-
ing to the source address. Without losing generality, entries in
LCT should be aged by timeout due to mobility. (For simplic-
ity, we let #(LCT) denote the number of active neighbors of
a node.) In the next subsection, we will introduce the broad-
cast acknowledgement scheme to provide sender the informa-
tion of the number of its neighbors already received the broad-
cast frame.
B. Broadcast Acknowledgment Scheme
Recall the uncertain broadcast problem is mainly caused by
the lake of acknowledgment of broadcast frame. To ensure the
sender be aware of the status of broadcast frame, we slightly
modify the IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol to provide broadcast
acknowledgement. To avoid producing extra overhead, we en-
force all the receivers to response right away in the following
611
PHY
hdrBusy Medium DIFS
Backoff MAC
hdr BROADCAST SIFS
DIFS
Source patterns
Others
PHY
hdr RTS SIFS
PHY
hdr CTS SIFS
PHY
hdr
MAC
hdr PAYLOADBROADCAST PacketDIFS
BackoffBusy Medium SIFS
NAV
SIFS
PHY
hdr ACK
Fig. 2. An illustration of broadcast, RTS/CTS and backoff scheme of DCF.
DIFS. By applying the same collision avoidance procedure in
CSMA/CA, the 50 µs DIFS time period (named as the Backoff
Acknowledgement window (BACK W) in this scheme) is di-
vided into several minislots and each receiver will select one of
them to transmit acknowledgement as shown in Fig. 1. Since
the transmission time of a formal ACK frame is longer than
DIFS, the broadcast acknowledgement (BACK) message must
be short enough to accommodate the minislot in the BACK W.
To help nodes to recognize the BACK message, we use m-
bit pattern, say x, to identify the BACK message. Basically,
the link quality in wireless network will determine the pattern
length (in bits). If the channel quality is poor, a longer pattern
length should be used and less minislots will be allocated in
limited BACK W. There are two patterns p(x) are used in the
proposed scheme:
p(x) =
{
0, new ACK for received broadcast packet
1, duplicted ACK for received broadcast packet
(1)
These two patterns are designed to inform sender the new or
the duplicative receive of the broadcast frame from a neighbor-
ing node. As soon as a node receives a broadcast packet, it will
randomly choose a BACK minislot to fill the corresponding pat-
tern. Since the WLAN adapter uses half-duplex mode to access
channel, a switching delay for sender and receiver to change
the transceiver state is required. According to the PHY speci-
fication, we need allocate a time period, which is set as equal
as SIFS (= 10 µs), for the PHY layer transferring between re-
ceiving and transmitting states at the end of broadcasting. Con-
sequently, for the x-bit patterns used in the m-Mb/s WLAN, a
number of (DIFS−SIFS)x/m =
(50−10)
x/m minislots will be allocated
in the BACK W. For example, if we use 4-bit patterns in 2 Mb/s
WLAN, we have 20 minislots (BACK W = 20).
Since the BACK messages are only used for notification, they
can be treated as particular control signallings between broad-
cast sender and receivers. Hence, in this scheme, all mobile
nodes can ignore the channel busy caused by these BACK sig-
nallings within the time period DIFS following the broadcasting
and will content the channel immediately after passing DIFS as
the standard does. As a result, the proposed scheme will not
waste any channel resource to easily acknowledge broadcast
frames as shown in Fig. 2.
According to the broadcast acknowledgement scheme, any
forwarding node has sufficient information to help deciding the
necessity of rebroadcasting. In the case of the number of re-
ceived BACKs is less than the number of its neighbors minus
one (= #(LCT) − 1)1, the forwarding node needs rebroadcast
1The expected number of BACKs in the original sender is equal to the exact
number of active neighbors.
Data Queue
Broadcast
Queue
MAC Buffer
Priority Queue
Selector
Data packet
arriving
Queued
messages
Broadcast
packet
arriving
Messages
departing
Fig. 3. Model of data queue and broadcast queue in network layer and a
priority queue in MAC layer.
it again. Recall the connectivity between nodes is time vary-
ing, sender may fail to collect sufficient BACKs no matter how
many rebroadcasts it attempts. Thus, we still need a maximal
broadcast retry threshold (MBRT) to minimize the bandwidth
wastage. Accordingly, a node will rebroadcast broadcast frame
until either the number of BACKs is sufficient or the retry count
reaches the MBRT.
C. Priority Queue
In the original IEEE 802.11 MAC broadcast scheme, there is
no priority between broadcast frames and ordinary data frames.
Propagated broadcast frames probably spend a long propaga-
tion delay at intermediate nodes even if the traffic load is low.
This is because that each time a broadcast frame relayed by a
node needs wait in the FIFO queue. This is a fatal drawback in
multi-hop communication network, especially when these pri-
ority frames have a delay bound. Therefore, the normal data and
broadcast packets come from the higher layer (network layer)
should be separated as two priority queues as shown in Fig. 3.
Broadcast packets will get a higher priority than normal data
to be serviced. Besides, to avoid circulating broadcast frames
in network, each broadcast frame should contain the following
fields:
• Source Address (SA)
• Destination Address (DA)
• Broadcast ID (BID)
• Hop count
• Retry flag
• Data Payload
Every mobile node maintains a BID counter and increases
the value by one each time it has a new data to broadcast.
The pair <SA, BID> uniquely identifies a broadcast packet.
Each time the broadcast frame is forwarded by a node, the
associated Hop count will be increased by one. According
to the Hop count indication, we let the broadcast frame with
the largest Hop count to have the highest priority to shorten
the propagation delay. Field Retry flag is used to identify
the broadcast frame is a new one or just a retransmission.
612
Procedure TRANSMIT BROADCAST()
input: BPkt
begin
set BACK count(BPkt) := #(LCT)−1; // or #(LCT) in the original
sender
set Retry count(BPkt) := 0;
set BPkt→Retry flag := False;
While (BACK count(BPkt) > 0 and Retry count(BPkt) < MBRT )
begin
broadcast the BPkt and then wait the replied BACKs;
receive all replying BACKs in BACK window;
BACK count(BPkt) := BACK count(BPkt) − new #BACKs;
BPkt→Retry flag := True;
end
drop this BPkt;
end
Fig. 4. The algorithm of transmitting broadcast packet procedure.
This will help the receiver to reply a correct BACK back to
sender. In addition, a node needs maintain two counters, named
as BACK count and Retry count, for each broadcast frame
buffered in queue to make the decision of rebroadcast. The
BACK count stands for a number of BACK count BACKs are
expected to be received from neighbors before discarding the
broadcast frame. A node will continue rebroadcasting it until
the BACK count is decreased to zero. Initially, the BACK count
is set as #(LCT)−1 or #(LCT). Another counter Retry count
is used to indicate that how many retries of a broadcast frame
has been done. If the Retry count is equal to MBRT, the broad-
cast frame will be discarded immediately. We note that since
a node may receive the identical broadcast frame from any of
its neighbors, the bandwidth consumption can be further min-
imize by detecting the Retry flag, SA and BID of the frame.
That is, each time it receives the identical broadcast frame with
Retry flag = False, it decreases the associated BACK count of
the broadcast frame buffered in the priority queue if any. As
a result, some waiting broadcast frames could be quickly re-
moved from queue. This is another advantage of the proposed
broadcast acknowledgement scheme. The broadcast transmis-
sion and receive procedures are listed in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, re-
spectively.
IV. MODEL SIMULATION AND RESULTS
In order to evaluate the proposed broadcast scheme in a more
precious way, we consider a detailed simulation model which is
based on the distributed coordination function (DCF) of IEEE
802.11 [5] WLAN. In simulations, we considered the realistic
system parameters (listed in the direct sequence spread spec-
trum (DSSS) physical specification) in IEEE 802.11 MAC pro-
tocol, which are shown in Table I. The 802.11 DCF uses
RTS/CTS exchange precedes data packet transmission and im-
plements a form of virtual carrier sensing and channel reser-
vation to reduce the impact of the well-known hidden terminal
problem [12]. Data frame transmission is followed by an ACK
and the RTS/CTS frames are sent using physical carrier sens-
ing. “Broadcast” frame transmission follows by a number of
BACKs and can be treated as control frame in proposed scheme.
All broadcast, RTS/CTS, and ACK are sent using physical car-
rier sensing. The radio model uses characteristics similar to a
commercial radio interface, Lucent’s WaveLAN [3]. WaveLAN
Procedure RECEIVE BROADCAST()
input: BPkt
begin
if BPkt→BID> BIDTable[BPkt→SA] then // New broadcast frame
if BPkt→DA = self address then // Arrive the destination
receive the BPkt and response via unicasting;
else
if #(LCT) > 1 then //excluding the sender
BPkt→Hop count := BPkt→Hop count + 1;
insert BPkt into priority queue and perform
InsertionSort(Hop count);
endif
endif
select a random(BACK W) to reply a new BACK;
update BIDTable[BPkt→SA] := BPkt→BID;
else // Duplicate broadcast frame
if BPkt→BID = BTable[BPkt→SA] then
if BPkt→Retry flag = False then
find the buffered BPkt, say Pkt, from local priority queue if
any;
if found Pkt then
BACK count(Pkt):= BACK count(Pkt)-1;
if BACK count(Pkt) = 0 then
remove Pkt from priority queue;
endif
endif
select a random(BACK W) to reply a duplicate BACK;
else
drop this BPkt;
endif
endif
endif
end
Fig. 5. The algorithm of receiving broadcast packet procedure.
is modeled as a shared-media radio with a nominal bit rate of 2
Mb/s and a nominal radio range of 100 m.
A. Simulation Models
In our simulations, we simulated a scenario of N mobile
nodes active in a square area of 300 m × 300 m. The initial
location of each node is assigned randomly within the area.
Excepting the first mobile node, the other mobile nodes will
be reallocated until it has at least one neighbor. This ensures
the simulated network topology is a connected graph. For the
sake of comparisons, nodes are assumed to stay at its original
spot during the simulation duration. Each mobile node has one
transceiver and its transmission range is 100 m (in 2 Mb/s). The
background data packets arrival rate of each mobile node fol-
lows the Poisson distribution with a mean λd, and the packet
length is an exponential distribution with a mean of L slots
time. The packet mean length is according to the analyzed av-
erage network packets on ordinary LAN [7], which is about
50∼150 Bytes (i.e., about 10∼30 time slots in 2 Mb/s trans-
mission rate). These popular TCP/UDP packets occupy over-
all traffic loading over 74%. Thus, we assume the data packet
length L = 30 time slots, and including PHY and MAC head-
ers (≈ 17 time slots) will be approximate 47 time slots, in our
simulations. The broadcast request arrival rate of each mobile
node also follows the Poisson distribution with a mean λb, and
the broadcast frame length is a fixed length of 25 Octets. The
broadcast request arrival rate per node λb is considered from
613
TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS IN SIMULATIONS
Parameter Normal Value
Channel bit rate 2 Mb/s
Transmission Range (2 Mb/s) 100 m
RTS frame length 160 bits
CTS frame length 112 bits
ACK frame length 112 bits
Broadcast frame length 25 Octets
Preamble and PLCP header 192 µs
MAC header 34 octets
A slot time 20 µs
SIFS 10 µs
DIFS 50 µs
aBACK Wmin 5 minislots
aBACK Wmax 20 minislots
aCWmin 31 slots
aCWmax 1023 slots
Air propagation delay 1 µs
Density 1 30 nodes in 300m× 300m
Density 2 60 nodes in 300m× 300m
Density 3 100 nodes in 300m× 300m
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Bro
adc
ast
 fl
ood
ing
 fr
act
ion
 (%)
Retry count
IEEE 802.11, N=30
IEEE 802.11 /w Priority Queue, N=30
IEEE 802.11, N=60
IEEE 802.11 /w Priority Queue, N=60
IEEE 802.11, N=100
IEEE 802.11 /w Priority Queue, N=100
Fig. 6. Comparisons of derived broadcast flooding fractions by the traditional
IEEE 802.11 and the proposed broadcast method priority queue method under
different retry counts.
10−5 to 10−4 in a step of 10−5. Each node maintains an infi-
nite waiting buffer (priority queue) in MAC layer. It contains all
data and broadcast frames waiting for transmission, in which,
broadcast frames have a higher priority than data frames. Each
simulation run lasts 60 seconds (≈ 3×106 time slots) and each
simulation result is obtained by averaging the results from one
hundred independent simulation runs.
B. Results
Two important performance metrics are investigated:
• Broadcast flooding fraction – The average ratio of the
number of nodes successfully received the broadcast frame
and the total number of mobile nodes in the network.
• Broadcast retry overhead – The average fraction of the
number of broadcast retries to the total broadcast times
during entire simulation duration.
In the first simulation, we consider three different network
densities which are generated by allocating 30, 60 and 100 mo-
bile nodes into a fixed square area 300m × 300m. We first
investigate the efficiency of broadcast flooding by using tra-
ditional broadcast scheme in IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol and
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bro
adc
ast
 re
try
 ov
erh
ead
 (%)
No. of expected BACKs
MBRT=1
MBRT=2
MBRT=3
Fig. 7. The derived retry overheads by proposed broadcast scheme under
different number of BACKs.
vary the retry count to observe the broadcast flooding results.
From the results shown in Fig. 6, we can see that with a lower
network density (i.e., with fewer nodes in network), a lower
flooding fraction will be obtained. For example, the best flood-
ing fractions in cases N = 30, N = 60, and N = 100 when
retry count is zero (i.e., the traditional broadcast scheme) are
about 76%, 89% and 90%. This is because that the link degrees
of nodes in the network with lower density is smaller than that
of a network with higher density. In other words, in the net-
work with higher density, once a broadcasting fails in reaching
some nodes, they have a higher probability to receive/recover
it from their neighbors. We can see that the flooding capability
is linear proportional (contra-proportional) with the number of
retries when the network load including the extra control over-
head is under (beyond) the saturated load. On the other hand,
combining the priority queue approach with the IEEE 802.11
MAC protocol can easily achieve a higher flooding fraction in
all cases. The reason is that the priority queue approach speeds
up the propagation speed for an ongoing flooding. We also em-
phasize the broadcast flooding fraction increases as the increas-
ing of the retry count. The highest flooding fraction can be up
to 97% in the high network density whereN = 100, λb = 10−6
and the retry count is equal to 4. From Fig. 6, we concluded two
results that the broadcast retry may raise or degrade the flooding
fraction depending on the generated control overhead and the
proposed priority queue scheme can significantly enhance the
flooding fraction especially when the network density is high.
In the following simulations, we only consider the network
size of 30 nodes since the worse performance occurs in this
case as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 7 shows the generated retry over-
heads under different expected numbers of BACKs and differ-
ent MBRTs in the scheme with broadcast acknowledgement
when BACK W = 5. We find that a larger expected number
of BACKs will result in a higher broadcast retry overhead. The
retry overhead will finally saturate at MBRTMBRT+1 by the MBRT.
Fig. 8 shows the derived flooding fractions by the pure
IEEE 802.11 broadcast scheme, the IEEE 802.11 with prior-
ity queue and the proposed broadcast scheme with broadcast
acknowledgement and priority queue under different broadcast
request loads. We can see that the flooding fraction is contra-
614
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
x 10 −5
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bro
adc
ast
 fl
ood
ing
 fr
act
ion
 (%)
Broadcast request arrival rate per node
IEEE 802.11
IEEE 802.11 /w Priority Queue
ADBS(MBRT=3, BACK_W=20)
Fig. 8. Comparisons of the derived broadcast flooding fraction by three differ-
ent schemes under different network loads.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
x 10 −5
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bro
adc
ast
 fl
ood
ing
 fr
ati
on 
(%)
Broadcast request arrival rate per node
MBRT=1, BACK_W=20
MBRT=2, BACK_W=20
MBRT=3, BACK_W=20
MBRT=3, BACK_W=10
MBRT=3, BACK_W=5
Fig. 9. Comparisons of the derived broadcast flooding fraction by proposed
broadcast schemes under different MBRTs, BACK Ws, and network loads.
proportional with the broadcast request load and the flooding
fraction may be down to only 39% when λb = 10−4. This
implies that over 60% mobile nodes can not be notified by the
broadcast frame. As a result, routing protocols like DSR and
AODV become useless in the IEEE 802.11 based multi-hop
ad hoc wireless networks. Contrarily, the proposed broadcast
scheme with broadcast acknowledgement and priority queue
can reach about 97% when the broadcast request arrival rate
is 10−5 when MBRT = 3 and BACK W = 20. Even though
with broadcast acknowledgment and priority queue schemes
when λb = 10−4, we still have 60% flooding fraction. The
performance degradation is mainly caused by the generated ex-
tra broadcast retry overhead and the broadcast request load. We
also note that the IEEE 802.11 broadcast scheme with priority
queue will outperform the proposed scheme when λb = 10−4.
This is because that no retry overhead will be generated in the
pure priority queue approach which will sustain an acceptable
flooding fraction even when the network load is heavy.
In order to investigate how the MBRT and the BACK W af-
fect the efficiency of proposed scheme, we consider different
combinations of MBRT and BACK W in simulations. Fig. 9
illustrates that by assigning a larger MBRT or BACK W will
result in a higher flooding fraction. Moreover, the flooding
fraction improvement by enlarging the BACK W is more ob-
vious than enlarging the MBRT. With a small BACK W, lots of
BACKs will collide with each other and the sender will rebroad-
cast as many times as possible. However, too many rebroadcast-
ings in a node will consume network bandwidth, increase queue
length and slow down the propagation speed to reach all mem-
bers. The advantage of the priority queue is being repressed by
large amount of broadcast retry overhead. From Fig. 9, we also
find that if the number of minislots in BACK window is suffi-
cient (e.g., BACK W = 20), a larger MBRT should be used to
derive a higher flooding fraction.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper pointed out the uncertain broadcast problem in
the IEEE 802.11 multi-hop ad hoc wireless networks. With-
out the robust broadcast scheme, some well-known multi-hop
routing protocols will become inefficient in such wireless net-
works. In this paper, we had proposed the broadcast acknowl-
edgement scheme and the priority queue scheme to enhance the
reliability and efficiency of conventional IEEE 802.11 broad-
cast scheme. These two waste-free schemes can respectively
minimize the unnecessary broadcast retries and the propagation
delay of broadcast frames in wireless networks. Simulation
results show that, with moderate network load, the proposed
broadcast scheme can provide an acceptable flooding fraction.
This encourage us to realize the IEEE 802.11 multi-hop ad hoc
wireless networks.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Chlamtac and S. Kutten, “On Broadcasting in Radio Networks Problem
Analysis and Protocol Design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM–33, no.
12, pp. 1240–1246, Dec. 1985.
[2] I. Chlamtac and S. Kutten, “Tree-based Broadcasting in Multihop Radio
Networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM–36, no. 10, pp. 1209–1223,
Oct. 1987.
[3] D. Eckhardt and P. Steenkiste, “Measurement and Analysis of the Er-
ror Characteristics of an In-building Wireless Network,” Proc. ACM SIG-
COMM’96, pp. 243–254, Oct. 1996.
[4] T. A. ElBatt, S. V. Krishnamurthy, D. Connors, and S. Dao, “Power Man-
agement for Throughput Enhancement in Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks,”
Proc. IEEE ICC’2000, pp. 1506–1513, Jun. 2000.
[5] IEEE 802.11 Working Group, “Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,” ANSI/IEEE
Std. 802.11, Sept. 1999.
[6] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic Source Routing in Ad-Hoc
Wireless Networks,” Mobile Computing, T. Imielinski and H. Korth, Eds.,
chapter 5, pp. 153–181, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996.
[7] K. M. Khalil, K. Q. Luc, and D. V. Wilson, “LAN Traffic Analysis and
Workload Characterization,” Proc. 15th Conf. Local Computer Networks,
pp. 112–122, 1990.
[8] I. Koutsopoulos, D. Connors, A. Savvides, and S. K. Dao, “Intra-Team
Multi-Hop Broadcasting (ITMB): A MAC Layer Protocol for Efficient
Control Signaling in Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks,” Proc. IEEE ICC 2000,
vol. 3, pp. 1723–1727, 2000.
[9] J. Macker and S. Corson, “Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET),”
IETF WG Charter., http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/manet-charter.html,
1997.
[10] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector
Routing,” Proc. 2nd IEEE Wksp. Mobile Comp. Sys. and App., pp. 90–
100, Feb. 1999.
[11] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, and S. R. Das, “Ad Hoc On-Demand Dis-
tance Vector (AODV) Routing,” Internet Draft draft-ietf-manet-aodv-
08.txt, Mar. 2001.
[12] F. A. Tobagi and L. Kleinrock, “Packet Switching in Radio Channels:
Part-II – The Hidden Terminal Problem in Carrier Sense Multiple-Access
Models and the Busy-Tone Solution,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM–
23, no. 12, pp. 1417–1433, Dec. 1975.
615
