Gas Path Debris Monitoring - A 2lSt Century PHM Tool 
C.E. Fisher 
Stewart Hughes Limited 
School Lane 
Chandlers Ford 
Hampshire, SO53 4YG 
United Kingdom 
+44 (0)23 8024 2000 
cef@ shl.co.uk 
Abstract- In order to achieve the goal of engine health 
management necessary for the Prognostics and Health 
Management (PHM), a suite of advanced monitoring tools 
is required. These tools must have the capability to monitor 
and diagnose different aspects of the engine’s health so that 
the combined, or fused, data and information from the tools 
provide an accurate picture of the current and predicted 
engine condition. 
Gas path debris monitoring is one of the tools that can be 
used to achieve this objective. It can be applied to the intake 
and exhaust of the propulsion system so that gas path 
component integrity can be monitored. Although the 
concept of gas path debris monitoring has been the subject 
of research and development over several years, it is still 
considered a novel and as yet immature technology for 
engine health management. The development and 
demonstration work during this time indicates that it has the 
potential to provide early detection and diagnostic capability 
for a range of engine faults, including foreign object 
ingestion. 
This technology, in the form of the Engine Distress 
Monitoring System (EDMS) and Ingested Debris 
Monitoring System (IDMS), was selected for the JSF 
seeded fault engine test program carried out in 1998 and 
1999. The objective of this program was to test and evaluate 
the capabilities of a range of potential PHM tools using a 
comprehensive set of seeded engine faults and conditions. 
These tests have provided a clear indication of the capability 
of gas path debris monitoring to be a useful tool for PHM. 
This paper provides a detailed summary of the EDMS and 
IDMS results from the seeded fault tests. It includes an 
outline of the test objectives from the IDMS and EDMS 
perspective and highlights some of the key issues and 
requirements associated with this technology.- 
Am 
EHM 
EDMS 
HP 
HPT 
IDMS 
JSF 
LP 
LPT 
GLOSSARY 
.Afterbumer (augmentor) 
Engine Health Management 
Engine Distress Monitoring System 
High Pressure 
High Pressure Turbine 
Ingested Debris Monitoring System 
Joint Strike Fighter 
Low Pressure 
Low Pressure Turbine 
PHM Prognostics Health Management 
SFET Seeded Fault Engine Test 
SOA Shaft Order (energy) Analysis 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SFET OBJECTIVES 
3. 
4. KEY ISSUES AND REQUIREMENTS 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
6. REFERENCES 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
SFET EDMS AND IDMS RELATED 
RESULTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The effectiveness of the Prognostic Health Management 
(PHM) system relies on the monitoring and diagnostic tools. 
It is important that the capability of the tools is understood 
and the information and data each provides is used 
effectively to achieve the PHM objectives. 
The PHM concept requires engine monitoring technologies 
that provide early warning of faults and the capability to 
monitor the development of faults so that timely action can 
be taken. A maturing tool for engine health monitoring, 
which can be used to assist the engine PHM objective is gas 
path debris monitoring technology, implemented as the 
Engine Distress Monitoring System (EDMS) and Ingested 
Debris Monitoring System (IDMS). 
Many gas path faults typically produce debris from the 
earliest stage of the fault. EDMS can detect the debris as 
soon as it is produced and therefore provides an early 
warning of gas path component deterioration. Continuous 
monitoring and correlation of the EDMS data with engine 
operating condition has also been shown to provide 
information that indicates if certain engine operating 
conditions are causing increased deterioration compared to 
other operating conditions. This information may be used to 
enable the engine operation to be altered, for example to 
allow a particular mission to be completed. 
The early warning requirement of PHM also necessitates 
that ingested material that is potentially damaging should be 
detected so that consequential damage can be minimised 
and remedial action taken as appropriate. Correlation of 
IDMS data with EDMS and other engine and/or monitoring 
441 
data provides an improved ‘picture’ of the consequences of 
the ingestion. 
Details of the equipment and analysis techniques used for 
EDMS and IDMS are presented in References [ 11 to [4]. 
The JSF Seeded Fault Engine Test (SFET) program, carried 
out in 1998 and 1999, provided an opportunity for extensive 
testing of the gas path monitoring technologies with a range 
of faults. Issues such as sensitivity and diagnostic 
performance could be assessed so that the overall capability 
could be determined. 
2. SFET OBJECTIVES 
The SFET had several overall objectives, covering all the 
technologies that were tested on the engine. As the 
technology developer, Stewart Hughes Limited also set 
objectives, some of which corresponded with the overall 
goals. The SHL objectives related to development and 
maturation of the gas path debris monitoring technology, so 
that it evolves with experience and an increased database of 
engine types and engine faults. 
The SHL identified objectives included the following: 
One of the goals for EDMS is to provide dual 
functionality from one sensor and technology. The dual 
functions are: 
Any limitations of the standard EDMS analysis and 
processing were identified and where possible analysis 
techniques implemented and tested to fill the gaps. 
The analysis of the IDMS and EDMS data for the seeded 
ingestion tests uses a rule-based tool for the 
classification and discrimination process. This was 
checked and enhancements identified. 
Any limitations of the combined IDMS and EDMS 
analysis for the detection and discrimination of ingested 
objects and material were identified and the causes for 
these investigated 
3. SFET EDMS AND IDMS RELATED RESULTS 
The seeded fault engine tests included a range of gas path 
faults with differing severity as well as seeded ingestions of 
both damaging and non-damaging debris. This section 
provides a summary of the results, including the light off 
detection function analysis from the EDMS sensor signal. 
The equipment installation was as shown in Figure 1 .  An 
additional EDMS sensor, S2, was installed in the divergent 
nozzle flap for the second SFET, primarily because the 
augmentor erosion fault would be downstream of the 
original sensor. The data from both EDMS sensors for 
SFET 2 was analysed and compared to confirm that there 
was no dependence on sensor position for detection or 
signal fault characteristics. 
IDMS IDMS 
Sensor 1 Sensor 2 
(i) Light off detection for the augmentor 
The EDMS data from the seeded fault tests was analysed 
to investigate and demonstrate using the EDMS sensor 
signal for these 2 functions. 
The seeded fault engine tests included several gas path 
faults which are detectable with EDMS. Ingestion tests 
were also carried out with both non-damaging and 
IDMS and EDMS analysis. 
(ii) Detection of gas path faults 
Signal Conditioner damaging debris to test the capability of the combined EDMS Sensor 
. The seeded gas path faults were of different types and 
severity. One of the objectives of the analysis was to 
determine the ‘detection threshold’ of EDMS, i.e. at 
what level of severity the fault was detected by EDMS. 
The analysis for the seeded gas path faults was initially 
based on standard EDMS analysis techniques carried out 
for previous engine tests and demonstrations of the 
technology. The fault library, based on different EDMS 
parameter characteristics, built up from previous engine 
tests, was used as the basis of the diagnostic assessment 
of the results from these tests. Where faults had not been 
monitored on previous engine tests, the fault related 
EDMS parameter characteristics were checked, to ensure 
that they are not identical to those for other faults. A 
rule-based approach was used with defined steps in the 
diagnostic process. This checks that the fault detection 
process and the parameter characteristics are correct for 
the range of seeded faults. 
I 4 Power Level Angle /Fuel Flow 
Figure 1 Schematic of IDMS & EDMS equipment 
Gas Path Faults 
The processing and analysis of the EDMS signal i.s 
explained in References [I] and [2]. Any enhancements and 
additional processing are briefly outlined where appropriate:. 
The following tables and figures present a summary of thie 
EDMS results from the successful seeded gas path fault 
tests, by fault type. Figures 2 to 5 show some of the data 
and results from the analysis, providing clear indications of 
the fault. 
442 
Rub Type Faults 
The activity level parameter for a normal start and for the 
bowed rotor start are shown in Figures 2a and 2b, with N2 
(HP) spool speed as a percentage on the x-axis. The data is 
averaged on a per second basis, hence few data points 
during the transient, with several once the idle condition is 
achieved. For the normal start it can be seen that the EDMS 
activity level parameter increases gradually as the spool 
speed increases. For the bowed rotor start it can be seen that 
there is a significant increase compared to the normal. This 
is presented as a delta effect in Figure 2c. It can also be seen 
that the rubbing occurred twice during the acceleration. The 
delta activity parameter would normally be very low, as at 
the start and end of this acceleration. The HP shaft order 
component also increased compared to normal during this 
start. 
SFET#I: Start to Idle - Normal operation 
8 October 1998 
0.2 
0.18 
0.16 
0.14 
0.12 
> 
3 
r" 0.1 
B - 
4 0.08 
0.06 
0.04 
0.02 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Percentage N2 spool spsed 
Figure 2a EDMS activity level - normal start to idle 
SFET #I - Bowed Rotor Start 
5 October 1998,19:21 
0 10 30 40 50 70 
Percentage N2 Spool S p m l  
Figure 2b EDMS activity level - bowed rotor start 
443 
SFET 1. October 5 1998 19:21. Bowed Rotor Start 
Delta Activity Level During Start 
Test 
A/B Gutter Loss 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Percentage N2 Spool Speed 
EDMS Parameter 
Detection Indicators - 
Yes A/B EDMS event 
Figure 2c EDMS activity level delta - bowed rotor start 
SFET 1 & 2  
The LPT rubs were seeded using small rub strips in one 
location which were wound into the gas path prior to a 
specified operating cycle. The intention was that as the 
blades increased in temperature during the cycle, the effects 
of thermal growth ,would result in a momentary rub during a 
snap (fast transient) between idle and intermediate. 
I parameter 1 
Table 1 Summary of rub type faults 
S E T  1 
Test ] EDMSDetection 
I -  
BowedRotor I Yes 
SFET 2 
Augmentor 
erosion 
Starts See Figures 2 a to 
SFET 1 I c. 
Yes A/B EDMS activity 
parameter 
4~ Stage LPT 
Rubs 
SFET1&2 
Yes 
See Figures 3 a & 
b for normal and 
rub. 
~ ~ ~~ 
Stage LPT 
Rub 
S E T  1 I Yes 
Parameter 
Indicators 
Activity level during 
start up. HP SOA 
components at idle. 
Combination. 
High activity level + 
events 
LP Shaft order energy 
for S E T  2 transient 
test data. Shows 
increase during the 
accel and snap. 
Combination 
~~ ~ ~ 
As for 4'h stage rub. 
As indicated in Table 1, the seeded LPT rubs produced the 
same indications from the EDMS data. The results indicated 
that the blades touched the rub strip during the acceleration 
between idle and intermediate powers and then briefly 
during the snap between these powers. Figure 3a shows the 
EDMS LP shaft order energy during a normal acceleration 
and snap between idle and intermediate powers. Figure 3b 
shows the same EDMS parameter during these transients 
when the LPT4 rub strip had been wound in. The increase in 
the shaft order energy can clearly be detected. The transient 
analysis of shaft order energy was one of the areas where 
signal processing enhancements were carried out to provide 
a more robust and clearer indication. The activity and event 
parameters also increased at these times. 
Augmentor faults-A range of augmentor faults werle 
seeded, as summarised in Table 2. The augmentor erosion 
fault was downstream of the original EDMS sensor 
installation, sensor S1, so was only visible on EDMS senso,r 
s2. 
Table 2 Summary of Augmentor Related Faults 
Pinteis I I parameter 2 
SFET 2 
444 
SFET 2, Normal Accel and Snap Idle to Intermediate. EDMS Shaft Order Energy 
250 - 
Accel Snap 
2 0 0 .  
30 
-- 25 
50 
5 
0 0 
Tim (Swwnda). Non Continuou. 
LP Tach (Hz) HP Tach (M) Max 02 Ensrgy 
Figure 3a Normal accel and snap - idle to intermediate. EDMS shaft order energy 
SFET 2,23 March 1999,1913 to 1925 
LPT4 Rub - EDMS Shaft Order Energy 
250 30 
25 
200 
2 O i  
c 
150 
Y 
B f 15 $ 
ul 1 100 
50 
5 
Figure 3b LPT4 Rub, accel and snap - EDMS shaft order energy 
The afterburner gutter failure occurred in two parts, one 
during SFET 1 and the second during SFET 2. The EDMS 
indication was the same in both cases and the failure was 
confirmed with video and post test inspection. 
The simulated augmentor erosion was successfully detected 
by EDMS sensor S2. 
The cut pintels did not produce any detectable change in the 
EDMS signal parameters. 
Other Faults-The SFET included additional gas path 
faults, high pressure turbine (HPT) erosion and blocked fuel 
nozzles. 
Table 3 Summary of Other Gas Path Faults 
Test 
HPT Erosion 
SFET 2 
Blocked Fuel 
Nozzles 
SFET 1 
EDMS 
Detection 
Yes 
See Figures 
4 and 5 
Yes 
level parameter 
Cumulative erosion 
parameter 
The HPT erosion was partially achieved by running the 
engine uptrimmed, i.e. hotter than normal. The analysis had 
445 
to ensure that this did not affect the detection of erosion by 
the EDMS signal. 
The delta activity level analysis for a range of periods of 
operation, from normal to uptrimmed, is shown in Figures 
4a and b. Most of the data included in this graph is for 
engine operation at a nominal intermediate power, although 
the fuel flow parameter, also shown on the graph, indicates 
the increase due to the uptrim. It should be noted that the 
time is non-continuous and that the vertical lines represent 
discontinuities in the data used as the engine power was 
altered from nominal intermediate. 
SFET 2: HPT Erosion. Fuel Flow variaion with Delta activity Level 
T 3'5 
.._..~__I " ........................... ..--I I - I 
23 Mar ~ 13 Clkks 23 Mar 13 Cllcks 0'5 T 12 Mar 2221 Normal 
Figure 4a HPT erosion - Delta activity level parameter 
SFET 2: HPT Erosion. Fuel Flow variation with Delta actlvlty Level 
. ...._..._."...__,.._I ~ _ . ._I..." I_______.... "" .-_.. ""."ll""""~" -........---....."--" 
24 Mar, 1342 13 Cllcks 
0 
1.5 
Figure 4b HPT erosion - Delta activity level parameter 
The overall cumulative erosion effect over the same period EDMS Light Off Detection Function 
is shown in Figure 5, which uses the same data set. This 
type of health indication could be used to determine the 
cumulative damage due to erosion, it also shows the periods 
when the erosion is most significant, when the rate of 
change is considered. The x-axis is time, the erosion 
parameter is derived from the data in Figures 4 a and b. 
The EDMS data was also used to investigate whether the 
signal could be used for light off detection of the 
afterburner. This was done using an alternative approach tlo 
the signal processing to minimise the effects of the gas path 
faults. This function has to be correct when there i- 
446 
advanced gas path distress as well, so the capability with the 
HPT erosion on-going was assessed. The final result of the 
analysis of the S E T  2 data is shown in Figure 6. It 
demonstrates the capability with no false or missed 
indications of augmented operation. (Note: fuel flow value 
greater than 0.5 indicates afterburner operation) 
Ingestion Tests 
4 damaging objects 
included in 15 
Overall Testing 
False Alarm Rate review 
I 
Detection & Analysis 
2 - detected and correctly 
classified as potentially 
damaging 
1 detected and classified as 
possibly damaging 
1 - data not yet available 
Many ingestions monitored 
per test. Assumed non- 
damaging if not seeded. 
Classification results in 
majority Cat 0, few Cat 1. 
Misclassifications < 5% 
Figure 5 HPT erosion - Cumulative erosion effect 
Ingestion Tests 
SFET 2: 
26 obiects seeded 
Futl Rcm 
3 
Detection & Analysis 
26 objects detected 
‘ 1 -  2 5 -  
Figure 6 EDMS light off detection parameter 
Ingestion Test Results 
This section briefly summarises the results of the combined 
IDMS and EDMS analysis for the ingestion tests. The tables 
include the ingestions carried out when the special test 
equipment was operating satisfactorily. 
Table 4 Summary of SFET 1 ingestion test results 
Overall Testing 
15 objects seeded 
14 of 15 have been analysed 
and classified - 13 correctly 
Table 5 Summary of SFET 2 ingestion test results 
successfully 
26 seeded objects 1 17 detected 
I include: I 17 classified correctlv 
17 non-damaging 
26 seeded obiects I 9 detected by IDMS 
include: 
damaging 4 classified correctly 
1 not classified - full data set 
1 misclassified - possibly 
damaging 
The results show that when the special test equipment 
problems were corrected all the seeded objects were 
detected by IDMS. The damaging objects that were 
successfully detected and classified include 2 objects which 
were seeded into the intake when water was also ingested 
through the FOD valves, one damaging and one non- 
damaging. This combination of ingestions has not been 
tested before with IDMS and EDMS and is a very good 
result. 
The tests included a range of ingestion situations that had 
not been tested before with IDMS and EDMS. In some of 
these cases the analysis and classification algorithms 
produced correct classifications, as explained above. In 
other cases some misclassifications occurred. Algorithm and 
classification enhancement is required to enable IDMS and 
EDMS to deal with these situations and produce a correct 
classification. This will include correlation with data from 
other sensors, for example eddy current sensors monitoring 
the fan, as the PHM concept involves data fusion, so that 
one monitoring technology does not have to provide 100% 
coverage. 
4. KEY ISSUES AND REQUIREMENTS 
The SFET data and results provided information about the 
requirements for production implementation of EDMS and 
IDMS. This includes the engine hardware requirements and 
installation as well as definition of the optimum parameters 
447 
for normalisation and correlation of EDMS and IDMS 
signals. 
Aspects relating to the software acquisition and processing 
include definition of the acquisition rates and data storage, 
particularly for IDMS where several objects may be 
ingested at the same time, all requiring accurate analysis and 
classification. Refinements to the processing and diagnostic 
algorithms have also been identified, to provide simpler 
indications of faults and their progression. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
The gas path monitoring technology, in the form of EDMS 
and IDMS, is maturing and evolving. The SFET program, 
which included a range of engine gas path faults with 
differing severity, has demonstrated that this technology has 
the capability to provide early indication of faults and also 
diagnostic information about certain gas path faults. 
Most of the faults were incipient in nature and so required 
early detection and subsequent monitoring. The erosion 
fault provided the opportunity to monitor the fault 
progression and identify diagnostic algorithms which have 
the potential to assist in the indication of cumulative erosion 
effects. 
It has also been demonstrated that, as experience with 
EDMS and IDMS increases and additional faults are 
encompassed, additional and enhanced processing and 
diagnostic algorithms can be identified and evolved. 
6. REFERENCES 
[ l ]  Powrie H.E.G. and Fisher C.E., “Engine Health 
Monitoring Towards Total Prognostics”, 1999 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, Prognostics for Aerospace Systems 
(Session 4.3) 
[2] Powrie H.E.G. and McNicholas K., “Gas Path 
Condition Monitoring During Accelerated Mission Testing 
of a Demonstrator Engine,” AIAA Paper 97-2904, July 
1997. 
[3] Nurse J., Petch C. and Fisher C.E., “Engine Gas Path 
Integrity Monitoring,” Aerotech 94, Paper C470/6/052? 
January 1994. 
[4] Barnes O.R.J., “Report into Progress in the 
Development of the Stewart Hughes Limited Foreign Object 
Detection System using the Ingested Debris Monitoring 
System (IDMS) and the Engine Distress Monitoring System 
(EDMS),” MOD Report LC/165116/2/7/2/1/ Logs(OR), 
December 1996. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work has been carried out with the support of Pratt 8i 
Whitney, Florida and Stewart Hughes Limited (UK). Thlz 
US DoD (JSF PHM Program Office) provided guidance and 
inspiration. 
