CACE: Coherent Analytical Computing 
Environment 
Commander Robert Girard Col. Russel Cwrer Leo Fila 
Joint Strike Fighter Program Office 
1213 Jefferson Davis Highway 
Joint Strike Fighter Program Office CENTRA Technology 
901 N. Stuart St. 12 13 Jefferson Davis Highway 
Suite 600 Suite 600 Suite 801 
Arlington, VA 22202 Arlington, VA 22202 Arlington, VA 22203 
~ ~ r a r ~ R ~ ~ l a ~ ~ . m ~ l  Currerri 8 iast.mil fila1 @icentrava.com 
703-602-7390 703-602-7390 703-276-7702 
Abstract 
The Coherent Analytical Computing 
Environment (CACE) program will leverage the 
use of cross-functional shared data and advances 
in decision support, knowledge management, 
and computer-aided forecasting and prognostics 
to significantly improve aviation operational 
safety, efficiency, and supportability while 
reducing ownership costs. The goals of the 
CACE program are to improve operational 
efficiency, disseminate useful and timely 
knowledge, enable cognizant readiness through 
situation assessment and advisory notifications, 
and augment reality through visualizations, 
forecasts, and prognostics. One of the main 
products of CACE will be functional prototypes 
that will be evaluated for military use and 
transitioned to sponsoring agencies for full scale 
development and deployment. 
Background 
Improving aviation safety represents a 
critical military need. The outcome of many 
mishap investigations point to aircrew error as a 
primary cause. Safety related incidents, 
however, are typically the result of a chain of 
events rather than a singular instance. These 
events occur in a number of cross-functional 
areas supporting flight operations such as 
maintenance, supply support, training and 
safety as well as flight crew. 
With the current state of information 
technology and tools available to operational 
personnel in aviation squadrons, it is nearly 
impossible to realize that a critical chain has 
been started except through hindsight. 
Providing this insight requires the integration of 
information systems with enabling tools and 
technologies to allow near-real time insight, both 
vertically through the command structure and 
horizontally across functional areas. 
Objective and Description 
The objective of the CACE Advanced 
Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) is 
to demonstrate the feasibility of combining and 
applying advanced data “warehousing” concepts, 
relational on-line analytical processing 
(ROLAF’), decision support systems (DSS), 
intelligent analytical computing tools, and 
innovative interface modes and mediums to the 
management decision-making process in the 
field of DoD aviation operation and logistics. 
CACE is being developed to improve safety 
through a shared commander’s intent, enhanced 
commander’s situational awareness, reduced task 
saturation and increased efficiency. 
The CACE ACTD will function by 
implementing mature and emerging information 
tools and technologies into an open data 
warehouse that integrates current information 
Ops 
Manpower & Readiness Safety Logistics 
Training Reports Reports &Training 
Figure 1. Squadron Communication Cycle 
27 
sources and systems. A schematic of this 
approach can be seen in figure 1. The data 
warehouse is the core of the program, providing 
an integrated, shared data environment for 
legacy, stove-piped information systems. 
Technologies are applied as part of the ACTD 
demonstrations to explore their effectiveness as 
tactics to improve operational efficiency, 
decision making, situational awareness, and, 
ultimately, safety. A key tenet of the CACE 
ACTD is that it is not a system in the traditional 
sense. Rather, it is an open environment that 
defines interfaces to, and leverages data from, 
existing information systems. That is, CACE 
will complement these systems through a 
combination of a formally defined, coherent 
information environment with targeted 
applications of technology to provide a safer, 
more efficient operational environment. 
Modem military information systems tend 
to be optimized around the functions they 
support and constrained by the need to comply 
with Service-wide policy, often resulting in sub- 
optimal, cross-function performance. CACE 
integrates these systems by creating a shared data 
environment. Legacy information systems are 
modeled and integrated into a consistent data 
warehouse that supports the application of 
advanced tools and technologies providing the 
increased efficiency, decision support and 
heightened awareness through immersive user 
interface techniques. 
The fundamental assertion is that safety 
will be improved by elevating data to wisdom for 
personnel throughout the command. This is 
accomplished through an integration of 
historically stove-piped information sources and 
a series of commercial and custom information 
technology and tools. Improvements in safety 
.will be a byproduct of targeted technology 
insertion that enable a shared commander’s 
intent, improved commander’s situational 
awareness, reduced task saturation and improved 
efficiency. Measurable benefits in these areas 
and their correlation to casual factors for 
- incidents will be the primary measure of utility 
- on this program. 
The primary tactics being employed as part 
of the CACE ACTD are: improve operational 
efficiency; disseminate knowledge; enable 
cognizant readiness; and augmented reality. The 
functionality of the preceding tactics are 
described below: 
Operational EfJiciency 
Operational efficiency refers to 
mechanisms and tools used to improve the day- 
to-day execution of tasks. Such would include 
devices that would facilitate user interfacing and 
enable CACE to collect and display data more 
effectively for individual user requirements. 
This would also incorporate the elimination of 
duplicate data entry that increase workload and 
introduce a greater opportunity for errors. 
Knowledge Dissemination 
A typical challenge in most operational 
environments is converting what is often 
excessive data into useful information. Decision 
support tools that will collect and package data 
into useful information will be applied on the 
CACE ACTD to demonstrate the elevation of 
data to actual knowledge, to enable better 
decision-making. 
Cognizant Readiness 
Increasing operators’ cognizant readiness 
implies proactively and autonomously 
supporting decisions or highlighting the need for 
a decision based on the current situation. The 
need for autonomy is driven by the typical 
overload of available data and the need to be 
aware of changes in ones environment. A 
system designed to continuously monitor and 
note any changes in aircraft data will be devised 
to work proactively in the CACE environment. 
Augmented Reality 
Despite the availability of corporate 
knowledge and wisdom, for operators to act on 
this information requires increasing their 
awareness of the need to act. Immersion and 
visualization technologies can simplify user 
interfaces and elevate the utility of operators’ 
basic computer skills to use the tools at their 
disposal to make optimal decisions. 
Technical Approach 
The technical approach being employed on 
the CACE ACTD is the creation of an integrated 
information environment within which a set of 
modular tools and technologies can be integrated 
2 
28 
through open application interfaces. An 
overview of the CACE ACTD technical 
approach can be seen in figure 2.  
Figure 2. Overview of CACE Technical Approach 
Data warehousing is the central technology 
to be included in the CACE ACTD. The charter 
of the Data Warehouse Team is to guide the 
design and development of the data warehouse 
such that it supports the requirements of the 
ACTD. As information systems are integrated, 
commercial decision support and data 
visualization tools will be applied to the growing 
data set to provide information in new and 
enlightening ways. In addition to new views of 
data, alternative methods for developing existing 
reports will be targeted to increase efficiency. 
Another key technology being integrated on 
the CACE will be the application of agent-based 
software, such as intelligent agents and 
associates. The application of intelligent agent 
and associate technologies to key functions 
within the operating environment of aviation 
systems will reduce the burden of day-to-day 
activities and provide enhanced decision support 
through autonomous assistance and alternatives. 
These technologies are continuously watching 
changes in data to provide alternatives and 
recommendations to enable cognizant readiness. 
In their simplest form, such agents would be 
forecasting future requirements based on past 
performance. By maturing these algorithms over 
time, corporate knowledge is retained and 
wisdom derived. 
In addition to agent based technologies and 
data warehousing and decision support 
technologies, user interface technologies will 
also be employed in CACE. The user interface 
team has two foci. First, they are responsible for 
defining the requirements for user interfaces 
within the CACE. Second, they are chartered 
with the evaluation of existing and emerging 
user interface technologies for inclusion in 
CACE to satisfy these requirements. 
The CACE ACTD will explore innovative 
user interfaces that reduce training requirements, 
increase awareness of important information, and 
increase the integrity of the data collected. The 
technologies that will be applied in this area 
include, but are not limited to: 
0 Wearable Computers and Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs) 
0 Role-based Kiosks (Portals) 
0 Immersive, graphical interfaces 
Biometrics 
Natural language queries 
i Pilot is alewd of iwortant 1 
'. I Pilot Kiosk Operations View 
I 
I I , i .................................... : .................. _' 
coilened for analysis and trending , 
Figure 3. User Interface Concept 
Figure 3 shows a single user interface concept 
using several of these technologies already 
explored by the ACTD. 
System Engineering and Integration 
The key functions associated with this team 
include requirements engineering, metrics 
development and measurement, architecture, 
information integration and documentation. A 
primary focus of the SE&I strategy is a 
consistently defined data warehouse integrating a 
number of cross-functional information sources 
3 
29 
available in an aviation system’s environment. 
This includes both legacy information systems as 
well as information not presently captured. An 
open systems approach will be used in the design 
of the data warehouse to reduce integration risk 
and enable future transition. 
continuously be utilized by the sponsor 
programs. The CACE program will prove 
invaluable in the structuring of current and future 
aircraft data. Figure 5 (below) illustrates the 
execution strategy as it is perceived today. 
Affordability 
Affordability is being addressed in two 
major ways on the CACE ACTD. First, one of 
the inherent benefits derived from CACE 
technologies are their contribution to reducing 
total ownership costs through improved 
be realized in reduced manpower requirements, 
measurable in metrics such as maintenance hours 
per flight hour, and supply chain integration, 
reducing metrics such as asset turn around time. 
Affordability is also being addressed in the 
Functionality 
operational efficiency. These improvements will Assessment 
Infrastructure 
development strategy for the CACE ACTD, in 
which an open architecture will be used to 
simplify the integration of both custom and 
COTS software applications. The formal 
approach to defining the information architecture 
for the CACE is also intended to both minimize 
the transition cost for and broaden the 
application of the concepts, tools and 
technologies demonstrated as part of CACE. 
Figure 5. Execution Strategy 
Bibliography 
Coherent Analytical Computing Environment 
(CACE), Program Management Plan (draft). 3 
Nov, 1999. 
Biographies 
Russel Currer. Col USMC, is a Naval Aviator 
and Acquisition Professional. He currently works 
as the Autonomic Logistics Director for the Joint 
Strike Fighter Program Office and is the CACE 
ACTD Technical Manager. 
Rob Girard, CDR USN, is a Naval Aviator and 
Acquisition Professional. He currently works as 
the Advanced Technology IPT lead within the 
Autonomic Logistics Directorate of the Joint 
Strike Fighter Program Office and is the CACE 
Project Manager. 
Correlation nith Imident C d  Factors (HaRp, NSC, FA.4, etc.) 
Figure 4. Overview of CACE Assessment Process Leo Fila is a recent graduate of Virginia Tech 
and holds a Dual Major B.S. in Aerospace 
engineering and Ocean engineering. He 
currently works for CENTRA Technology as a 
consultant supporting the Joint Strike Fighter 
Program Office, JAST and Autonomic Logistics 
Directorates. 
summary 
A complete overview of the CACE 
assessment process can be seen in Figure 4. The 
program is currently finishing it’s f i s t  year of a 
four year program cycle, and is scheduled to run 
through FY02 with residual capability running 
through FY03/04. Throughout the CACE 
program, developing technologies will 
4 
30 
