Sensor Web for In Situ Exploration 
of Gaseous Biosignatures 
Kevin A. Delin and Shannon P. Jackson 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109, USA 
Kevin.Delin @.jpl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-9647 
Abstract - A Sensor Web is a system of intra-communicating 
spatially distributed sensor pods that can be deployed to 
monitor and explore new environments. By its very nature, 
the Sensor Web provides spatio-temporal data in a form 
consistent with that needed for environment modeling and 
represents a new paradigm for in situ monitoring and 
exploration. For example, a wireless web of scattered 
sensor pods on the Martian surface is an ideal way to pursue 
gaseous biosignature searches. Sensor Web climate and 
agricultural monitoring on Earth (particularly when coupled 
with remote measurements) characterize significant 
commercial opportunities for this technology. Recent 
laboratory demonstrations at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL) have shown the potential of current Sensor Web 
technology. These demonstrations are leading to a JPL 
effort to field a Sensor Web in Baja California to examine 
gaseous biosignatures from the microbial mats there. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THE SENSOR WEB INSTRUMENT 
3. APPLICATION SPECIFICATIONS 
4. LABORATORY DEMONSTRATION 
5. GASEOUS BIOSIGNATURE MONITORING 
6.  SUMMARY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Recent advances in sensor, computation, and communication 
technologies allow for a radically new type of scientific 
instrument: the Sensor Web[ 1,2]. This instrument contains 
sensors distributed spatially and communicating among 
themselves in a wireless networked fashion. Each network 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 2000 IEEE 
The research described in this paper was carried out in the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a 
contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
Manuscript Received December 17, 1999 
node consists of two modules, the transducers that 
physically interact with the environment and collect data and 
the communication chips that move the data around the 
network. The intra-web, node-to-node communication not 
only reduces the power required to transmit data out of the 
web to an uplink but also allows for power-efficient 
operation of node sensors when a spatially dynamic 
environmental front passes over the instrument. We expect 
that this global sharing of information will lead to pod 
synergism (the sum of their activity being greater than the 
parts) and permit intelligent resource (power, bandwidth) 
management by the web. Included among the obvious 
benefits of this scheme are the possibilities of roverless 
surveying, built-in fault-tolerant redundancy, and spatially 
scaleable experiments. 
The Sensor Web provides a new archetype for in situ 
instrumentation and experiment design. Spreading a 
multitude of web nodes over large areas is a cost effective 
way of examining planetary surfaces. Interconnected Sensor 
Webs could become a global-scale instrument capable of 
providing data, for example, on the carbon and sulfur cycles 
on Earth. By its very nature, the sensor web would provide 
spatio-temporal data in a form consistent with that needed 
for biosphere modeling. Because of its inherent light mass 
and flexibility of deployment, the Sensor Web is ideal in the 
context of extra-terrestrial missions as well. A Sensor Web 
outfitted with microsensors creates an advanced, innovative, 
micromission-style instrument that enables extraterrestrial 
life-detection searches and planetary modeling. 
As a specific demonstration of the Sensor Web’s 
capabilities, we have focused on building a web for 
monitoring biogenic gases produced by algal mats in Baja 
California. Remote sensing is inadequate here because it 
measures over large atmospheric columns and is not capable 
of detecting the low concentration of gases that is expected 
to disperse quickly at the planet surface. Only an in situ 
instrument directly at the surface-atmosphere interface can 
provide the type and quality of measurements required. 
Only a sensor web can provide the coverage of 
465 
measurements needed to perform detailed modeling while 
still subject to the dollar, power, and mass constraints 
associated with planetary monitoring. 
By joining low-cost, low-power gas detectors with sensor 
webs, it will be possible not only to detect the presence of 
biogenic gases, but also to map the full geographic, diurnal, 
and seasonal variations of those gases over large spatial and 
temporal scales. Such data is crucial for accurate modeling 
purposes. In addition, the intrinsic stochastic nature of 
biosignatures requires multiply redundant measurements to 
weed out anomalous signatures. Additionally, because the 
in situ sensor web can also monitor local meteorological 
conditions, it will be possible to further distinguish between 
possible biogenic gas motion and mere mesoscale 
meteorology. 
Finally, from power considerations, it is important that the 
data transferred from node to node be low bandwidth in 
nature. As a result, data collected must be either low 
bandwidth in nature or have been significantly compressed 
or preprocessed at the node before transmission. Most 
sensor measurements associated with biological activity, 
such as those discussed here including local atmospheric 
conditions and biogenic gas detection, satisfy this low 
bandwidth constraint. 
2. THE SENSOR WEB INSTRUMENT 
Description 
As shown in Figure 1, the sensor web consists of a few 
prime nodes (boxes in the picture) with many secondary 
nodes (shown as spheres). Each node, here pictured as 
about 20 cm3 or less, consists of a sensor transducer suite to 
collect data appropriate to the experimental or monitoring 
as great as its next nearest neighbor distance. 
The prime nodes have the additional capability of 
communicating signals into and out of the web. At a prime 
node, for example, web data can be uplinked to an overhead 
satellite or ported to a local field computer. Unlike 
architectures currently used for environmental monitoring 
(such as seismic activity), there is nothing particularly 
special about the location of the prime node relative to the 
rest of the web. Since each node (including the prime) is 
equivalent in terms of intra-web transmission, the sensor 
web as described goes far beyond the star-network 
geometries currently associated with distributed sensors. 
Hopping the data from node to node not only allows for 
sharing locally collected data to other parts of the web but 
also is power efficient. From elementary electromagnetic 
theory, the total power required to transmit a signal that 
ensures a received power P,, a distance D away is 
P,,,,=(DIh)'"P,, where h is the wavelength of the 
transmitted signal[3]. Here m is 2 in free space and can 
range to 4 or more in environments with multiple-path 
interferences or local noise. As a result, the total power 
required to transmit a given distance with N hops is reduced 
by a factor of fl-" compared to the total power required by 
direct transmission. In the simple case of free space (m=2), 
this fact is easily demonstrated graphically in Figure 2. It is 
clear from the figure that the volume of the collection of 
smaller spheres (multi-hop transmission) is much less than 
that of the larger one (direct transmission). The reason why 
hopping data is power efficient is that more of the power is 
directed along the path to the receiver. Since the free space 
case is the best case scenario in terms of transmission 
efficiency, the value of hopping is only increased in more 
hostile environments. 
task at hand and a transceiver section to sendreceive this 
data to other node points. Fault tolerance is guaranteed if 
the maximum communication distance of each pod is at least 
The very of a web, with its multiply 
redundant nodes, allows for an instrument to be 
against instrument degradation. In other words, as various 
nodes drop out of the web because of spent batteries or 
damaged transducers, it is possible to redeploy new pods in 
FRIIS TRANSMISSION EQUATIW P,,, (L fl P,, ( 2  S m 5 4) 
Figure 1 The Sensor Web Instrument. Note the 
relative size of the individual pods to that of the 
Sojourner rover. than direct transmission. 
Figure 2 Multi-hopping is more efficient power-wise 
466 
the instrument area that will seamlessly mesh with the 
existing, older web communication backbone. In this way, 
though the pods themselves are expendable, the sensor web 
instrument can continue to function indefinitely. Moreover, 
this reseeding allows the macroinstrument to evolve over 
time as new pods can be more sophisticated and 
technologically advanced than older ones. Finally, because 
the sensor web has no definitive boundaries (the prime 
nodes may be located anywhere in the network), multiple 
deployments of webs in a given area will naturally mesh 
with one another. Consequently, a sensor web represents an 
instrument whose surveying area can be expanded via 
multiple deployments. 
In its most abstract form, the sensor web can be thought of 
as an imaging device with each node point a pixel in the 
phase space represented by the transducer suite. To 
appreciate the analogy, consider a sensor web of the same 
mass as the Sojourner rover which explored Mars. The 
rover and its associated deployment mechanisms weighed 
about 15 kg. If each node pod weighs about 100 g, it would 
take about 144 pods for the sensor web to have the same 
mass. This is a 12x12 array. Assuming a minimum 
communication distance of 50 m between pods (attainable 
with commercial transceiver chips), the “image” area 
associated with this sensor web is 500x500 m’- with a 50 m 
resolution. In addition, the image can change as a function 
of time, allowing for the sensor web to create virtual movies 
in the phase space associated with the transducers. In 
contrast, the Sojourner rover moved only a maximum of 
about 7 m from the Pathfinder lander[4]. Thus, while rovers 
are ideal for moving instruments around on a fine scale, 
sensor webs are important tools for large area surveying and 
establishing a virtual presence over the entire region. 
Deployment 
A key feature of the sensor web is the flexibility in its 
deployment. The relative ease of deployment permits more 
of the mass associated with the instrument to be the 
instrument itself. Because the pods are plentiful, small, and 
lightweight like plant seeds, it is useful to look to nature to 
develop efficient deployment schemes[5]. As a result, the 
pods may enter an environment in a number of different 
ways, depending on the specific application as illustrated in 
the land-based sensor webs of Figure 3. 
Deployment in a planetary environment can consist of 
dropping the pods in a stream out the back of an airplane, or, 
in the case of Mars, from a descending lander (similar to the 
Deep Space 2 probes), with small parachutes or rotors used 
to lessen ground impact (upper left portion of figure). 
Dropping the pods from balloons is also an option. These 
are perhaps the most energy efficient ways to disperse the 
pods. In another scenario, the pods can be fired from a 
central point (such as a lander) to surround the base station 
(lower left portion of the figure). This raises the possibility 
of ballistically driving the pods into the side of a steep 
canyon wall which could not be surveyed by conventional 
techniques. The sensor web in this case would be vertical in 
orientation. The pods can also be dropped out the back of a 
rover (lower right portion of figure). This deployment 
scheme allows the pods to serve not only as data collection 
points, but also as a communications link between the rover 
and lander for over-the-horizon communication (as may 
occur in meteor crater sites). Finally, the pods could be 
attached to the central craft (like streamers) via a fiber optic 
link (upper right portion of picture). This scheme does 
allow the possibility of wide bandwidth communication and 
is potentially useful in deep ocean environments as well. 
There are also secondary deployment issues as well. For 
example, the pods could be covered with stickers allowing 
them to stay put during a wind. Conversely, the pods could 
be covered with aerodynamic cups like a pinecone allowing 
for overall web movement during a wind. A vane-like 
device can also be attached to the pods to allow a wind to 
screw the pod into the ground permitting subsurface sensing. 
Construction 
The Sensor Web represents, by definition, an instrument 
where the economy of scale can be directly exploited. 
Although any particular sensor web is a single instrument, it 
is made up of dozens, even hundreds and thousands of 
identical pieces. The cost of larger instruments therefore 
decreases on a per unit area basis. 
Additionally, the sensor web hardware can leverage off of 
the present twin revolutions in computation and 
communication technology. Often the commercially 
available technology is the state of the art technology. For 
example, cheap, micropowered transceiver technology 
broadcasting in the ISM band (roughly 916 MHz) is readily 
available. Many of the more obvious transducers required 
for baseline sensing (e.g. temperature, pressure, light) exist 
in low-power commercial form as well. Furthermore, the art 
of integrating multiple, low-power micromachined sensors 
Figure 3 Various deployment schemes. into a-single package is presently being refined in the 
laboratory[6]. Finally, embedded microprocessors are 
467 
becoming more sophisticated and memory chips are 
becoming cheaper. Consequently, raw data can be analyzed, 
interpreted, and reduced locally at the pod itself, thereby 
allowing pod-to-pod data transmission to be low bandwidth, 
and hence, low power. 
3. APPLICATION SPECIFICATIONS 
The applications for sensor webs are vast because in 
principle they allow for information synthesis over a large 
spatial area involving measurements and tracking of 
dynamic phenomena over multiple length scales 
simultaneously. Consider, for example, the situation when 
the Mir Space Station’s hull was breached when it was hit by 
a cargo vehicle. It was clear to the occupants of the station 
that air was leaking out, the problem was which module to 
seal offl71. A Sensor Web in the station would have greatly 
aided in leak location rather than mere leak detection. 
There are 5 environments where sensor webs can be 
deployed: space, atmosphere, aqueous, land, and artificial 
(i.e. buildings and spacecraft). There are essentially two 
categories of sensor web uses: passive monitoring and 
active exploration. There are therefore a total of 10 
classification of sensor webs and it is important to 
understand the intra- and inter-group similarities to best 
identify the technology needed for a specific application. 
Moreover, it would aid in seeing how an existing sensor web 
might be applied into a new scenario. The box presented to 
the right represents a way to organize the diversity of 
applications along meaningful categories. 
First, of course, is a definition of what the web will do. The 
ultimate uplitdddownlink point is important because it will 
impact the way in which the information gathered from the 
web will reach the end user. 
Next, the spatial aspects of the web must be considered. 
Dimensionality affects the degree of intercommunication 
between the various node points. A sensor web for leak 
location along the Alaska pipeline is an example of a 1D 
system, while the a series of deployed balloons of differing 
buoyancy to determine air movement is an example of a 3D 
system. Because intra-web connectivity is associated with 
the degree of potential information synthesis, lower 
dimensional webs are more limited in their ability to 
interpret their environment. The expected physical distance 
between neighbors and pod distribution constrain the type of 
communication links between pods. 
The measurements associated with the application constrain 
the type of sensors needed as well as the on-board 
computation abilities of the pod. In addition to the web- 
scale (global) information synthesis, a pod-scale (local) 
information synthesis can be required as well. This helps to 
limit the amount of information that need be sent pod-to- 
pod. The precision of each measurement is also related to 
APPLICATION ISSUES 
1 .O Sensor Web Description 
1.1 Goal of Web Usage 
1.2 Passive Monitoring/Active Exploration 
1.3 Ultimate point of uplitdddownlink 
2.1 Dimensionality (ID, 2D, 3D) 
2.2 Area coverage 
2.0 Spatial Scale 
2.2.1 Ideal 
2.2.2 Minimum 
2.3 Average distance between nearest neighbors 
2.4 Distribution of pods (unifordclumpy) 
3.0 Measurements 
3.1 Number of measurements at each pod 
3.2 Frequency of each measurement 
3.3 Precision of each measurement 
3.4 Local processingheduction of data 
3.5 Total lifetime 
3.5.1 Pod lifetime 
3.5.2 Application lifetime 
4.1 Transmission of measurements (hopping) 
4.0 Information Scale 
4.1.1 Frequency of transmission 
4.1.2 Size of transmission packet 
4.2 Maximum latency tolerated to receive 
information at uplink/downlink 
4.3 Event driven requirements 
4.3.1 Reaction to environment 
4.3.2 Reaction to intemal web 
4.3.3 Maximum latency tolerated to 
conditions 
react to event 
4.4 Measurement dropout tolerance 
4.5 Node dropout tolerance 
5.1 Static/Cyclical (and time scale of cycle) 
5.2 WetiMoistJDry 
5.3 Thermal Stress 
5.4 Pressure Stress 
5.5 Chemical Stress 
5.6 Ecological Issues 
6.0 Pod Description 
6.1 Maximum size of pod tolerated 
6.2 Maximum weight of pod tolerated 
6.3 Power source (e.g. battery, solar cells) 
6.4 Pod uniformity (task differentiation) 
6.5 Mobility 
7.1 Placement strategy 
7.2 Location 
5.0 Web Environment Description 
7.0 Pod Deployment 
7.2.1 Absolute to environment 
7.2.2 Relative within web . 
468 
this issue; the more bits required, the more information need 
be sent. Some measurements, such as those associated with 
wet chemistry, require consumables onboard the pod. 
Again, environmental conditions, as determined by the 
overall web, may need to be monitored before performing 
such measurements. Finally, the individual pod lifetime 
must be weighed against the total lifetime of the application 
to determine if reseeding or multiple deployments is 
required. 
The node-to-node communication issues are closely related 
to measurements issues but form their own class because the 
measurements may well be interpreted locally before needed 
to be transmitted. Latency is a key concern here, 
particularly when examining situations where delays are not 
tolerated (like battlefield examples) or where information is 
collected on an event-triggered basis (like earthquake 
monitoring). Lost information to the end user, either from a 
lost packet or a lost node, needs to be considered as well. 
This will influence decisions about transmission coding 
schemes, from very robust, but more power-hungry ones, 
like spread-spectrum for military applications, to more 
simple ones, like on-off keying for routine monitoring in 
some agricultural applications. 
The next two categories describe issues associated with pod 
construction and packaging. As sensor web pods are 
expected to be deployed in large numbers in many delicate 
environments, the impact of the hardware and pod-to-pod 
communication on the environment must be considered 
carefully. This may require a total recovery of the sensor 
web after a specified amount of time. Pods also need not all 
be identical, and task differentiation is possible. For 
example, consider a large collection of pods containing low- 
cost, low-maintenance, electronic noses that are sprinkled 
with a few more power-hungry, but more sensitive and 
precise mass spectrometers. In this arrangement, the 
electronic noses detect gaseous fronts that trigger when the 
mass spectrometers need to be turned on. The web assets 
are thus internally managed. Pod mobility also raises 
interesting possibilities from one extreme of anchored pods, 
through passive, unconstrained motion (such as buoys on an 
ocean surface), to active, web-determined motion (such as 
pods integrated into mini-rovers). 
Finally, pod deployment is an issue that will impact both 
pod construction as well as inter-pod communications. The 
ability to specify the spatial position of a particular 
measurement is crucial not only for passive mapping of 
phenomena but also for local information synthesis and 
decision making. 
4. LABORATORY DEMONSTRATION 
Over the past year, we have gained significant experience in 
working with and developing Sensor Webs. A 
demonstration of the concept has been made at the Jet 
Figure 4 Functional Sensor Web pod (on left). 
Extraterrestrial on right. Note size of quarter. 
Propulsion Laboratory using commercial components, a 
typical pod is shown in Figure 4. Contained in this small 
package are the transmitfreceive chips (from RF 
Monolithics[S]) which operate at 916 MHz and are capable 
of data transmission at rates up to 20 kbs using amplitude 
shift keying. Over a duty cycle of one set of measurements 
per second, it is estimated that 50 microwatts of power are 
needed and thus there is low power drain associated with the 
communication backbone of the Sensor Web. The sensors 
contained in the package measure local light level and 
temperature. The pod is powered by a 3 V Li battery hidden 
in the base. Total pod mass is about 50 g. 
To demonstrate the low-power hardware envisioned for the 
Sensor Web, three identical sensor pods were assembled. A 
fourth pod was attached to a laptop computer; this served as 
the prime, or mother, node where the data were displayed. 
The protocols developed organized the pod broadcasts by 
specific time slots. 
The 4-node Sensor Web was demonstrated in two 
arrangements as shown in Figure 5. The first consisted of a 
linear layout, where each pod could only communicate with 
its nearest neighbor. The mother node was able to receive 
the temperature and light data from all points, thus 
demonstrating triple hopping as the data was transmitted 
along the line in a daisy-chain manner. The second 
demonstration consisted of a dense diamond layout. Here, 
two of the pods could communicate with all nodes 
DATA HOPPING: UNEAR FORMATION 
* Each node in contact with only 
its nearest neighbor 
* Triple hop demonstrated 
DATA HOPPING: DIAMOND FORMATION 
Multiple hopping paths to prime node 
tolerance of sensor web 
Redundant data eliminated 
dynamically 
* Multiple paths demonstrates fault 
Figure 5 Sensor web geometries demonstrated. 
469 
simultaneously. Because of this redundancy, the removal of 
either these nodes from the web did not interrupt the flow of 
data from the farthest point on the web to the mother node, 
demonstrating the fault tolerant property of the sensor web. 
Moreover, the redundancy in the web creates redundancy in 
the data transmitted in the web. The web protocols are 
designed, however, to eliminate this redundant data 
dynamically, lest the Sensor Web be overwhelmed with 
information. Again, the temperature and light levels at all 
three node points were displayed correctly at the mother 
node. In both demonstrated geometries, the mother node is 
not located centrally, showing how a sensor web is more 
than a simple star-network. 
5. GASEOUS BIOSIGNATURE MONITORING 
ScieiitiJic Motivation 
The use of gases as biosignatures has become an important 
thrust area for NASA. For example, the Terrestrial Planet 
Finder represents a space interferometry program to probe 
atmospheres of extra-solar planets for gases driven out of 
chemical equilibrium, presumably by biological activity[9]. 
From a similar scientific rationale, we propose that a Sensor 
Web can be used as an in situ instrument to detect life by 
looking for trace amounts of biogenic gases that are too low 
in concentration to be observed remotely. 
It is not known a priori which gases would be biogenic on 
other planets. Therefore, one promising method to search 
for chemical signatures of life is to do a broad, unbiased 
chemical survey of an atmosphere. This can be followed by 
detailed modeling that identifies those detected species 
whose atmospheric distribution cannot be explained by 
thermodynamic, geochemical or photochemical processes. 
By elimination, we arrive at the possibility of biological 
processes (sources and sinks) that may be operating on the 
planet. 
Because bacteria are thought to be the most primitive and 
ancient life forms on Earth, they are the logical target for 
searching for life on other planets. Planets that harbor 
bacterial life will likely have a metabolic signature in their 
atmospheres. 
Figure 6 Global CO? data from N O M .  See also 
htt~://~~~.cmdl.noaa.gov/ccgg/figures/co2rug.~if. 
A network of measurements is needed so that models can be 
applied to the data over spatial and temporal scales. The 
modeling will address whether the chemical species detected 
are produced by a putative bacterial community distinct 
from atmospheric constituents resulting from photochemical 
and geochemical processes. As an illustration, consider the 
global data of CO? taken by the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Climate Monitoring 
and Diagnostic Laboratory shown in Figure 6, The data 
clearly shows pronounced seasonal and latitudinal variations 
of CO?. The variations are of such magnitude as to be 
incompatible with chemical or geochemical processes. A 
very simple modeling effort will lead to the conclusion that 
the CO? variations are the results of an active biosphere. 
The microbial mats in Baja California are a confined, 
terrestrial target where all the features of a Sensor Web can 
be examined in an biological context. The top layer of a 
microbial mat is generally composed of filamentous 
cyanobacteria[ lo]. These bacteria produce oxygen during 
daylight, which diffuses through the upper portion of the mat 
to be consumed by heterotrophic and other bacteria involved 
in, for example, H2S, FeS, NH3, or CH4 oxidation. Within a 
few millimeters, the O2 is completely removed, and the 
anaerobic bacteria thrive. These organisms produce copious 
amounts of H2S by reducing sulfate[l 13. Also, denitrifyers, 
methanogens, and anoxygenic photosynthesizers are often 
present in the anaerobic zone of microbial mats. All of these 
bacteria are involved in either the production or 
consumption of gaseous compounds. Indeed, the rise of O2 
in the Earth‘s atmosphere was entirely due to production by 
cyanobacteria. 
Prototype Sensor Web 
A Sensor Web to monitor the metabolism of the algal mats 
is currently being constructed and illustrated in Figure 7. 
The pods will be scattered over an area of order lOOxl00 m’ 
which will provide stochastic measurements as well as 
encompass several different microenvironments. The prime 
node will be stationed at the home base campsite and will 
Figure 7 Algal mat experiment. 
470 
provide 24 hour monitoring over two diumal cycles. 
Ground-truth for the field instrument will be established by 
collecting and analyzing gas samples around the microbial 
field by hand using a gas chromatographlmass spectrometer. 
A sample pod is shown in Figure 8. There are a total of 6 
sensor measurements that will be made by each pod. H2S 
and O2 gas sensors (from Figaro Inc.[ 121) are located on the 
right side of the pod. Ambient humidity and temperature 
will also be measured as well as the temperature of the mat 
itself (this last measurement is made by the thermocouple 
hanging outside the pod seen in the inset). Finally, ambient 
light is measured on the top of the pod. 
Because the HIS sensor is relatively high power, solar cells 
(seen in the inset) enable local energy harvesting and will 
trickle charge the battery. The rest of the pod is 
micropowered. In the future, an electronic nose could 
increase the number of gases examined and still allow for 
low power consumption. The two vertical circuit boards at 
the top of the main photo are the receiver and transmitter 
(available commercially from Linx Technologies [ 131). 
These micropowered units can handle data over 8 channels 
at rates of up to 50 kbs using frequency shift keying. They 
have a range of about 400 m. Our application uses burst 
transmissions at 28.8 kbs. Despite the relative small size of 
the pod, no attempt has yet been made to compact the 
design. 
6. SUMMARY 
The Sensor Web is a macroinstrument, ideally suited for in 
situ environment monitoring and exploration, where 
relatively simple pods interact with one another to enable 
more complex operations and behavior. The key insight 
about Sensor Webs is that a node point can be a web itself 
which leads to an “interweb” concept of linked webs as 
illustrated in Figure 9. This allows for local analysis to 
create distributed control at an unprecedented level. Though 
we have focused here primarily on land applications, the 
Figure 8 Gaseous biosignature Sensor Web pod. 
The scale seen in the inset is 6 inches. 
Figure 9 The recursive concept of a Sensor Web. 
concept is flexible and can be applied to aqueous, 
atmospheric, and space environments as well. The 
cooperative behavior among the pod enables them to be 
micropowered, relatively cheap, and individually 
expendable. In addition to having demonstrated a simple 
Sensor Web in the laboratory, we are currently 
experimenting with a web deployment in Baja California. It 
is expected that data from this web will be scientifically 
significant. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Pan Conrad, Margie Homer, 
Lome Lane, Loren Lemmerman, Ken Manatt, Gene 
McDonald, Phil Moynihan, Ken Nealson, Dave Rodgers, 
Amy Ryan, Lisa Stein, Michael Storrie-Lombardi, Sasha 
Tsapin, Ray Wall, and Yuk Yung for valuable discussions. 
REFERENCES 
[l] K.A. Delin, S.P. Jackson, and R.R. Some, “Sensor 
Webs,” NASA Tech Briefs, 23, 1999,80. 
[2] J.R. Agre, L.P. Clare, G.J. Pottie, and N.P. Romanov, 
“Development Platform for Self-organizing Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” Proceedings of AeroSense ’99, SPIE 
Intemational Symposium on Unattended Ground Sensor 
Technology and Applications, 1999,257-268. 
[3] M.N.O. Sadiku, “Wave Propagation,” in The Electrical 
Engineering Handbook, R.C. Dorf, ed., CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, 1997,925-937. 
[4] Science, 278, 1997, 1734-1742. 
[5] D. Attenborough, The Private Lives of Plants, Princeton 
University Press, 1995. 
[6] A. Mason, N. Yazdi, A.V. Chavan, K. Najafi, and K.D. 
Wise, “A generic multielement microsystem for portable 
wireless applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1998, 
1733-1746. 
471 
[7] J. Oberg, “Shuttle-Mir’s Lessons for the International 
Space Station,” IEEE Spectrum, 35, 1998,3 1. 
[8] See http://www.i~m.com. 
[9] C.A. Beichman, N.J. Woolf, and C.A. Lindensmith, 
(eds.), The Terrestrial Planet Finder, JPL Publication 1999, 
99-3. See also httd/tpf.ipl.nasa.gov. 
[IO] J.F. Stolz, “Distribution of phototrophic microbes in 
the flat laminated microbial mat at Laguna Figueroa, Baja 
California, Mexico,” BioSys., 23, 1990, 345. 
[ 1 I]  D.E. Canfield, and D.J. Des Marais, “Biogeochemical 
cycles of carbon, sulfur, and free oxygen in a microbial 
mat,” Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta., 57, 1993,3971. 
[ 121 See http://www.figarosensor.com. 
[ 131 See http://www.linxtechnolotries.com. 
Kevin Delin is currently leading the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory’s effort to develop sensor webs for in situ 
experiments and habitat monitoring. His present interests 
include defining the newly emerging discipline of sensor 
webs, from applications to technological issues, and 
information synthesis on sensor webs. He received the S. B., 
M.S., E.E., and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering 
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he 
also co-authored a textbook, Foundations of  Applied 
Superconductivity (Addison- Wesley, 1991 ). He has worked 
at Lincoln Laboratory where he ran the low-temperature 
superconducting circuit line and was part of an industrial 
consortium (with IBM and AT&T} to develop ultra-high 
critical current Josephson junctions. He was also a 
Member of the Technical staff at Conductus where he was 
part of a 4-person team that developed the world’s first 
superconducting NMR probe. He holds two patents in this 
area. 
Shannon Jackson has spent the past 14 years at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory as a Member of the Technical Staff 
and holds an S.B. degree from the Califomia State 
Polytechnic University in Pomona. He has been involved in 
numerous spaceflight projects, including the Cassini probe, 
and was the Lead Engineer in developing and delivering the 
electronic-nose gas detector which Jew on Shuttle Mission 
STS-95 (October 1998). Mr. Jackson is presently the Lead 
Engineer in developing sensor webs for gaseous detection. 
His current interests include fiber-optic and wireless 
communication systems. 
472 
