K-1 Integrated Vehicle Health Management 
System: Design for Operational Efficiency 
Richard Bailey 
Kistler Aerospace Corporation 
3760 Carillon Point 
Kirkland, WA 98033 
rl~nilev(~~kisrler3el.o.com 
425-889-2001 
Abstract-Kistler Aerospace Corporation is developing the 
world’s first commercial, fully reusable aerospace vehicle. 
The two-stage K-1 vehicle is designed to significantly 
reduce the cost of reliably delivering payloads to Low Earth 
Orbit (LEO) and to provide rapid launch response and 
schedule flexibility. 
The K-1 operability philosophy is similar to that of late- 
generation commercial aircraft, such as the Boeing 777. 
The vehicle’s on-board systems are continually monitored 
for performance versus expected and this performance data 
is used for both in-flight and maintenance tum-around 
actions. The in-flight decisions are made, without a person- 
in-the-loop, to maximize the mission success. The 
operations crew on the ground obtains early visibility on the 
performance during the flight so they are prepared to 
perform the necessary actions to prepare the K-1 for the 
next flight. This paper discusses the avionics architecture, 
which is implemented with both managed and committed 
hardware redundancies. The managed redundancy exists in 
the triplex computing complexes and the committed 
redundancy exists in the dual pyrotechnic, valve, and motor 
effectors. The paper will discuss the avionics design and the 
implementation of the vehicle health management system. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. K-1 AVIONIC OVERVIEW 
3 .K- 1 VEHICLE HEALTH MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
DESCRIPTION 
4. SUMMARY 
Michael McSharry 
Honeywell 
US Hwy 46 
Teterboro, NJ 07608 
mmcsharry @kistleraero.com 
425-889-2001 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Kistler Aerospace Corporation is developing the world’s 
first commercial, fully reusable aerospace vehicle. The two- 
stage K-1 vehicle is designed to significantly reduce the cost 
of reliably delivering payloads to Low Earth Orbit (LEO) 
and to provide rapid launch response and schedule 
flexibility. Kistler Aerospace Corporation has assembled a 
team of aerospace experts and space program managers to 
design the K-1 vehicle and manage the K-1 program. 
Kistler is leading the K-1 systems engineering and 
integration effort through an integrated team composed of 
Kistler and contractor personnel. Each of Kistler’s 
contractors is a leader in its respective field of the aerospace 
industry and has significant experience in the construction 
of similar components. The team includes Northrop 
Grumman Corporation, Lockheed Martin Michoud Space 
Systems, GenCorp Aerojet, Draper Laboratory, Honeywell, 
Irvin Aerospace, and Oceaneering Thermal Systems. 
The K-1 operability philosophy is similar to that of late- 
generation commercial aircraft, such as the Boeing 777. 
The vehicle’s on-board systems are continually monitored 
for performance versus expected and this performance data 
is used for both in-flight and maintenance tum-around 
actions. The in-flight decisions are made, without a person- 
in-the-loop, to maximize the mission success. The 
operations crew on the ground obtains early visibility on the 
performance during the flight so they are prepared to 
perform the necessary actions to prepare the K-1 for the 
next flight. The crew receives continual reporting of the 
vehicle as the maintenance or turn-around process 
progresses as well as the trending data that foreshadows a 
necessary maintenance action. 
Copyright 0 2000 Kistler Aerospace Corporation. Permission granted to 
IEEE to publish in all forms 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 -- 2000 IEEE. 
323 
The K-1 is a fully reusable two-stage vehicle consisting of 
the first stage Launch Assist Platform, or LAP, and the 
second stage Orbital Vehicle, or OV. The K-1 integrated 
Vehicle Health Management (VHM) system developed by 
Kistler Aerospace, Honeywell, and Draper Laboratory plays 
a key role in the K-1's ability to achieve is operability goals. 
This includes both the completion of the current mission 
and the efficient turn-around of each K-1 stage for the next 
mission. 
2. K-1 AVIONICS OVERVIEW 
The avionics architecture is implemented with both 
managed and committed hardware redundancy. The 
managed redundancy exists in the triplex computing 
complexes. The committed redundancy exists in the dual 
pyrotechnic, valve, and motor effectors. This architecture is 
illustrated in Figure 1 for the OV. The LAP architecture is 
very similar. 
The triplex-computing core consists of three Vehicle 
Management Computers (VMC) connected via a cross- 
channel data link. The data link in concert with 
Honeywell's propriety Fault Tolerant Executive (FTE) 
software provides the VMC input source congruency, three 
processor synchronization, and processor fault detection, 
isolation, and recovery. The three VMCs perform all flight 
processing functions for the K-1 vehicle. 
I/O functions are allocated to the Subsystem Management 
Units (SMU) and Main Engine Controllers (MEC). The 
SMU and MEC processors also adhere to the triplex 
computing architecture. The output side of the SMU and 
MEC utilize hardware voters to assure that pyro, valve. and 
motor commands are only performed through concurrence 
of a majority of the processing channels. 
Sensor input is provided by triplex navigation sensors and 
various temperature, presssure, and other miscellaneous 
sensors. Health decisions and control decisions are based 
upon talang advantage of the explicit input redundancy (e.g. 
three identical Embedded Global positioning system / 
Inertial navigation system (EGI) sensors) or the implicit 
redundancy that can be achieved through synthesis of 
related sensor inputs. With this input redundancy in the 
architecture the VHM system is able to select the most 
reasonable input and analyze anomalies that may require 
later action. 
.. ...>e. ..... cAe, .-,,;:::*, Kistler Aerospace K-1 OV ELRU Architecture 
KEY 
0 
0 
k 
y--; 
' :  !_.__I ... 
Figure 1 OV Avionics Block Diagram 
............... _. - Avionics Bus  3 
324 
3. K-1 VEHICLE HEALTH MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The K-1 VHM is built around the intelligence available in 
the VMC, SMU, and MEC computers and the extensive 
monitoring points available implicit in the architecture and 
in the internal hardware circuits. It possesses and on-board 
data recording capacity of 400 Megabytes per flight as well 
as telemetry using Tracking Data Relay Satellite System 
(TDRSS). 
The on-board management of the K-1 health starts with the 
core VMC computing complex. It is the responsibility of 
this core to assure that all 1553 outputs are identical and 
time-synchronized. Given this condition, the fault detection 
and isolation of other vehicle components can be realized. 
Within the VMC, the embedded FTE will detect a variance 
in the computation of any of the three VMC computers. 
When a persistent variance is detected the faulty channel 
will be removed from the decision making set, reinitialized, 
and monitored until it demonstrates that its computations are 
the same as the other channels. At all times the FTE will 
assure that the 1553 output of all channels going to the 
SMUs, MECs, and others is identical and the result of a 
majority vote. 
The SMU, MEC, EGI, and other selective components on 
the 1553 avionics bus are managed by the VHM system as 
intelligent devices. There exists certain expected 
handshakes and similarity of response between redundant 
components. When these do not occur then the VHM 
system will log the failure and take recovery action. It is 
generally the case that recovery is attempted by power- 
cycling of the faulty component followed by monitoring for 
good behavior. 
At the circuit level there exists extensive Built-In-Test 
(BIT). BIT is always performed on K-1 vehicle power-up. 
It is performed continuously on those circuits that can be 
observed unobtrusively. It is also initiated at specific times 
during the pre-launch countdown sequence or by command 
over the K-1 umbilical during maintenance. 
Great care was taken on the circuit designs for the K-1 to 
assure that the BIT will be adequate to realize the 
operational philosophy of a self-contained health monitoring 
system. As an example the design of the pyrotechnic drive 
circuit, as shown in Figure 2, allows the following potential 
hardware failures for each individual pyro circuit to be 
automatically detected: 
4 m  
J 
I - 
ESD Pnt
1 
7- S . W h  H a ,  
L 1  Y.d 7"s : 
R4.Y on"., 
- 
Figure 2 Pyro Driver Diagram 
325 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6.  
7. 
Pyro device not connected or pyro bridge wire 
open 
Pyro device shorted 
Drive circuit fired with adequate current to 
blow pyro bridge wire 
No live pyrotechnic device installed 
Incorrect vote circuit enabling a pyro driver 
Incorrect voltage at pyro 
Fault of pyro drive circuit switch. 
The series drive switches in this circuit should also be 
noted. It is always the case for all circuits that no single 
circuit failure will allow premature unintended operation. 
Since every discrete output function is implemented with 
dual drivers, no single circuit failure will result in an 
unintended operation. 
The BIT circuitry allows a small amount of current to flow 
through the firing circuit and the pyrotechnic device. The 
amount of current flowing is measured to determine if the 
pyrotechnic device is attached or is shorted. From the 
measured current, the resistance is calculated and compared 
to a range of expected values. Any measurements outside 
the expected values is logged or brought to the attention of 
the ground system operator when the K-1 vehicle umbilical 
is connected. This BIT is also used after the circuit is fired 
to verify that the pyrotechnic device has been used. 
The BIT circuitry verifies the firing circuitry by switching 
out the pyrotechnic device and inserting an equivalent 
resistance. The BIT software then fires the pyrotechnic 
driver and the VHM system verifies all measurements 
against the expected values. This same process is used with 
the actual circuit during flight. The measurements taken 
from the pyrotechnic driver are voltage applied, battery 
current, and peek current. If any of these measurements fall 
outside the ranges stored in the Expected Value Table 
(EVT), the results are noted in a table of possible failures 
and logged in the flight data recorder along with all the 
associated measurements. 
The EVT is a table loaded prior to launch that describes the 
expected characteristics of all K-1 measurements at various 
phases of the launch and flight profile. Each measurement 
is compared to the EVT and tagged as nominal, yellow, or 
red. Yellow-tagged data indicate that measured values are 
close to the outer range of the expected value, and red- 
tagged data indicate values outside the expected range. The 
processing of the EVT and data recording begins when the 
system is in the pre-launch mode and concludes when the 
system is powered down after stage landing. 
This process begins during the pre-launch mode, when the 
K-1 consumables are loaded into the vehicle. As the filling 
progresses, pressure and temperature measurements are 
compared against expected values. The VHM diagnoses 
any measurements outside the expected values and displays 
the results to the K-1 ground system operator. During 
flight, the VHM System again processes all measurements, 
looking for possible anomalies. For example, if the pressure 
transducer for the gaseous oxygen system reads below the 
expected value at some time during the flight, the VHM 
system stores the occurrence in the flight data recorder as a 
possible leak. 
The VHM system also examines vehicle response to system 
effector commands. For example, the VMC issues Attitude 
Control System (ACS) firing commands via the SMU. The 
VHM System expects a response from the EGI data based 
on the ACS firing. If the response does not match the 
expected value, the VHM system will begin to weight that 
thruster as failed. The failure weight will be increased until 
the value passes the failure criteria. If the valve is 
determined to be nonfunctional, the VHM system removes 
it from the active thruster list used in the thruster selection 
logic by the VMC software. The thruster is marked as 
failed and logged into the flight data recorder, and the flight 
continues. 
After every K-1 flight, the flight data recorders are 
downloaded to the ground system. Kistler engineers confirm 
the fault log versus the log received via telemetry for any 
maintenance items that need to be addressed during K- I 
vehicle turnaround. The post-processing software analyzes 
the data retrieved from the flight data recorder looking for 
any yellow or red tagged data. Yellow or red tagged data 
are copied out of the data set to be reviewed by the system 
engineer and/or contractor responsible for that system. 
Kistler further analyzes data from all the K-1 launches to 
produce trending maintenance records for future launches. 
These records are used to predict what maintenance 
functions need to be performed reducing the in-flight fault 
rate. The trending data also allows Kistler to apply lessons 
learned from previous flights to enhance the reliability and 
safety of the K-1 vehicle in future missions. 
4. SUMMARY 
Kistler, Honeywell, and Draper Laboratory have completed 
the K-1 VHM system design, with the hardware fabricated, 
tested and installed in the K-1 Hardware-in-the-Loop 
(HWIL) facility at Draper Laboratory. The software 
requirements, generated by an integrated product team, are 
also complete, with the software design underway. Test 
plans are in place to verify the integrated VHM system 
using the K-1 HWIL facility. Multiple fault insertion will 
be implemented as part of the verification process to 
document the response of the VHM system including the 
ground post processing. 
The design of the K-1 has been driven by a commercial 
operational philosophy that assures rapid vehicle turn- 
around, minimum operator intervention, and avoidance of 
unplanned down-time. This design has been realized with 
an extensive VHM system implemented with architectural 
326 
redundancy and automated checks-and-balances. This 
system forms the basis for a highly reliable and robust space 
transportation system with operation and performance 
similar to those of commercial airliners. As the K-1 vehicle 
accumulates more flights, the VHM system experience base 
will grow resulting in decreasing maintenance and operating 
costs and high reliability for K-1 customers. 
Richard Bailey is the Avionics Manager for Kistler 
Aerospace Corporation and is responsible for the K-1 
avionics design and coordination of Kistler's avionic 
contractors. His background includes 18 years experience 
in the areas of avionics, guidance, navigation and control 
system development and analysis. 
Michael McSharry is the Principal SystedSoftware 
Engineer on the K-1 for Honeywell with responsibility for 
coordination of the K-1 vehicle software development. He 
has 22 years of experience in fault tolerant avionics design 
and real-time software development. 
327 
