Logistics Considerations for a Human Mission to Mars 
William E. Roy 
National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA) 
Mailcode: LO-P2 
John F. Kennedy Space Center 
KSC,FL 32899 
william.roy- 1 @ksc.nasa.gov 
407-867-6069 
Abstract- Throughout the history of mankind, humans have 
ventured beyond their home base and source of support, and 
explored the unknown. Columbus, Lewis & Clark, and 
Scott are just a few examples of those brave explorers who 
sought out new lands and the potential of new discoveries. 
These explorers often spent months, even years, actively 
expanding the bounds of their limitations and resources. 
They successfully investigated new regions while 
overcoming many challenging and harsh environments. 
Humans are again poised to venture beyond their home base 
of Earth. This venture will rival the journeys of the early 
explorers especially in terms of mission duration and 
isolation from sources of supply and assistance. This next 
journey may be to Mars (Figure 1). 
Figure 1, Mars 
The NASA Human Mars Mission (HMM) presents a 
multitude of technological challenges that must be addressed 
in order to safely send and return a crew to Mars. Once the 
manned phase of the mission is committed to launch, orbital 
mechanics will drive the crew to be away from Earth for a 
minimum of two years. There will be no re-supply and only 
a limited mass and volume allotment for logistics materials. 
The crew will have limited resources and capabilities 
available to them to maintain and repair the flight vehicle 
and the surface systems. 
Logistics will be one of the more significant challenges the 
program must investigate, research, and eventually 
overcome. The program must provide for the long-term 
logistics supportability of vehicle systems and associated 
hardware where supply from Earth is non-existence. The 
crew will be asked to perform tasks normally not required of 
“today’s’’ astronauts. Much like the early explorers, the 
crew must be able to handle all situations autonomously. 
This logistics challenge can be met by developing robust, 
redundant systems and by incorporating creative logistics 
solutions into the flight vehicle and surface system designs 
early in the program. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. HUMAN MARS MISSION ARCIUTECTURE 
4. LQGISTICS PRINCIPLES AND INNOVATIONS 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
6. REFERENCES 
3. LOGISTICS AREAS OF CONCERN 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) has overcome a multitude of technical challenges 
over the decades. We have safely sent and returned crews to 
the surface of the moon and have designed and continue to 
deploy a reusable launch vehicle (Space Shuttle). However, 
NASA has never had to face the logistics challenges posed 
by a Human Mission to Mars. 
From Gemini to Apollo to Skylab, previous manned space 
flight programs have had the option in a contingency to 
return to Earth when an unplanned anomaly or emergency 
presents itself. The International Space Station (ISS) will be 
outfitted with the Crew Return Vehicle (CRV) to assure 
crew safety if a system failure or astronaut illness warrants. 
The HMM will not have such a luxury or capability to return 
to Earth. Once the crew is committed to the mission, 
support from Earth is limited to communications and ground 
based expertise and experience. The crew must be able to 
perform logistics tasks with the skills and resources (tools, 
spares, and material) available to them. For this very 
’ U.S. Govemment work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
227 
reason, Logistics will play an important role in the success 
of a Human Mission to Mars. 
Logistics and maintenance concepts, utilized in previous 
NASA programs, need to be reviewed, re-addressed, 
tailored, and expanded. Logistics and maintenance for 
space vehicles and systems, for the most part, have been 
planned as ground based tasks. The activities of 
organizational and depot level maintenance are performed 
by ground based technicians to return the vehicle, system, 
and hardware to a serviceable condition. The HMM crew 
must possess the necessary skills to perform these repairs 
and the required resources must be must be on the vehicle. 
To ensure that this logistics scenario can be achieved, the 
program must adopt an Integrated Logistics Support (ILS) 
strategy. ILS is a management function that provides initial 
logistics planning and subsequent implementation to assure 
that the HMM systems and hardware will meet performance 
requirements and can be expeditiously supported by the 
crew during its deployment. 
The major objectives of the HMM ILS will be to: 
A. Integrate support elements into systems and 
equipment design. 
.......................... 
Earth @ 
Departure 
Jan. 20,2014 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Earth 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
@ Arrival / 
' .June 26,2016 / 
\ 
\ 
, , - _ _ _ _ - -  - _  - .  
ars Surface Stay Tim 
* = .  ...' 
December 10,2014 
Figure 2, Human Mars Mission Trajectory and Stay Time 
228 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Develop and define logistics support requirements. 
Acquire and field the required support and 
associated capabilities. 
Provide efficient and cost-effective logistics 
support during the operational phase of the 
program (ground and flight). 
This paper address the logistics challenges of a Human 
Mission to Mars and provides a high level overview of the 
logistics concepts that must be incorporated into the 
program to ensure its success. 
2. HUMAN MARS MISSION ARCHITECTURE 
Of all the planets in our Solar System, Mars is the most like 
Earth. With a thin atmosphere, weather, seasons, and a 25- 
hour day, Mars has a diverse and complex surface, including 
ice. Activities on Mars will commence with precursor 
missions including high-resolution satellite imaging; surface 
imaging and sample returns; and robotic rover landing and 
exploration operations. Subsequent Mars explorations will 
include human and cargo surface landings, large-scale 
surface explorations, and In-Situ Resource Utilization 
(ISRU). 
The objective of the Human Mars Mission (HMM) Initiative 
is to conduct the human exploration of Mars. The HMM 
Initiative plans to execute the mission in individual, 
incremental phases with each phase demonstrating 
technologies and validating equipment concepts prerequisite 
for subsequent phases. The HMM Initiative phases include: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
The NASA 
fie-launch 
Launch and Initial Low Earth Orbit Operations 
Trans-Mars Injection (TMI) and Interplanetary 
Travel 
Arrival at Mars and Orbit Capture 
Mars Entry and Landing. 
Crewed Initial Surface Operations 
Crewed Long Term Surface Operations 
Departure Preparations and Departure 
Rendezvous, Docking, and Transfer to Earth 
Return Vehicle (ERV) 
Trans-Earth Injection (TEI) and Interplanetary 
Travel 
Earth Entry and Landing 
Post Landing Recovery 
Design Reference Mission (DRM)’ indicates 
that the initial HMM could take place during the 201 1 and 
2013/2014 Mars opportunities. The term DRM describes 
the current HMM baseline architecture. There are several 
different architectures being reviewed and discussed, none 
of which directly affects the HMM logistics program. 
However, for planning purposes of this paper, DRM 3.0 is 
Design Reference Mission 3.0, dated June 1998 
utilized for reference only. 
The Exploration Transportation Office at Marshall Space 
Flight Center (MSFC), the Exploration Office at Johnson 
Space Center (JSC), and the exploration community at large 
use the DRM to compare and evaluate approaches to 
mission, system, and transportation concepts. The DRM 
does not define the final mission profile but instead an 
evolving and “best” current approach. 
The DRM for the crew utilizes relatively fast transits (1 15 to 
180 days) to and from Mars with long surface stays (18 to 
22 months; 570 days nominal). Two cargo flights will leave 
for Mars during the first opportunity, one to Mars orbit and 
the second to the surface, in preparation for the crew during 
the following opportunity. Each TMI stack will consist of a 
cargo/payload portion and the nuclear thermal propulsion 
(NTP) module to provide the required thrust for Mars 
trajectory. Both portions of the piloted trajectory and the 
stay time on the surface are shown in Figure 2. 
In the second opportunity, in January 2014, the crew of six 
departs for Mars in a transitlsurface habitat. The outbound 
trip time is 161 days. After aero-capturing into Mars orbit, 
the crew will perform an aero-entry maneuver, descend 
propulsively in the transit habitat to the surface, and 
rendezvous with the previously delivered cargo elements via 
means of a controlled precision landing. 
The return leg for the first piloted visit begins with the TEI 
maneuver in January 2016. The crew ascends from Mars in 
the Earth Crew Return Vehicle (ECRV) and rendezvous 
with the TEI stage, figure 3. The return Uip time is 154 
days. The atmospheric entry is performed with an Apollo 
type reentry vehicle, and is the only piece of transportation 
hardware returned to Earth. 
Figure 3, ECRV Rendezvous 
Once on the surface of the planet, figure 4, Human 
operations that characterize the activities to be undertaken 
on the surface of Mars include: 
229 
1. 
2.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
Base set-up 
Base operations 
Base maintenance 
Biological life support operations 
Pressurized rover operations 
1. Crew Size 
2. Mission Duration 
3. Martian Environment 
4. Logistics mass/volume allocation 
5. Logistics repair capabilities 
6. Resupply 
7. Communication 
Figure 4, Mars Surface Operation 
The key activities of the crew envisioned for the surface 
operations phase, as documented in the DRM, of the mission 
include: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6.  
7. 
Field geology and sample collection 
Tele-operation of robotics as sample collection 
systems (rovers) 
Conduct preliminary analysis of samples 
Communication of findings to geology team on 
Earth 
Deploy geophysical and meteorological packages 
Special sampling (deep drilling) 
Conduct active experiments 
PreDare samdes for return to Earth 
~ ~ , ~ a ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  and remil. ~~~~~7 ~~~~~ as I I @ C L ’ $  F Q r V  I 
This section will provide further discussion of the various 
limiting factors of the Human Mars Mission and the logistics 
concepts that must be applied to ensure mission success. 
Crew Size: The nominal crew size of the mission is presently 
six (6). The absolute requirement for the crew size and 
composition remains TBD until the final mission 
architecture is selected. The crew size will be based on the 
required tasks that are necessary to be performed, safety and 
risk considerations, and political factors such as 
international participation. The crew will generally consist 
of a mission commander, scientists (geologisthiologist), 
medical personnel, and engineers. 
From a logistics standpoint, the size of the crew is directly 
related to the skills, consumables, and available crew time to 
perform logistics tasks and activities. As such, crew training 
will be critical to the success of the mission. The crew will 
be asked to perform tasks that are not expected of today’s 
astronauts. They will be generalists or multi-disciplined, 
capable of performing cross functionally while providing 
redundancy where desired. Although crew education and 
experience as well as training on the ground are essential, 
the in-transit time from low-earth orbit (LEO) to Mars will 
provide a valuable opportunity for additional training. Other 
than some limited science and physical exercise activities, 
the crew is expected to be idle during their voyage. 
The use of Computer-Based-Training (CBT) and Virtual 
Reality (VR) programs could be utilized to supplement their 
skill levels in the areas of science and logistics. 
What the highlighted activity infers is that equipment must 
be maintained by the crew while in-flight or on the planet’s 
surface. Repairs by the crew will be effected if and when 
hardware fails. There are several factors that can limit the 
logistics support infrastructure and capability for a mission 
such as the HMM. These factors are discussed in section 3 
of this paper. 
3. LOGISTICS AREAS OF CONCERN 
There are several factors associated with a crew operating 
on the surface of Mars that will drive logistics 
considerations. Mission architects and planners can manage 
or mitigate these limiting factors by developing a new form 
of effective and efficient logistics support concepts. 
The crew size will also provide limited allotted time to 
perform logistics and maintenance tasks such as preventative 
maintenance (inspection, servicing, cleaning, filter change 
out, calibration, etc.). Figure 5 provides an overview of the 
crew time allocation. The crew, on average, will have an 
allocation of 3 hours per day to perform Housekeeping, 
Maintenance, and Repair (H/M/R) tasks. To facilitate a 
comprehensive WM/R program within the crew time 
limitations, critical hardware must be designed to 
incorporate built-in-test (BIT) technology or Predictive 
Health and Reliability Management (PHARM) systems. 
This capability will provide indications of hardware 
performance operation for potential degradation. 
Automated systems such as these will minimize crew time 
dedicated to scheduled maintenance activities. 
Limiting factors include: 
230 
4. LOGISTICS PRLNCIPLES AND INNOVATIONS Crew Time Allotment (hours) 
[3 Personal 
Ex p lo ratio nL5 c I enc e '1U Crew Ops 10 
6 
Figure 5,  Crew Time Allotment 
Mission Duration/Resupply : The total elapse time of the 
crew in a Human Mars Mission from low-earth orbit 
operations through the return to Earth is approximately 883 
days (2.42 years). System hardware, having been exercised 
during ground processing will have been potentially 
powered or operated in excess of 3-4 years. Failures of the 
hardware will occur and repairs will have to be effected 
where redundancy is inadequate. There are no resupply 
missions planned. The repairs will have to be made with 
existing resources stored on-board the various vehicles 
Martian Environment: The trek to Mars will subject the 
vehicle and crew to a harsh environment for a long period of 
time. While on the surface of Mars, this hardware will be 
subjected to a wide range of temperature cycles from 20°F to 
-125°F (although extremes range from 80°F to -280°F), 
long duration dust storms created by winds up to 200 mph. 
The Martian atmosphere is approximately one-hundredth as 
thick as Earth's, resulting in almost all the sun's radiation 
reaching the planetary surface. 
Logistics MassNolume Allocation: Due to the limitations 
of payload weight in present launch systems (Space Shuttle 
and unmanned expendable vehicles), the design of the 
spacecraft will restrict the amount of logistics resources that 
can be stored on-board the vehicles. 
Logistics Repair Capability: Several elements are required 
to have a logistics repair capability. Besides the crew skill 
level discussed previously, the crew must have the detailed 
technical documentation to perform the repairs. Also 
needed are the tooldtest equipment and spare parts. These 
resources have a direct impact on logistics mass/volume 
allocations. 
Communication: With existing technology, the current time 
delay in communication from Earth to Mars is 
approximately 20 minutes. This limitation requires the crew 
to be capable of responding autonomously to time critical 
failures or anomalies. 
Logistics support for the HMM Initiative can be categorized 
into three ( 3 )  elements. They are: 
1. 
2. Enabling Technologies Supporting Logistics 
3.  Creative Logistics 
Standard Logistics Principles and Practices 
Standard Logistics Principles and Practices: The HMM 
Initiative must recognize the importance of implementing a 
robust Integrated Logistics System (ILS). These standard 
logistics principles and practices must be strictly adhered to 
ensure system reliability, supportability, and maintainability. 
Through the standard principles and practices, logistics will 
actively participate in all phases of the program to influence 
the design for logistics and maintenance considerations. 
Logistics will influence the design in order to minimize the 
frequency and duration of maintenance requirements thereby 
minimizing the demand on crew time to perform the 
required maintenance. This is done through a variety of 
methods: 
Preventative maintenance and calibration 
requirements. The vehicle systems must be 
designed such that periodic preventative 
maintenance tasks are minimized and, when. 
required, are effective and efficient. Monitoring 
the system performance data and hardware cycling 
information for limited operating life items (LOLI) 
requirements by ground engineers through 
telemetry will also minimize the demand on the 
crew. 
Impose stringent program requirements for 
reliability and maintainability. Critical flight 
hardware, due to the environment to which it will 
be exposed and its expected operating life, must be 
designed utilizing high reliability parts. Limited 
crew time available for performing maintenance 
dictates that maintainability considerations must be 
incorporated into the design of flight hardware. 
Ensure rapid detection and isolation of failures. 
The detection of a failure and subsequent isolation 
to the component level, especially in critical 
systems, is essential to the safety of the crew. 
Maximize hardware accessibility. The ability to 
gain quick and easy hands-on access to hardware 
and components, without extensive de-integration. 
A limitation on unit layering and maximum use of 
quick disconnects, and captive fasteners will 
improve hardware accessibility. 
231 
5 .  Design Hardware for minimum weight and ease of 
handling. Once the suspect equipment is 
accessible, the hardware should be designed to 
allow a single crewman to complete the required 
maintenance. 
6. Simple Design. After the isolation and removal of 
the failed component, the crew must be capable of 
repairing the hardware without the use of 
complicated processes such as soldering. 
Technology such as “Plug-and Play” is highly 
desirable. 
7. Develop concise and clears instructions and 
procedures. All technical manuals, in electronic 
format, must be current, standardized, and easy to 
read and understand. Due to the communication 
time lag, the crew must be capable of operating 
without assistance from Earth based engineers. 
8. Assure the rapid verijkation of corrective actions. 
Following hardware maintenance, the crew will 
require the capability to verify the restoration of 
hardware functionality. 
9. Design systems and hardware for known crew 
skills and training. Although the crew will be 
highly trained there are limitations to their 
achievable skill levels in certain technical areas. 
The crew composition and expected associated 
skills must be identified early in the program 
providing design engineers a key design 
parameter. 
Enabling Technologies Supporting Logistics: The Design 
Reference Mission (DRM) indicates that the earliest 
opportunity, if congressional approval is granted, for the 
first phase of a manned mission to Mars would be in the year 
2011. The current rate of technology advancement shows 
promise that current logistics capabilities will mature or be 
further defined and that new capabilities will exist that could 
revolutionize logistics. 
Once identified as a promising logistics technology, NASA 
and the aerospace industry should further investigate and 
support its evolution. The following technologies may be 
mature enough to support logistics capabilities during the 
Mars mission: 
1. Micro-Sensor Technology: Sensors that can be 
attached or embedded into tools, equipment, 
critical spares, and the crew to provide location 
information (real-time asset management system). 
2. Portable, Universal Maintenance Tester: A tester 
that will have the capability to detect and isolate 
failures within the majority of the hardware 
components or component-types. This will 
minimize the support equipment requirements 
within the limited madvolume allocation for 
logistics. Hardware will be designed with test ports 
for interfacing with the tester. 
Autonomous Hardware: Systems that can operate 
with minimal human interaction. 
Robotics: Utilizing robotics to perform 
maintenance outside the habitation will decrease 
the risks associated with crew Extra-Vehicular 
Activity (EVA). Maintenance of the rovers could 
be performed by robotics. 
Rapid Prototyping: An advanced technology that 
can presently produce hands-on solid, three- 
dimensional replicas (models). Advancements in 
this area could result in a manufacturing capability 
on the surface of Mars utilizing in-situ resources. 
PCB Repairs: Presently a majority of printed 
circuit boards utilized in the NASA manned flight 
programs are conformal coated for contamination 
protection. The dusty environment expected on the 
surface of Mars will require the cards to be 
protected from contamination as well. Conformal 
coating is a process requiring special tools and 
equipment to both remove (to perform 
maintenance) and apply (after maintenance). 
Instead of conformal coating, the use of a shrink- 
wrap that can easily be removed and subsequently 
applied by the crew would improve ease of 
maintenance. 
Creative Logistics: This category identifies logistics 
concepts that potentially make the systems and hardware 
more supportable or satisfy expected limitations in 
mass/volume allocations. 
Dissimilar Redundancy: This concept populates 
hardware with components that are from different 
dates or lots or even manufacturers. For example, 
printed circuit boards (PCB) would consist of two 
different microprocessors. When a microprocessor is 
suspect with a manufacturing defect or known failure, 
a switch is initiated to utilize the other microprocessor. 
In-Place Storage: Due to the constraints of volume 
expected in the vehicles, a proposed logistics concept 
would be to store spare parts (piece parts) in the 
assembles. A simplistic example would be the 
fasteners of a rack. Common throughout the vehicle 
design, the design of panels would incorporate 8 
fasteners where theoretically only 4 are required. 
Hardware Harvesting: The recoverability of 
components, where on the ground the disposition 
would generally be to discard upon failure, would be 
232 
to remove or “harvest” serviceable parts for potential 
future use. Today’s trash may be tomorrow’s spare 
Part. 
4. Hardware Re-Utilization: This concept utilizes parts 
from avionics/propulsion/mechanical systems from 
previously unused or non-critical systems. If the 
standard principles and practices of logistics were 
adhered to during the design, hardware from the 
unmanned, pre-positioned flights can be used as direct 
spares for the systems used in the manned flight. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
The Human Mission to Mars can be successful if attention is 
paid to the logistics aspects of the initiative. The very nature 
of programs is to develop and build hardware on schedule, 
at or below costs. Experience indicates that budgets, 
earmarked for logistics in the design phase of the program, 
are often reallocated to ensure production milestones are 
met. 
The program has a variety of risks, from programmatic 
(funding) to technical (constantly changing mission 
architecture, new generation of hardware, and the 
environment on Mars). Logistics will continually review 
and evaluate the mission to ensure logistics considerations 
are incorporated to the greatest extent possible. 
A structured and robust logistics system needs to be an 
integral part of the program from the initial 
conceptualization phase, through the design and 
development phase, to the flight operations phase. On a 
program as logistically challenging as a Human Mission to 
Mars, not incorporating logistics considerations may 
significantly increase the risk of not meeting mass, volume 
and crew time allocations. 
6. REFERENCES 
[l] NASA Special Publication 6107, Human Exploration of 
Mars: The Reference Mission of the NASA Exploration Study 
Team, January 1998. 
[2] NASA Publication EX13-98-036, Reference Mission Version 
3.0, Addendum to the Human Exploration of Mars: The 
Reference Mission of the NASA Exploration Study Team, June 
1998. 
[3] Human Exploration Operations Team (HEOT), Lyndon B. 
Johnson Space Center (JSC), Operations Concept Definition for 
the Human Exploration of Mars, April 8,1999. 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
A mechanical engineer by 
education, Mr. Roy worked for 
the U.S. Navy at the Supervisor 
of Shipbuilding, Conversion, 
and Repair in Groton, 
Connecticut, from 1985-1988. 
During his tenure, Mr. Roy was 
named technical lead for 
weapon system engineering, 
responsible for torpedo, 
ballistics missile, and 
countermeasure device launch 
systems during the construction 
phase of nuclear powered submarines. 1; 1988, Mr. Roy 
transferred to the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) where he presently works at the 
John F. Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, 
Florida. There he works in the Logistics Operations (LO) 
Directorate responsible for the repair and maintenance of 
facilities, ground support equipment (GSE), and flight 
hardware for the Payloads, Intemational Space Station 
(ISS), and Space Shuttle Programs. Mr. Roy obtained a 
Masters of Science in Industrial Engineering (MSIE) at the 
University of Central Florida (UCF) in 1992. NASA 
honored Mr. Roy in 1995 with the Manned Flight 
Awareness (MFA). He was also awarded the NASNKSC 
Logistics Employee of the Year and was the recipient of the 
prestigious Silver Snoopy Award in 1998. Mr. Roy and his 
wife Laura, reside in Merritt Island, Florida. They have two 
children, a daughter, 15, and a son, 6.  
[4] Logistics Operations Directorate (LO), John E Kennedy 
Space Center (KSC), NASA Human Mars Mission (HMM) 
Initiative Integrated Logistics Support (US) Assessment for Mars 
Surface Operations, October 26, 1998. 
233 
