SRTM Mission: Results of a Real Time One-bit Processor1 
Giorgio Franceschettil.3, Fabrizio Impagnatiello?, Franco Rubertone', Manlio Tesaurol, Stephen D. Wall3 
IUniversith di Napoli Federico ZZ 
Dipartiinento di  Ingegneria Elettronica e delle Telecomunicacioni 
2 1 via Claudio 
80125 Napoli, Italy 
ni;mlio@'it.ecr: 1 .irecc.na.cnr.it 
'Alenia Aerospazio 
24 via Saccomuro 
00131 Roma, Italy 
irnpaqnat @ alespazio.ini.it 
'Jet Propulsion Laboratory, JPL 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
stephen.d.wal1 Q ipl.nasa.eox 
+(39)-8 1-7683 104 
+(39)-06-41.511111 
+(1)-818-3540023 
Abstract- An experimental real time one-bit (hardware) 
processor has been realized and is planned to operate in 
connection and during the Space Radar Topography Mission 
(SRTM). This is the first single pass interferometric 
Synthetic Aperture radar (SAR) in the space mounting on- 
board two radar receivers. During the mission, part of the X- 
S A R  raw data will be down-linked, re-coded at one bit and 
convolved (in time domain) with a one-bit coded filter 
function, to generate real-time images and associate 
interferometric fringes. 
The experiment is expected to be relevant to the emerging 
area of on-board real time processing (reduced weight and 
power consumption) and deep space microwave imaging 
(bandwidth saving). 
Results of the experiment are presented. The processor 
performance and (geometric and radiometric) image quality 
are discussed. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. PROCESSING CHAIN ARCIUTECTURE 
4. SIGNUM-CODED SAR PROCESSOR 
6. CONCLUSION 
3. SIGNUM-CODED S A R  ALGORlTHM 
5 .  IMAGE AND INTERFEROGRAM TESTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Active microwave systems are powerful tools for observing 
Earth and other planetary surfaces. Among them the 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), a high-resolution active 
microwave system, has demonstrated its ability to detect and 
provide significant information about important natural 
features [1,2]. Interferometric S A R s  add the capability to 
remotely sense elevation or topographic information, usually 
displayed in the form of a digital elevation map (DEM). 
Results from analysis of DEMs have shown its growing 
importance to detection and analysis of land deformation 
and natural hazards [1,3,4]. 
In many civilian (disaster management's) and military 
(battlefield recognition) an important requirement may be 
real time elaboration. 
Processing of S A R  data requires convolution of a sequence 
of echo data with a reference function that takes into account 
signal bandwidth and acquisition geometry. Due to the 
substantial computational and memory requirements 
associated with time-domain elaboration, most proposed 
S A R  real, or quasi-real processors operate in frequency 
domain, using efficient FFT codes. Serious problems are 
encountered if the depth of focus is small compared to the 
pulse length and if range dependent motion compensation is 
needed. 
In time-domain S A R  processing, the above mentioned 
problems are not present, because depth of focus, range 
migration, motion compensation, parameter space-variance 
' 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
13 
are immediately and easily taken into account by two- 
dimensional (2-D) time domain convolution. For real-time 
implementation in time-domain with today's technology it is 
mandatory to use only the signum of the SAR raw data (one- 
bit code). In this case multiplication operations are replaced 
by sums; in addition, if we also signum-code the reference 
function, the above mentioned operations can be performed 
by XNOR gates [5-81. 
A final result is a handily real time processor. This is a first 
reason that suggests exploration of one-bit coded SAR 
systems. 
In Space missions that travel outside the near-Earth 
environment (deep space missions) a first requirement is 
down-link rate reduction. 
A typical S A R  system on a spacebome platform transmits 
(chirped) pulses and receives echoes from the ground. The 
received (analog) signal is heterodyned to an intermediate 
frequency, demodulated to baseband I and Q channels and 
digitized with 4 - 8 bit code, as digital transmission provides 
immunity to noise greater than analog [9]. Typically, this 
digital data stream is stored onboard the platform until the 
next opportunity to down-link it to Earth. 
Unfortunately, SAR systems require spacecraft, telemetry 
and ground systems to handle a very large amount of data, 
and interferometric systems require even larger amounts. In 
fact, geometric resolution is proportional to signal 
bandwidths in both range and azimuth direction, which in 
turn state a lower bound to the sampling rate and the pulse 
repetition frequency (PRF). These parameters and the 
number of quantization bits for each sample, together with 
storage capability and down-link strategy, set the down-link 
data rate. In all space missions this rate is an important 
resource, since it determines the required telemetry system, 
antenna size, ground system complexity, and other cost- 
related parameters. Deep space missions require much more 
complex telemetry systems, and down-link rate is therefore a 
much more powerful driving factor in their overall cost 
compared to terrestrial orbiters. Accordingly, down-link 
rates for deep-space missions may be limited to tens or 
hundreds of kilobitsh as compared to many hundreds of 
megabitds for their terrestrial analogues. 
A first way to lower data rate is to reduce the number of bits 
assigned to each sample without impairing geometric or 
radiometric resolution by data compression or data coding. 
Several schemes exist that accomplish this reduction specific 
to S A R  data and have been employed in both mission types. 
Further reduction in rates may involve loss in resolution or 
other data degradation, resulting in a cost/performance 
tradeoff. Other parts of the cost equation include any 
additional onboard mass or power requirements of the 
scheme and any additions to ground processing equipment 
or time. Thus the question of whether or not to code SAR or 
interferometric SAR data addresses many parts of the entire 
mission system and is properly a first-order system design 
issue. This paper presents a simple solution to bit rate 
reduction that is convenient to hardware implementation, 
and minimizes additional onboard complexity: only the sign 
of the sample is preserved (one-bit coding) [5-81. 
An additional advantage of one-bit coding is its greater 
immunity to noise: a larger number of quantization bits 
generally requires a greater signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as 
stated in communication theory. In other words, with a 
single bit a lower SNR is allowed without adjoin significant 
image degradations. This attractive issue allows transmitted 
SAR power or device noise figure reduction with only a 
minor disadvantage with respect to a larger' bit quantized 
system. 
A third important reason why this technique is worth 
extensive exploration and experimentation: provided that all 
the processing is performed at one-bit, a robust and 
inexpensive lightweight hardware processor of limited 
power consumption can be designed. This is a first step in 
the direction of on-board processing. On board image 
production is a key issue for quick exploration of the 
environment. For instance, if we are not interested to speckle 
information, multi-look image is generally redundant and a 
lot of data image compression can be applied to reduce the 
number of bits associated to the image. For topography 
mapping, on board interferogram generation requires only 
down-link the fringe product. This is more 'concise' 
information because speckle is not present in high coherence 
areas. 
What is the cost of these facilities? It is anticipated that one- 
bit coding generates radiometric images of degraded quality 
compared to those obtained by using the conventional 4 - 8 
bits. Accordingly, a trade-off between image quality and 
complexity of data compression algorithm is an important 
point in S A R  system design. 
We address the cost of this solution relative to no coding 
(conventional) or other compression schemes currently in 
use. Here are the basic elements involved in this trade off: 
1. on board equipment, 
1.1 on board equipment related to compression 
processing; 
1.2 on board equipment related to radiometric 
processing (LNAs, analog amplifiers, A/D 
converters); 
2. 
3. 
4. 
number of bits to be down-linked; 
ground segments equipment related to decompression 
processing; 
level of inaccuracy due to compression; 
4.1 level of DEM inaccuracy due to compression; 
4.2 level of radiometric inaccuracy due to compression. 
The first three issues are related to the financial cost, while 
the fourth is a performance cost, because it degrades the 
product and is undesiderable. An overall cost function can 
be generated to compare various methods of signal 
14 
compression. Note that cost elements must be generated 
weighted properly. For example, down-link cost is much 
higher if the sensor close to Saturn rather than to the Earth. 
Baseline length rm1 
Baseline orientation [degree] 
Plaqorm height [ h l  
Orbital orientation [degree] 
Look angle [degree] 
Carrier, frequency [GHzl 
Polarisation 
Summarizing, one bit coding allows both real time 
processing and bit rate reduction preserving only the zero- 
crossing information; most of image (lost) features are 
restored in the processing operations. 
62 
45 
225 
51 
45 
9.61 
vv 
Interferometric products are shown in Section 5 with some 
quantitative comparisons. The mission, planed in September 
99, has been delayed to January 2000 and real experiment 
with SRTM data cannot be referred to. However, we present 
the tests of the chain by using raw data acquired during the 
94 mission (SRL-1 and SRL-2) on the Etna site by SIR-C/X- 
SAR. 
Primary antenna azimuth dimension [m] 
Primary antenna range dimension [m] 
Secondary antenna azimuth dimension[m] 
Secondary antenna range dimension [m] 
Chim bandwidth rMHzl 
Pulse repetition frequency (PRF) [Hz] 
To validate these concepts we realized a Signum-Coded 
SAR Processor (SCSP) to be used during the Space Radar 
Topography Mission (SRTM) [lo]. This is a dual frequency 
(C band and X band) system each one equipped with two 
antennas: a transmitting-receiving antenna, mounted in the 
Shuttle cargo bay, and a receiving-only, mounted on a 60 m 
long deployable boom structure (baseline), see fig.1. Most 
relevant mission parameters related to the X-band S A R  are 
listed in Table 1. 
12 
0.4 
6 
0.4 
1240-1860 
io* - 19"" 
In this paper we present the implementation and first results 
of SCSP which shall be part of the X-SAR SRTM 
Processing Chain. In the first Section we present the 
reference architecture of the overall X-SAR/SRTM 
Processing chain in which the SCSP is included. The basic 
SC arithmetic operations and the focusing algorithm are 
described in Section 3 and 4, respectively. Image and 
Chirp duration [ P I  
Sampling frequency [MHzI 
Quantization (un ijorm) [bit] 
Transmitted power [WI 
Data rate [Mb/s] 
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) [dBl 
Figure 1 SRTM configuration with the boom structure. 
40 
11.25" - 22.50"" 
6 
1440 
45 
14 
Table 1: Main SRTWSAR svstem Darameters 
15 
2. PROCESSING CHAIN ARCHITECTURE 
Within the overall X-SAR Processing Chain three systems 
have been identified, each of one distinguished from the 
others both from a functional and hardware point of view. 
They are: 
1. the Data Recorder Manager & Preparation to 
2. 
3. 
Processing systems (DRM-PP); 
the Signum-Coded S A R  Processor (SCSP); 
the topographic Post Processing Unit (TPPU). 
The DRM-PP has the double role to manage and control the 
whole X-SAR processing and pre-processing Chain of the 
raw data. These capabilities are the following: 
1. Acquisition and storage of raw data from the JPL 
ingestion site. 
2. Real time deformatting of raw data. 
3. Storing of the deformatted data. 
4. Real time availability of the deformatted data to the 
SCSP. 
5. Storing of the SLC SAR images received from SCSP. 
6.  Availability of the deformatted data and of the SLC 
S A R  images to TPPU. 
The SCSP is in charge of real time processing of X-SAR 
raw data for generation of Single Look Complex (SLC) SAR 
images. The SCSP generates a quick look image product 
starting from the SLC image and it is represented on a 
screen as amplitude image (QLI). The SCSP processing 
modes are the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Survey Mode. The full resolution image product is 
displayed in real time only. 
Survey-rec Mode. The full resolution image product is 
displayed in real time and a video recording is enabled 
in standard PAL or S-VHS mode. 
Full Mode. The full resolution image product is 
displayed in real time, a video recording is enabled in 
standard PAL or S-VHS mode, and the SLC is stored in 
the DRM-PP. This is the nominal processing with SLC 
storage for non interferometric mode. 
IFSAR Full Mode. The full resolution image product is 
displayed in real time, a video recording is enabled in 
standard PAL or S-VHS mode, and the SLC is stored in 
the DRM-PP. The reference filter has the same value 
used for the first interferometric channel. This is the 
nominal processing with SLC storage for secondary 
interferometric channel. 
The TPPU is in charge of the off line generation of 3D S A R  
image from SLC interferometric couples. Its main task is 
image registration and phase unwrapping of the 
interferogram by using a least square algorithm [ l l ] .  The 
TPPU is required to be capable of generating topographic 
products by using 
1. phase preserving single look complex images (SLC) 
produced by SCSP. 
2.  re-formatted raw data produced by DRM-PP limited to 
the X-band only in all the 64 instruments parameters 
modes. 
The Processing Chain has a unique extemal interface for the 
acquisition and storing of the raw data sets from the JPL 
ingestion site. 
3. SIGNUM-CODED SAR ALGORITHM 
The signum code S A R  algorithm (SCA) makes use of a 
processing based on binary algebra, and can be implemented 
with very high scale integrate circuits. 
SCA is implemented by signum coding and then convolving 
two coded signals: the received signal u(x',r') and the 
system unit response g(x ' , r ' , x , r )  where (x',r') are on 
board azimuth and range coordinatek. As gk) depends also 
directly on range and azimuth coordinates r and x, high 
precision S A R  processing requires a reference function 
adjustment during the fight path and during the vertical 
mutual shift between ground and platform. For the time 
being, let us neglect the direct dependence of gk) on r and 
x variables 
This assumption reduces the SAR processing to a simple 2D 
convolution between the signum coded signals 
The complex image signal can be expressed by the 
following 2D discrete convolutions: 
-it g;c 6, s b i c ( m +  P - P, n+--q 2 
p=l q=l Q ,  
+ 
The dimension of the discrete 2D sequences are 
P=int(T,,PRF/2)*2 9 (5 )  
(6) 
~ = i n t ( ~ , / 2 ) * 2  
16 
for g, and 
M = int [T . PRF] (7 1 
for U ,  along the azimuth and the slant range directions, 
respectively. In eqs. (5-8) W and X are the footprint antenna 
dimensions along the slant range and azimuth directions, 
respectively, PRF and f ,  are pulse repetition and sampling 
frequency, z is the transmitted pulse length, T the data take 
duration, 1’ and c are platform and light velocity, 6 the look 
angle. 
As both reference function and data values are signum- 
coded, each sample can assume only two different values 
(-1, +1), and the same happens for their product. If we use 
the following coding: -1 + logical 0 and +1 logical 1, then 
each product g,, (h, kk , ,  (r ,  s )  reduces to a simple XNOR 
operation between the reference function and the data bit 
G, (h, k ) 8  U,, ( r ,  s) as shown in Tables 2. 
Tables 2: Boolean operations 
ll 1 II: 10 l o  I ;1 
Real correlation. 
Let us consider the problem of summing the Y = P x Q  
products of eq. (4). If X products are equal to +1, there are 
Y - X products equal to -1, and then the total sum is 
(9) s = (+1)X +(-1)(Y -x)= 2 x  -Y 
As a consequence the sum can be achieved by counting the 
number of products having logical 1 value, multiplying the 
result by 2 and subtracting a fixed offset. Thus the main 
problem in performing the binary convolution cam be stated 
as follows 
Complex correlation. 
The complex convolution can be achieved (but an 
inessential multiplicative factor) as follows 
1. 
2. 
For the real channel, by subtracting the results of the 
binary convolutions (Xzi - XQQ ) without the offset. 
For the imaginary channel, by adding the results of the 
binary convolutions ( X ~ Q  + X Q ~  ) with the offset 
Y = P x Q .  
4. SIGNUM-CODED SAR PROCESSOR 
The SAR focus capability are guaranteed in connection with 
all the 64 instrument modes (16 PRF values and 2 samples 
coding) together with the instrument resolutions (fine and 
coarse). 
The proposed 2-D time-domain algorithms splits the 
complex convolution in four real ones, each one operating 
on binary sequences (see fig.2). 
Each 1-D real convolutor is assembled by means of parallel 
connection of 2-D real elementary convolutors. These 
operate with a columns of one-bit coded filter and raw data, 
and comprise a data formatter and a processing chip. The 
former reads serial data and addresses them to the 
processing chip in a column cluster. The latter is the main 
processing unit and provides the 1-D elementary one-bit 
convolution between filter and raw data. 
The reference function to be used in the complex correlator 
accounts for three phase terms: 
1. the range quadratic phase 
with b = &2/2 (I3 and z being the c h q  bandwidth and 
duration, respectively); 
2. the azimuth quadratic phase 
with a=2nX’/lA0 (X being the antenna beam 
footprint, R, the center scene distance and d the 
wavelength); 
3. the azimuth linear phase 
1. 
2. 
calculate the elementary products; and 
counting the number of elementary products equal to 1. 
17 
wherein f D, is the doppler centroid. 
I b 
+ 
R E A L  C O R R E L  AT10 N 
S U B  BLOCK 
U 'SC 
' D R M - P P  
single bit 
raw data 
I U i c  
- 
-- 
I 
g sc 
- 
- 
- 
R E A L  CORRELATION 
S U B  BLOCK 
16-bi t  da t a  
S L C  & Q L I  
R E A  L C 0 RREL AT IO N 
S U B  B L O C K  3 
R E A L  CORRELATION 
S U B  BLOCK 
I 
g sc 
Correlation single 
Figure 2 The SCSP. 
In the sampled domain we have 
q = I,..., Q, 
.$Aq(P)'-m,PRF' 2nv2 [ p - y ) ,  p = l ,  ..., P, (13) 
*%, 1-P p = 1, ..., P, 
The signum coded reference function can be generated 
without computing the transcendental functions: it is 
possible to generate the signum cosine and the sine by using 
the simple verification rule based on phase normalization. A 
normalized phase I,U is associated to the true phase by 
means of 
I,U = mod[: ,4] 
that furnishes w in the range (0,4). Then gic  and g& in 
eq. (4) are immediately obtained by looking for the integer . 
value of w achieving 
gkc =-I ggc = + 1  if z = 1  
gsc =-I g& =-1  if z = 2  (17) 
In (13) we have some parameters that shall be estimated 
from the raw data and evaluated from state and attitude 
vectors. 
The doppler centroid estimator is developed in two steps: 
1. computation of the dopper centroid argument: its phase 
is representative of the ambiguous doppler centroid 
frequency; 
calculation of the unambiguous frequency. 2. 
18 
The SCSP design includes diagnostic functions that allow: 
The former step is stated (in terms of the SC algebra) as 
follows: 
p=2 (]=I 
p=l q=l 
p=l q=l 
p=l q=l 
wherein NR and NA are range and azimuth block dimension, 
respectively. Note the similarity between eq. (4) and eq. (1 8) 
and the possibility to implement with the same architecture. 
The second step makes usage of regular floating point 
algebra and it is composed of the following parts: 
1. an ambiguous value is computed starting from doppler 
centroid argument as follows 
amb f D c  = P R F -  
27t 
2. the ambiguity in terms of PRF multiplies is retrieved 
from external setting under continuity constrain, i.e., by 
enforcing that the time history of 
is essentially continuous. In eq. (20) n t m b  is the initial 
doppler ambiguity factor, (externally set at the start of 
operations) and Anamb is a correction term whose initial 
setting is 0 and which is changed in such a way to 
enforce the above mentioned time continuity. 
The velocity is computed by using the state vectors, 
spacecraft position available from X-SAR instrument data 
stream. These are obtained from Shuttle Attitude & Orbit 
determination Avionics (AODA) and are inserted and 
formatted by X - S A R  on-board digital central electronics. 
The filter is upgraded every second. 
The SCSP is designed according a modular strategy that 
could allow the expansion of computational sections of the 
subsystem for future application. Whenever possible, it 
employs on-the-shelf commercial solutions both on 
hardware and software issues. 
1. full or reduced self-test of all unit at the SCSP start-up; 
2. interface test and nominal connections establishment 
with the DRM-PP 
3.  a fast module-level failure identification within the 
correlation section both in run mode and during start up. 
The SCSP is equipped with a man machine interface that 
allows full operation and monitor by a single user. 
From a technological point of view, SCSP is implemented 
by using Field Programmable Array (FPGA) to have a very 
high flexibility allowing design refinements. 
5 .  IMAGE AND INTERFEROGRAM TESTS 
The test campaign has been performed at system level, 
showing that the X - S A R  processing chain is stable with 
compliant performance versus real raw data sets. Available 
from SRL-1 and SRL-2 missions (held in 1994). We show in 
figure 3 the real time (top) and conventional (bottom) 
processed images. 
Raw data are the (one-bit recorded) Mt. Etna DT.125.1 data 
set (only the central section of the frame), PRF 1734, echo 
size 2138. From a visual inspection the product quality is 
excellent and the impact, when looking at the QLI monitor is 
quite impressive. 
A qualitative parameter is the normalized mean square error 
defined as 
where s and s' are the test and the reference (6-bits) image, 
respectively. It is easy to realize that this index decreases as 
the similarity between the two images increases. It should be 
noted that s and s' may exhibit a different amplitude scaling. 
This scaling effect is not related to the image quality, and 
should be compensated. Accordingly, s ' must be multiplied 
by a scaling coefficient such that the mean square error is 
minimized. It is possible to calculate a scaling coefficient 
separately for the I and Q channels of the image, i.e., to find 
coefficients a and b that minimize 
It can be surmised that the two channels of the signal show 
similar statistics. Moreover, it can be supposed that statistics 
slightly change over different portions of the image, thus 
inducing a slight variation of the coefficients a and b. 
19 
Following the definition of eq. (21) the mean square error 
between the test and the reference (6-bits) image is 0.38 
(almost - 4.2 dB is the radiometric resolution). 
Figure 3 Real time (top) and conventional (bottom) processed images. 
When we zoom the crater area on the (module) single look differences. However, geometric resolutions are not 
images, see fig. 4 we can appreciated some radiometric impaired. 
20 
We evaluated the histograms of the gray levels for this area 
and for an uniform one along the steep of the volcano, (see 
fig. 5). In the first case we note the highlighted differences 
in the second thev are almost not evidence. 
Figure 4 Real time (top) and conventional (bottom) processed images 
Figure 5 Histograms of the gray levels for the crater area (left) and for an uniform one (right). 
Continuos line real time, dashed line conventional processing 
21 
The interferograms are presented in fig. 6 for one-bit (top) 
and conventional processing (bottom). In this case the gap 
between the products is more evident; from a quantitative 
point of view the median value of the coherence is 0.31 and 
0.50 for one-bit and conventional processing, respectively. 
However both the inteferograms can be unwrapped correctly 
in spite to the increased noise level Being the phase 
unwrapping operation a hard non linear process, it exhibits a 
threshold: topographic information is totally lost for a 
coherence values smaller than 0.2. Above this threshold 
value, the height is recovered with a precision governed by 
the baseline value. 
22 
Figure 6 One-bit coded (top) and conventional (bottom) processed interferograms 
23 
Figure 8 Top one-bit and bottom conventional processed 
unwrapped phase cut along the range. 
The unwrapped phase is shown in fig. 7 top for one-bit and 
bottom conventional processing, respectively and a cut 
along the range direction is presented in fig. 8. In both 
figures the unwrapped phase is smoothed by a moving 
average filter. Again the results are impressive. 
24 
6 .  CONCLUSION 
In this paper we present an experimental real time one-bit 
hardware processor. Although it has been designed to 
operate during the SRTM mission, the underlying coding 
and processing idea finds a lot of applications from deep 
space to risk management. In both cases it should be 
checked at what extent the “valuable” information is 
preserved (“valuable” should be properly defined). 
Generated products during the campaign test, and presented 
in the paper are excellent and suggest further exploitations. 
Note also that the realized SCSP is truly innovative from a 
technological point of view. It is today the fastest customer 
computer in the world in terms (of course) of elementary 
operations per second. In fact, SCSP is capable of about 
8000 billions of operation per second. These are executed 
within the machine, sharing among one-bit multiplicators, 
one-bit counters and twenty bit adders and combines. 
REFERENCES 
[l]  Stofan, E., Evans, D., Schmullius, C., Holt, B., Plaut, J., 
van Zyl, J., Wall, S., and Way, J. “Overview of Results of 
Spacebome Imaging Radar-C, X-Band Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) ”. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote 
Sensing 33,4, July 1995, 817 - 824. 
[2] Saunders, R., et al., “The Magellan mission summary”, 
J. Geophys. Res. 97,13067-13090. 
[3] Massonnet, D., Rossi, M., Carmona, C., Adragna, F., 
Peltzer, G., et al., “The displacement field of the Landers 
eqrthquake mapped by radar interferometry”, Nature 364, 
1993, 138-142. 
[4] Moreira, J., M.Schwabish, G.Fomaro, R.Lanari, 
R.Bamler, D.Just, U.Steinberger, H.Breit, M.Eineder, 
G.Franceschetti, D.Geudtner, H.Rinkel., “X-SAR 
interferometry: first results”, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote 
Sensing, 33,4, July 1995, 950-956. 
[SI B. S. Steinberg, “Hard Limiting in Synthetic Aperture 
Radar Processing”, IEEE Trans. Aerospace Electron. Syst., 
AES-11,556-561, 1975. 
[6] G. Alberti, G. Franceschetti, V. Pascazio, G. Schirinzi, 
“Time-domine convolution of one-bit coded radar signals”, 
Proc. IEE, 138-F, 438-444,1991. 
[7] G. Franceschetti, V. Pascazio, G. Schirinzi, “Processing 
of Signum Coded S A R  Signal: Theory and Experiments”, 
Proc. IEE, 138-F, 192-198, 1991. 
[8] G Franceschetti,, S. Merolla, M. Tesauro, 1999, 
“Processing of Phase Quantized S A R  signal: Theory and 
Experiments“, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, vol. 30, no.l, 201-214. 
[9] J. C. Curlander, R. N. McDonough Synthetic Aperture 
Radar: Systems arid Signal Processing, New York, John 
Wiley, 1991. 
[lo] R. L .Jordan, E. R. Caro, Y. Kim, M. Kobrick, Y. Shen, 
F. V. Stub, M. U. Wemer, 1996, “Shuttle Radar 
Topograhpy Mapper (SRTM)”, Proceedings of 
EUROPTO ’96, 2958, Taormina, Italy, 412-422. 
[l I]  G .  Fomaro, G. Franceschetti and R. Lanari, D. Rossi, 
M. Tesauro, “Interferometric S A R  Phase Unwrapping via 
the Finite Element Method“, Proc. IEE, 44, 266-274, 
October 1997. 
25 
Giorgio Franceschetti was bonz and 
educated in Italy. Winner of a nationwide 
competition, he was appointed professor of 
electromagnetic theory at the University of 
Napoli, Italy in 1969, position that he 
holds since then. He has been Fulbright 
Scholar and Research Associate at 
Caltech, Visiting Professor at the 
University of Illinois, at UCLA, at the Somali University 
(Somalia) and at the University of Santiago de Compostela 
(Spain). Author of over 130 (refereed) papers and five 
books, he is active in research in Electromagnetic theory 
and applications, Signal processing and Synthetic Aperture 
Radar imaging. He is IEEE Fellow and Member of the 
Electromagnetic Academy. 
Fabrizio Impagnatiello Biography and foto not available 
Franco Rubertone Biography and foto not available 
Manlio Tesauro was bom in Napoli in 
1966. He received the laurea (summa cum 
laude) in electronic engineering and the 
Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering and 
computer science from the University of 
Napoli, Federico U, Italy in I992 and 
1998, respectively. 
Since 1997 he is with the IRECE (Istituto di Ricerca per 
1'Elettromagnetismo e i Componenti Elettronici), Napoli, an 
Institute of the Italian National Council of Research, with a 
grant of Telespazio. His main research activities are in the 
SAR and IFSAR real time processing and phase 
unwrapping. 
Stephen D. Wall leads the Center for Space 
Mission Architecture and Design at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory and is a former 
leader of the Advanced Projects Design 
Team (Team X) .  He holds a masters degree 
in Optical Engineering fvom the University 
of Rochester (1972) and is a veteran of six 
planetary and earth sciences remote sensing missions 
including Viking (1976), Magellan (I988), Cassini (1997) 
and the Spacebome Radar Laboratory (I981 - 1996). For 
his past work Steve was awarded the NASA Exceptional 
Service and Exceptional Achievement Medals and eight 
NASA Group Achievement Awards. 
26 
