Plasma Experiment for Planetary Exploration (PEPE) on 
DSli 
Jane E. Nordholt David T. Young Herbert 0. Funsten 
Los Alamos National Laboratory University of Michigan 
M / S  D466 Space Physics Research Laboratory M / S  D466 
Los Alamos, NM 87545 2455 Hayward St. 
JNordholt@LANL . gov 734-647-3590 HFunsten@LANL . gov 
DTY oung @umich. edu 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos, NM 87545 
505-667-3897 Ann Arbor, MI 48 109-2 143 505-665-43 14 
Abstract-The Plasma Experiment for Planetary 
Exploration, PEPE (pronounced PEPE), is a space plasma 
energy, angle, and madcharge spectrometer now taking 
data aboard the Deep Space 1 (DS1) spacecraft. PEPE 
required several advanced technologies and specialized 
construction techniques to meet its targeted cost, schedule, 
mass, power, and volume reductions compared to previous 
plasma sensor packages such as the NASA Cassini mission 
Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS). It was designed to validate 
technologies and techniques for these resource savings so 
that future plasma instrumentation can use fewer resources 
and continue to have frequent access to space. PEPE was 
also designed to monitor the effect that the ion engine on 
DS1 has on the spacecraft environment and determine the 
impact of ion engines on future scientific instrumentation 
and measurements. PEPE has produced both high quality 
data and science, fully demonstrating that its new 
technologies can produce a viable instrument compatible 
with an ion propelled spacecraft. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. OVERVIEW 
3. NEW TECHNOLOGIES 
5. PERFORMANCE 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
4. COST SAVING TECHNIQUES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The NASA New Millennium Program (NMP) was started 
in 1995 to validate the use of new technologies in 
spacecraft design and implementation with the purpose of 
ultimately making possible space missions that are truly 
smaller, cheaper, faster, and better. The first in the Deep 
Space series of test missions, Deep Space 1 @SI), was 
designed to test several technologies including an ion 
engine and auto-navigation . To fully test such a mission it 
was necessary to demonstrate that the spacecraft could self- 
navigate to a planetary body and reach it with the savings 
in fuel and time predicted to be possible with the use of an 
ion engine. Space plasma research couples very well into 
such a mission. Planetary bodies provide rich and 
relatively new ground for them scientifically, the 
environment induced around the spacecraft by the ion 
engine plume, and the viability of future scientific missions 
using ion engines with space plasma instruments all 
together provided a unique opportunity to validate new 
space plasma instrumentation in ways that will have a 
significant impact on the design of future science missions. 
The Plasma Experiment for Planetary Exploration, PEPE, 
has worked successfully since December 1998 on the Deep 
Space 1 (DS1) spacecraft. PEPE analyzes the direction and 
energy of incoming ions and electrons and, in addition, 
measures the madcharge of incoming ions. A space 
plasma analyzer of this type is usually used for scientific 
analysis of ambient plasmas such as the solar wind and the 
environment near a planetary body, but it can also analyze 
what is being ejected by an ion engine by monitoring a 
small fraction of its plume and effects on the spacecraft. 
DS 1’s planned visits to planetary bodies such as comets, its 
time in the solar wind, and the plasma environment 
produced by its ion engine provided an ideal testbed to 
develop and test new space plasma instrumentation. The 
solar wind provides a well known environment for 
instrument calibration and the planetary body flybys and 
ion engine provide scientific opportunities for investigation 
of new plasma environments and their effects on the solar 
wind. 
PEPE was designed to demonstrate six new technologies 
that have the potential to revolutionize the construction of 
space plasma analyzers. The six new technologies are: 
miniaturized time-of-flight (TOF) section; confocal ion and 
electron optics; high speed chip-on-board electronics; 
advanced power supplies; highly integrated electronics, 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
597 
PEPE technologies and instrument. Each institution has a 
tradition of scientific investigators who are experienced in 
instrument development and who work as the project task 
manager, which is often a separate function elsewhere. 
This structure allows a quick turn-around from instrument 
concept through hardware fabrication because all aspects of 
design are considered together allowing tasks to be 
assigned to designers who carry forward parts of an 
integrated plan. PEPE also benefited from skilled 
designers and technicians with many years of broad 
experience in similar types of instrumentation. 
Another factor in the rapid development of PEPE was a 
very good working relationship with the DS1 project. New 
Millennium Project members inside and outside DS 1 flight 
team worked to simplify integration issues and streamline 
the qualification and review process as much as possible. 
Without this sort of cooperation and dedication to the flight 
validation of new technologies for space missions, an 
instrument such as PEPE would not be possible. 
PEPE is now validated for use on other missions, and we 
hope that it will fly on many future scientific spacecraft. In 
this paper we will detail some of the design techniques that 
made PEPE possible and show a small subset of the data it 
~i~~~ 1 PEPE is visible on DS1 in the upper left-hand 
corner 
has produced. PEPE was designed as a general-purpose 
plasma instrument to measure the energyhgle spectrum of 
electrons and the energy/angle/mass spectra of ions. This 
power supplies, and optics; and coatings and surface 
treatments for higher integration and lower mass. 
Plasma analyzers are traditionally as complicated to build 
as, for example, large imaging instruments and employ 
techniques such as high voltagehigh electric field design; 
several different surface coating and polishing treatments; 
ultra-thin (-50ft thickness) carbon foils; very low power, 
high speed, large dynamic range electronics; single particle 
detectors which are contamination sensitive; and 
sophisticated data processing and compression. PEPE 
required all of these elements but employed them in new 
ways and combined them with advances in electronic 
packaging and improvements in mechanical and electre 
optical design that allowed it to be much smaller and 
cheaper than previous instruments. 
PEPE was built by collaboration between Los Alamos 
National Laboratory (LANL) and Southwest Research 
Institute (SwRI) with the addition of some micro-machined 
calorimeters from Stanford University. The build time from 
start of funding to delivery was just over two years, which 
is extremely fast for a complex plasma instrument of this 
type, particularly one involving the many new technologies 
which PEPE used. The time-to-delivery is, however, a 
major factor in the overall cost of a space instrument. 
PEPE was only possible because the design tools, test and 
fabrication facilities, and expertise were already in place at 
each institution. Much of this expertise was devoted to 
making judgements and decisions about the handling and 
mitigation of risk in rapid development of the sophisticated 
alone would make PEPE of good candjdate for Deep Space 
1 because the spacecraft will be passing several small 
planetary bodies that give off ionized gases that are of the 
intense scientific interest. PEPE can contribute 
significantly to the scientific questions concerning those 
bodies by studying the composition of the material released 
and the way in which it interacts with the solar wind. In 
addition, the ion engine on Deep Space 1 produces a cloud 
of neutral and ionized gas around the spacecraft that a 
plasma spectrometer such as PEPE can measure and use to 
diagnose the formation of that cloud, its effects on the 
spacecraft[ 11, and possibly detect whether or not the engine 
is functioning nominally or suffering some degradation. 
When the xenon expelled from the ion engine begins to 
sputter away the metal grids inside it, PEPE has been able 
to detect molybdenum ions in the charged xenon cloud 
around the spacecraft. Thus PEPE was chosen for DSl 
both because of its science and diagnostic capabilities and 
its new technology. Figure 1 shows PEPE mounted on the 
spacecraft so that it has an almost 270" view of space but 
does not reside so close to the ion engine that it might be 
damaged by high fluxes out of the engine. PEPE is located 
on a bracket at the upper (+Z) end of the +X-Y panel of the 
spacecraft so that the central plane of the FOV lies in the 
XZ plane. This gives PEPE access to both the nominal 
solar wind direction and to boresight direction of the 
imager aboard DSl, the Miniature Integrated Camera and 
Spectrometer (MICAS). 
598 
Figure 2 PEPE mounted on a test fmture 
2. OVERVIEW 
Figure 2 shows a photograph of the PEPE instrument. 
PEPE is designed as a general purpose plasma sensor 
capable of measuring electrons and mass-resolved ions over 
most of particle phase space from 8 eV to 33,500 eV. 
Because 3-axis stabilized spacecraft pose a problem for 
complete coverage of all possible plasma arrival directions, 
PEPE is also designed with a field-of-view (FOV) covering 
a solid angle of 2.8 7c steradians. PEPE “heritage” comes 
largely from work at the two collaborating institutions: 
SwRI development of miniaturized electrostatic analyzer 
optics [2] and LANL development of 3-dimensional linear 
electric field (LEF3D) time-of flight (TOF) mass 
spectrographs [3] and [4]. Our chief objective was to build 
an instrument with performance comparable to that of the 
NASA Cassini mission Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS) on 
which LANL and SwRI had collaborated (together with 
other institutions [5]), but with significantly lower resource 
requirements. In order to achieve this goal the CAPS 
electrostatic optics were either modified or entirely 
redesigned and miniaturized. This required the introduction 
of several new methods and technologies including high 
resistance coatings applied to ceramic TOF cylinders, the 
use of metal-plated plastics in place of metallic parts, and 
novel optical/electronic packaging methods. Also, a large 
(3.6 kg) stepper motor actuator used to rotate the entire 20 
kg CAPS instrument was replaced by an electrostatically 
scanned FOV. 
PEPE is also a combination of several sensors in one but 
they are not separately packaged as they are in earlier 
instruments. For example CAI’s has seven major 
subsections including three individual sensors packaged 
separately. PEPE has two of the three sensors and all of the 
other major CAPS subsystems, except for the actuator, in a 
single, highly integrated package. 
This eliminates significant 
unnecessary mass which is needed in 
individual module packages to provide 
radiation and micrometeoroid 
shielding as well as structural support. 
External cabling and connectors and 
any additional shielding they require 
are also eliminated. 
The PEPE electreoptic and 
mechanical layout, shown in Figure 3, 
is cylindrically symmetric about the 
central vertical axis and the electre 
optics consist entirely of electrostatic 
elements. The optical system consists 
of three main functional elements: 
angular deflection optics, 
energylcharge analyzers, and the 
LEF3D TOF optics. In order to protect 
instrument components such as detectors, carbon foils, and 
highly resistive surfaces that are sensitive to particulate and 
chemical contamination, PEPE is fitted with a sealed cover 
through which N2 purge gas is flushed. The cover is 
removed before the rocket fairing door is closed before 
launch. 
Instrument Description 
Ions and electrons enter the PEPE optics through a 
grounded toroidal grid that defines the external acceptance 
aperture of the instrument. The grid also terminates the 
electric fields within PEPE. Immediately inside the 
grounded grid, ions and electrons experience an electric 
field that deflects them into the acceptance volume of the 
top-hat electrostatic analyzers. The name top-hat applies to 
the toroidal analyzer plates and their entrance aperture 
which is horizontal in Figure 3 [6] .  Usually only one set of 
curved analyzer plates is used and, with the entrance 
aperture looks rather like a rounded top-hat. The deflection 
electric field is generated by two opposing, cylindrically 
symmetric, toroidal electrodes. Equal voltages of opposite 
polarity are applied to the deflection electrodes so that, for 
example, ions coming from above the symmetry plane are 
deflected downward into the upper top-hat aperture, while 
electrons coming from below the plane are also deflected 
toward the upper apertures. The top-hat analyzers, one for 
ions and one for electrons, are positioned so that their 
apertures are located symmetrically above and below the 
central plane. As ions and electrons enter the region of the 
top-hat analyzer electric fields, they are deflected down and 
up respectively into their individual electrostatic energy 
analyzers. By changing the deflection voltages PEPE’s field 
of view can be moved from +45” to -45”. For example if 
ions are entering from -45’ then electrons will enter from 
+45”. The 360” azimuthal direction around the axis of 
599 
ELECTRON SIGNAL- 
ELECTRONICS BOARD 
HV SUPPLIES 
DEFLECTION 
HV SUPPLIES 
ION 
- ~ I Y V ~ ~ D I U R  
DYNODE 
- ELECTRON 
ANALYZER 
DEFLECTION 
ANALYZER 
ANALYZER 
CARBON FOILS 
TOF ANALYZE 
F HQ 
PPLY (2) 
ELECTRONICS BOARD 
CONVERTERBOARD ‘LEF3D REGION 
1 \ DECELERATION DATA PROCESSOR BOA 
INTERFACE BOA REGION 
J-39 0 LOW VOLTAQE POWER CONVEFITERS 
Figure 3 Schematic cross section of PEPE 
PEPE is continuously viewed but there is usually some 
blockage because of the spacecraft body. The energy of the 
ions or electrons that are allowed to enter is determined by 
the voltage on the curved plates which, like the deflection 
voltages is continuously swept. Up to this point the optical 
systems are identical for ions and electrons. 
Electrons transit the curved plates if their energy and 
direction match those that are allowed by the current 
voltage settings on the deflectors and curved plates. Once 
they exit the plates they strike a secondary emitter. The 
secondaries are then focused onto a micro-channel plate 
(MCP) detector stack. The use of the secondary emitter 
allows the design to use a smaller MCP than would 
otherwise be possible. The angle at which the electron 
entered PEPE is determined by discrete anodes behind the 
MCP. 
When ions exit their set of curved analyzer plates, a large 
negative potential accelerates them into thin carbon foils. 
The foils form the entrance to the time-of-flight 
masdcharge analyzer. Electrons that are released by the 
passage of the ion through the foil are accelerated onto the 
outer annulus of the MCP stack at the bottom of the TOE 
section. They all take a uniform time of about 2ns to get to 
the MCP. There they start a clock that will be used to 
determine the time-of flight for the ion that released them. 
Discrete anodes behind the MCP also determine the 
azimuthal angle at which the ion entered PEPE. Ions are 
generally neutralized by their passage through the foils. In 
this case they continue down the TOF section until they 
(with high probability) strike the center section or “stop” 
section of the MCP. This stops the clock and standard 
time-of-flight mass spectroscopy, with the knowledge of the 
ion’s initial energy to determine its velocity, is used to 
determine the ion’s mass. Mass resolution WAM is only 
about 4 for this process. If the ion remains charged and it’s 
energy is not too large to be turned around by the high 
voltage on the curved grid (heavy dotted line in Figure 3) it 
will “bounce” in the linearly increasing electric field just as 
600 
tage 
Connectors 
Figure 4 PEPE TOF section 
a mass on a spring would. The time for one half oscillation 
of this bounce is independent of energy or angle of flight of 
the ion so the TOF is proportional to the square root of the 
masslcharge. Ions that do bounce hit a secondary emitter at 
the top of the TOF section and the resulting electrons are 
drawn to the center “stop” portion of the MCP. The mass 
resolution in the case is about 20. 
All three regions, acceleration, LEF3D, and deceleration, of 
the TOF section use ceramic cylinders with resistive 
coatings to produce in them a uniform electric field but 
only the center section requires the coating to have varying 
thickness to produce the linearly increasing electric field. 
3. NEW TECHNOLOGIES 
High Voltage Design 
High voltages from a few kV to +/-15kV are needed to 
focus ions and electrons and power the detectors for the 
charged particles of interest in PEPE. The use of high 
voltages usually requires large spacings between focusing 
elements to allow the gap distances necessary to prevent 
high electric field breakdown and emission. Unfortunately, 
this usually leads to a large instrument with a mass increase 
corresponding to the increased size. PEPE uses high 
strength metal plated plastics and resistively coated 
ceramics in high voltage subsystems. This reduces the part 
count, mass, complexity, and assembly time. Where metal 
mechanical parts are used at high voltage, they were 
electrepolished as opposed to mechanically polished. The 
surface finish is not as fine but seems quite adequate to 
prevent high voltage breakdown. 
High voltage power supplies 
PEPE uses high voltage power supplies, produced by 
Pat Casey’s group at Southwest Research Institute, with 
advanced miniaturized multipliers and small, 
lightweight packaging that uses metalized plastics and 
parylene coatings. This allows them to be enclosed in 
small plastic boxes that have been metalized to provide 
chassis ground and electro-magnetic field protection in 
a much smaller and lighter package than ever flown 
before. These power supplies were also specially 
designed to mate directly into the electro-optical 
elements which they power. They use spring mounted 
sockets which allow them to plug into commercial off 
the shelf (COTS) electrical connection pins as shown 
on the ion mass analysis section in Figure 4. This way 
the power supply itself replaces both the cabling and the 
connector normally used to give power supplies the 
ability to connect and disconnect to the elements they 
power. A small COTS electronics pin is used because it 
guarantees a definite low insertion force connection 
with spiral multi-wire high reliability sockets. The 
spring-loaded connector can move freely over a distance 
of about +/-0.4mm because a thin insulated wire inside the 
box is used to connect to the multiplier output. Unshielded 
wire would not be possible extemal to the power supply box 
because without a ground shield it would violate electro- 
magnetic cleanliness requirements. With a shield the wire 
and connector would be much longer and too large to mate 
to a small pin with the required positive coupling. Small 
pins with only insulated coupling sleeves are essential to 
keep the connector size down. Floating sockets allow these 
small connecting pins to survive relative motions between 
the optical sections and the power supply housing during 
launch vibration. Electro-magnetic cleanliness is 
maintained despite the use of an unshielded connector 
because the grounded power supply box is almost in contact 
with the ground shield of the electro-optics. These power 
Figure 5 A PEPE 15kV Power Supply 
601 
Figure 6 A Deflection High Voltage Power Supply 
supplies do not require potting and the +/-15kV supplies 
are each 150 grams and the size of a deck of playing cards. 
Figure 5 shows a 15kV power supply and Figure 6 shows a 
deflection supply that has been built into the electreoptics 
that house it. 
Time-ofjlight section 
The TOF section is made by coating the hollow ceramic 
cylinders that line the ion flight path of the instrument with 
a resistive coating. This allows the cylinders to be coated 
with varying thickness to produce, in a very small area, the 
linearly increasing electric field and constant electric fields 
needed for the ion analysis. Using this technology, the 
standoff distances usually required to safely maintain 
voltages as high as +/-15kV are reduced by an order of 
magnitude over standard techniques. The resistive coating 
also prevents scattered ions that impinge on the walls from 
charging the insulating ceramics which would then deflect 
ions unpredictably. 
The coating process is a multi-step vapor deposition 
method that lays down a uniform resistive coating and 
ensures that the entire edge surface of each cylinder makes 
electrical contact with the voltage input ring with which it 
is in contact. The cylinder is first fitted into a masking jig 
which covers all but the ends and a few tenths of a 
millimeter of the inside of the hollow cylinder. This 
assembly is then placed in an evacuated bell jar where 
chromium is vapor deposited on one edge. The process is 
repeated for the other end of the cylinder. Once both ends 
are uniformly plated with a conductor, the resistive material 
is laid down on the inside of the cylinder. A new jig is 
fitted to the cylinder so that only the inside surface is 
visible. This assembly is then put in a bell jar with an 
oxygen atmosphere where chromium is evaporated onto the 
surface but, because of the presence of oxygen, a resistive 
chromium oxide coating is instead deposited. The distance 
from the cylinder to the evaporation boat determines 
whether the resistive coating is uniformly deposited or has 
a thickness which varies as the desired linear electric field 
requirement of R = Z’. Here R is the resistance measured 
at a ring placed on the coating parallel to the edge of the 
cylinder and Z is the distance to one edge of the cylinder. 
The acceleration and deceleration cylinders are given a 
uniform chromium oxide coating. 
The process involves balancing the distance to the 
evaporation boat, the speed of deposition, the oxygen 
pressure, and the thickness of the coating to produce a 
resistive coating in the desired range of total resistance. 
Total resistance, Kat, must lie within the range 
lOGQ I Rot I 1TQ. Rot should be large enough to ensure 
that the current drain from the power supplies is minimized 
because of the extreme limitations on power and so that 
power dissipated in the coatings does not cause them to 
heat significantly. The upper bound of KOt insures that 
charge will not build up on the coated surfaces from an 
intense ion beam. 
Chip-on-board Electronics 
The MCPs used in PEPE can detect single particle impacts 
and produce signals which can be used to time that impact 
to better than Ins. However they can produce signals with 
more than two orders of magnitude of dynamic range. 
Producing accurate timing information from small (few x 
lo7 electrons) yet widely varying pulses in a noisy 
environment near a data processing unit is very 
challenging. The front-end electronics (FEE) for the ion 
mass section was newly designed using a coded anode and 
chip-on-board circuits to amplify and discriminate the 
signals. After some difficulty with infant mortality in these 
parts due to wire bond failure, they have performed 
flawlessly. Future models may be double wire-bonded to 
avoid the infant mortality problems. Rework was not a 
problem with these parts because they attach to the main 
boards via sockets. This is a very low cost and effective 
method to produce custom miniaturized circuits and it has 
proven its flight worthiness. The FEE used differential 
signals and referenced chassis ground for both shielding 
602 
PEPE elc: 7 Awr fdav OS?'), 1999 
A \ Lf I' Counts 
Id 
10000 
- 
3 1000 
Y 
x 
F 
15 1Q0 
Id 
10 
10 
45 5 0x10~ 
- 30 4 0 x 1 ~ ~  
1 
E 15 
0 
-15 
-30 
-45 D 
r 
n 
U 
I _  0 z 0x10~ 
1 ~ ~ ~ 1 0 ~  
.-. 
lz 
180 
120 
60 
Z Q  
f 
0 
m 
5 -60 
-120 
-180 
9OL 
LonD 173.8" 
Figure 7 Electron Spectrogram for 6 Hours on a Day IPS Was Running 
and signal discrimination. This method also has proven 
that it can save time and money over older techniques that 
sought to separate chassis and signal grounds. In these 
older systems signal-to-noise problems can be extensive 
and expensive to find and solve after integration. 
4. COST SAVING TECHNIQUES 
Short Development Time 
PEPE was built in just over two years. This compares with 
the NASA Cassini mission CAPS instrument which took 
almost ten years to 
produce. The 
difference in cost was 
closely tied to the 
difference in 
development time; 
however such a quick 
development period for 
PEPE was only possible 
because much time and 
effort had already been 
put into the CAPS 
instrument. A team 
was on hand that was 
very knowledgeable in 
construction, design, 
and testing of 
instruments of this type. 
Although many 
techniques and 
technologies were 
newly developed for 
PEPE the instrument 
concepts and objectives 
were either well known 
or developed for the 
CAPS instrument. This 
allowed software and 
design techniques to be 
applied successfully 
with little or no prior 
testing. Some custom 
parts were specially 
made for the CAPS 
instrument and required 
several design and test 
iterations for CAPS but 
could be used 
unchanged in PEPE. 
Electronic parts from 
CAPS that were surplus 
were used after the 
Cassini mission was 
launched. Also many 
design elements from 
CAPS were used in PEPE to save cost. If redesign of all 
systems on PEPE were required, the instrument could not 
have been produced within the time or cost allowed. This 
means that although the design of PEPE is very innovative, 
much of the development of completely new instrument 
concepts was done in the CAPS LEF3D Ion Mass 
Spectrometer (IMS) [7],[8], and could not be accomplished 
in the time and monetary budgets allowed for PEPE. In all 
likelihood completely new instrument concept development 
must be left for longer-term programs or instrument 
development programs such as NASA's Planetary 
Instrument Definition and Development Program (PIDDP). 
603 
PEPE ion: '7 Apr (day 097), 1999 r o ~ ~ n t ~  -__. .- 
Id 
10000 
- Id 
2 1000 
Y 
x 
!? 
5 100 Id 
10 
45 
30 Id - 
0 
m 
0 
E 15 
0 
-15 
-30 
-45 
180 
120 
U 
0 ._ 
lOe 
- 
- 
W 
- 
60 Id 
m 
9 0  
5 
.F -60 
2 
-120 10 
-180 
- 90 
45 
VI 5 0  
-45 
Asgo 
0600 07:OO o a m  0900 10'00 1 Z O O  
7 Apr (day 097), 1999 
R n g B  0.529 AV Lot@ -0.0" LotD 
R n g O  1,272 AU Lon@ -163.0" LonD 173.8" 
Figure 8 Ion Singles Same Time as Figure 6 
However the resource and cost savings h m  using new 
technology in a well known type of instrument is very 
significant and has rarely been attempted at the pace and 
impact level seen in PEPE. The new techniques validated 
in PEPE will save time and money as well as resources on 
future missions even when PEPE itself is not flown. Initial 
development is always more expensive than follow-on use 
of a technology so future use of these methodologies should 
have a strong positive impact on future space plasma 
spectrometers. Some of the more generic aspects of PEPE 
such as the use of COB electronics and high levels of 
electronic and mechanical parts integration can be used to 
principal investigators who 
improve packaging in 
many different types of 
instrumentation. 
Embedded sensor and 
electronics packaging 
that can be used even 
near contamination 
sensitive detectors can 
be used in types of 
sensors ranging from 
optical to ion and 
neutral particle 
detectors. 
Management 
Another aspect of the 
cost savings realized on 
PEPE was the DS1 
project management. 
PEPE was a Category 
I11 instrument meaning 
that if it did not work it 
would not impact the 
mission as a whole. 
This allowed project 
managers to keep 
reviews and paperwork 
to a minimum, saving 
both time and money for 
all the organizations 
involved. DS 1 
personnel also were 
extremely helphl with 
parts procurement and 
requirements. Project 
management was 
flexible and judicious in 
their requirements. 
Another very important 
part of the fast 
development and low- 
cost in PEPE was the 
use at both LANL and 
SwlU of science 
doubled as project task 
managers. This allowed them to be involved-in every 
aspect of the design and construction. Additionally it 
streamlined the design-to-construction phases because all of 
the design criteria and construction techniques were 
centralized in one person who could make decisions on 
design, technology, and allowable risk with full knowledge 
of the impact on the instrument and desired science. 
604 
PEPE tof: 7 
06:OO 07:DO GWOO 0900 
7 Apr (day 097), 1999 
* IPS R n g &  0.529 AU L a t a  -O.O* 
A i s - t R n g O  1.272 AU Lon@ -163.0' L Q ~ D  173.8" 
Figure 9 Time of Flight Spectrum Same Time Period as Figures 7 and 8 
5 .  PERFORMANCE 
PEPE weighs 5.5kg, uses 9.5 to 10.5W and is capable of 
telemetry rates from 50-1024 bit&. This compares 
favorably with instruments such as CAPS which weighs 
23kg, uses 16.4 to 21W and has a standard telemetry rate of 
16k bitsls. PEPE has been taking data since December 
1998 and appears to be in good working order. Its 
observations can be divided into several plasma regimes. 
Solar Wind-During 
most of its time onboard 
the DSl mission, PEPE 
has had the solar wind 
available for calibration 
and testing purposes. 
Comparison with 
instruments on the 
Wind spacecraft shows 
that the calculated 
sensitivity for PEPE is 
very nearly correct at 
6x1 O4cm'-sr-eVIeV 
total for both electrons 
and ions. PEPE was not 
designed with solar 
wind science as its 
primary mission because 
of the beam-like 
characteristics and high 
charge state ions in the 
solar wind which do not 
require the sky scanning 
of PEPE and do not 
provide high resolution 
"bounce" mass spectra 
for most ions because 
the multiply charged 
ions of the solar wind 
generally exit the foils 
with lowered charge 
state and then cannot be 
turned around by the 
electric field in the 
LEF3D section. PEPE 
was designed for 
plasmas with low 
charge states and 
complicated masses and 
angular spreads such as 
those near planetary 
bodies. Nevertheless, 
the solar wind acts as an 
excellent source for 
instrument calibration 
and there is interest in 
scientific measurements by PEPE of the solar wind because 
of DSl's location in space and the mass resolution 
capability. Figures 7, 8, and 9 show data taken in the solar 
wind with the ion engine on. The narrow solar wind 
energy spectrum is clearly visible in Figure 8 at -1keV. 
The low energy particle spectra from the ion engine is 
visible in Figures 7 and 8 as a narrow line at about 20eV. 
The electron spectra show a rise in electron flux at high 
energies above about 3keV which is due to some internal 
emission. The ion solar wind beam is clearly visible at 
lkeV in Figure 8. The H' and He* from the solar wind 
605 
beam are evident in the TOF plot in Figure 9 at about 70 
and 140 TOF channels respectively. Each time-of-flight 
channel corresponds to a 750ps increase in ion time-of- 
flight. 
Ion Engine-PEPE measures the conditions induced by the 
ion engine's effluent xenon plume and can see other 
materials sputtered off the engine's interior by the xenon. 
Figure 9 shows a day where the ion engine was fired 
continuously. Xenon appears as a broad diffuse band at 
about 800 TOF bins. A faint line of molybdenum can be 
seen at -670 bins. The xenon output is also visible at 
-20eV in Figure 8. 
and leave the field, the next generation of sensors will 
suffer increased costs and failures. It is essential that 
instrument and management teams work together to ensure 
that necessary paperwork and review requirements are 
fulfilled but do not impede the development of the 
instrument. A responsible manager's rejoinder to problems 
faced by outside teams is often to hold more reviews, but 
this can be d,angerously short sighted since much time must 
be devoted to each review when hardware work needs to be 
done. 
The PEPE science team is looking forward to many future 
discoveries with DS1 and PEPE. 
Comets-Unlike the encounter with asteroid Braille, PEPE REFERENCES 
should have adequate count rates at the two comets, 
Wilson-Harrington and Borrelly, that DS1 will flyby in 
2001. The chances of detecting an asteroid were small and 
it is not surprising that no signal stands out above noise 
during the Braille encounter. Outgassing rates are 
significantly higher at a comet so the ion flux should be 
easily measurable. The TOF section was designed to 
analyze the relatively low energy, low charge state, plasmas 
near a planetary body such as a comet and should produce 
exciting results. 
[ l ]  J. Wang, et al, Deep Space One Investigations of Ion 
Propulsion Plasma Interactions: Overview and Initial 
Results, AIAA 99-2971, 35'h AIAA/ASME/SAI/ASEE 
Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, 20-24 June 1999, 
Los Angeles, CA. 
[2] D.T. Young, et al., MOSS, Measurement Techniques 
for Space Plasmas, Measurement Techniques for Space 
Plasmas, AGU Monograph 102, (ed. R.F. Pfaff, J.E. 
Borovsky, D.T. Young), 1998, pp 313-318. 
Future-PEPE has been running at reduced voltage on the 
TOF section because it needed time to outgas sufficiently to 
hold the full design voltages of +/-15kV. Spacecraft 
command time was not available for these voltages to be 
raised until after the flyby of asteroid Braille. The attempt 
to raise the PEPE TOF voltages resulted in some damage to 
[3] D.J. McComas, J.E. Nordholt, S.J. Bame, B.L. 
Barraclough., and J.T. Gosling, Linear Electric Field Mass 
Analysis: A Technique for Three-Dimensional High Mass 
Resolution Space Plasma Composition Measurements, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., USA, 87, 5925-5929, 1990a. 
[4] D.J. McComas, and J.E. Nordholt, A New Approach to 
Composition Measurements, Rev. Sci. Inst., 61, 3095-3097, 
1990b. 
[5] D.T. Young, et. al, Cassini plasma spectrometer 
investigation, Measurement Techniques for Space Plasmas, 
AGU Monograph 102, (ed. R.F. Pfaff, J.E. Borovsky, D.T. 
the TOF section because of a software error that increased 
can be increased 
beyond the -8kV at which it was originally operating. An 
increase in this voltage should improve PEPE's sensitivity 
and mass resolution capability by decreasing scattering in 
the foils. High resolution analysis will be restricted to ions 
entering the instrument with less than -5keV energy. 
PEPE should still be able to make significant contributions 
to solar wind science and do new science at the comets. 
too quickly' The positive was +8kv and 3-D, High Sensitivity, High Mass Resolution Space plasma 
now be +5kv' The negative 
Young), 1998, pp 237-242. 
6 .  CONCLUSIONS 
PEPE has demonstrated many new technologies and 
techniques that will advance future space plasma 
instruments. Many of these techniques can be applied to 
instruments in other scientific areas. Their validation in 
space is sufficient to allow the use of these technologies and 
techniques in other instruments. These cost-effective, fast 
turn-around techniques can help to make smaller, faster, 
cheaper, better a reality. PEPE has shown that they work 
well in space. On Earth the management techniques 
employed in DS1 are also essential to future gains in 
instrumentation in efficiency. If smaller, cheaper, faster, 
better comes to mean that experienced people are exhausted 
[6]  D. T. Young, S.J. Bame, M.F. Thomsen, R.H. Martin, 
J.L. Burch, J.A. Marshall, and R. Reinhard, 2n-radian 
field-of-view toroidal electrostatic analyzer, Rev. Sci. 
Instrum., 59,743-751,1988. 
[7] J.E. Nordholt et al. The Cassini ion mass spectrometer: 
performance metrics and techniques, Measurement 
Techniques for Space Plasmas, AGU Monograph 102, (ed. 
R.F. Pfaff, J.E. Borovsky, D.T. Young), 1998, pp 209-214. 
[SI D. J. McComas and J.E. Nordholt, J.-J. Berthelier, J.M. 
Illiano, and D.T. Young, The Cassini Ion Mass 
Spectrometer, Measurement Techniques for Space Plasmas, 
AGU Monograph 102, (ed. R.F. Pfaff, J.E. Borovsky, D.T. 
606 
Young), 1998, pp 187-194. 
Jane E. Nordholt is a technical 
project leader at Los Alamos National 
Laboratory. She was co-principal 
investigator for the development and 
delivery of PEPE. She is a co-lead on 
the NASA New Millennium Program 
Integrated Product Development Team 
for In-Situ Instruments and MEMS 
and in conjunction leads a multi-sensors investigation. She 
is a CO-I on the PEPE Science Investigation, the Genesis 
Discovery Mission, the NASA PIDDP Laser Induced 
Breakdown Spectroscopy project, and the MIDDP Laser 
Induced Mass Spectroscopy project. She is instrument lead 
for the Cassini CAPS Ion Mass Spectrometer that like 
PEPE is a 3-Dimensional Linear Electric Field mass 
spectrometer for which she holds the patent. She is also co- 
inventor of Free-Space Quantum Cryptography for which 
she also holds a patent. Her interests include ion, electron, 
and photon optics and detectors. She received her BS from 
Rutgers University and her MS from the California 
Institute of Technology. 
David T. Young was an Institute 
Scientist at Southwest Research 
Institute, San Antonio, TX during the 
PEPE development phase and is now a 
professor at the University of Michigan. 
He was the PEPE co-principal 
investigator during development and is 
the principal investigator for the 
mission operations phase. He is also the 
principal investigator for the Cassini Plasma Spectrometer 
investigation and as either CO- or principal investigator has 
been responsible for design and development of several 
other space-borne ion mass spectrometers. His interests 
include space plasma physics, mass spectrometry and 
related instrumentation. He received his BS at the 
University of Southwestern Louisiana and MS and PhD 
from Rice University. 
Herbert 0. Funsten is a technical 
staff member in the Space and 
Atmospheric Sciences Group at Los 
Alamos National Laboratory. He is the 
PI of the A M P S  on the DoD SABRS 
Verification Experiment. He is a CO-I 
on NASA's TWINS mission and is a 
team member of the MENA Imager on 
NASA's IMAGE mission, PEPE on NASA's Deep Space 1 
mission, and IMS on NASA's CASSINI mission. His 
interests lie in development of low energy solid state 
detectors, particle-solid interaction physics, neutral atom 
imaging, and solar wind physics. He is the author or co- 
author of over 50 scientific papers and has three patents 
and two patents-pending. He has a BS from Washington 
and Lee University and an MEP and PhD from the 
University of Virginia. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the following individuals 
for their contributions to the success of PEPE: R.A. Abeyta, 
J. Alexander, D. Archuleta, J. Baldonado, P. Barker, R. K. 
Black, T. L. Booker, R. P. Bowman, P. J. Casey, L. Cope, J. 
P. Cravens, C. Gonzales, D. R. Guerrero, S .  F. Hahn, J. J. 
Hanley, B. P. Henneke, E. F. Horton, D. J. Lawrence, K. P. 
McCabe, D. J. McComas, A. Roybal, R. P. Salazar, E. 
Santiago, M. Shappirio, S .  A. Storms, C. Urdiales, and V. 
Vigil. We would also like to acknowledge support from 
NASA contracts WO-9049, and WO-9066 in the 
construction of PEPE and contracts WO-9165 and WO- 
9138 for data analysis and processing support. We would 
also particularly like to thank Wes Huntress, Jim Burch, 
Lesley Livesay and the DS1 team without whose help PEPE 
would not have begun, been built, or flown. Work at the 
Los Alamos National Laboratory was performed under the 
auspices of the United States Department of Energy. 
Development of PEPE at SwRI was supported by 
NASNJPL contract 960619 and SwIU internal research 
funds. Mission operations and data analysis at SwRI are 
supported by NASNJF'L contract 961207. 
607 
