High Rate Data Delivery Thrust Area 
Kul Bhasin 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Glenn Research Center 
21000 Brookpark Road, M.S. 5412 
Cleveland, Ohio, 44135 
Ph:216.433.3676 Fax::! 16.977.7444 
e-mail: bhasin@grc.nasa.gov 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, a brief description of the high rate data 
delivery (HRDD) thrust area, its focus and current 
technical activities being carried out by NASA centers 
including JPL, academia and industry under this program 
is provided. The processes and methods being used to 
achieve active participation in this program are presented. 
The developments in space communication technologies, 
which will shape NASA enterprise missions in the 21st. 
century, are highlighted. 
Focus 
This thrust area objective is to establish virtual presence 
throughout our solar system. To achieve this will require 
the integration of advanced communications, networks 
and information technologies. The integration of these 
technologies, with high data rates, will enable a 
telepresence for near-earth and deep space scientific 
missions, and for human and robotic exploration. The 
transmission of data at high rates permits an increasingly 
rapid conversion of information to knowledge, and 
knowledge to new discoveries. Global interoperability 
among space-based assets and terrestrial 
telecommunications networks will diminish the gap 
between the sensors and the scientist. Information 
technology breakthroughs will enable the management of 
massive, diverse, multi-terabyte data sets needed to 
produce high-level information products. 
The thrust area currently focuses on: 1) Revolutionary 
advances in high performance communication 
architectures and technologies for near-Earth and deep 
space missions; 2) Space-space and space-earth 
microwave and optical communications systems, 
subsystems, and component technologies that will enable 
a several orders of magnitude increase in data 
communications with extensive miniaturization. 3) 
Communications and network technologies for small 
spacecraft constellations 4) Advanced network technologies to 
enable the delivery of space-acquired data, control of 
spacecraft, or hybrid network management, through the 
appropriate and cost-effective use of existing and planned 
commercial space and terrestrial communication infrastructure. 
5) Advances in scientific spatial information management 
systems, capable of handling the archiving and retrieval of 
terabyte-sized collections of image data and distribution 
method for this directly from space to multiple users. 
CURRENT ECHNICAL A C T I V ~  
Advance microwave communication and optical technologies 
are being developed to increase data rates (greater than 622 
Mbps) for point to point near earth and deep space 
communications. Ka-band phased array and inflatable 
antennas, high-speed digital modems and multi-gigabit 
receivers are being designed to increase the capacity for the 
backbone communications. Relay radios for micro 
communication and avionics systems, which will reduce mass, 
power and volume for planned Mars Missions will be 
demonstrated. Optical technologies to calibrate, validate and 
characterize the optical terminals for deep space 
communications are being assembled as well as high efficiency 
solid state lasers are being developed to reduce power 
requirements for optical communications. The models for 
space to ground radio-propagation to enable NASA and U.S. 
community and U.S. industry to utilize K-Band frequencies 
will be completed and presented in a handbook. 
Micro Electric Mechanical Systems (MEMS) switching 
technologies are being investigated to reduce losses in phased 
array antennas. Miniature solid state amplifiers and 
ferroelectric microwave components are being developed for 
micro-spacecraft cross-link communications. As an example 
of the integration of communication and computer 
technologies, a core system for receiving, storing query and 
distribution of basic imagery products will be tested and 
architectures for the data distribution are being studied. 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
579 
A number of tasks are underway to extend the advances 
being made in the Internet technologies in terrestrial 
environment to the space environment as well as to 
provide connectivity from spacecraft directly to the users. 
This work is being conducted by NASA centers including 
JPL, academia and industry under this program. 
KEY MECHANISM 
High Data Rate Thrust Area calls together the most 
innovative people, from a variety of settings, to work in 
highly cohesive teams. Team members are identified 
from NASA’s Field centers, the aerospace industry, the 
communication and networks industry, and academic 
institutions. These teams assess the needs of the NASA 
Enterprises, identify enabling technologies, processes and 
products, and implement effective research and 
technology programs. Ideas leading toward the objectives 
of this area are developed from the concept level to “proof 
of concept level,” in the laboratory environment for the 
primary customers: Earth Science, Space Science, and 
Human Exploration and Development in Space (HEDS) 
Enterprises. 
Currently, NASA Research Announcement (NRA) 
opportunity, issued under the Cross-Enterprise 
Technology Development Program (CETDP) in NASA 
Space Science Enterprise, is being used to select the tasks 
competitively from industry, academia and as well as NASA 
centers including JPL. Partnenng is highly encouraged. 
FAR TERM VISION 
The future vision of this thrust area sees new communication 
and information technology breakthroughs enabling high rate 
data delivery, thereby establishing our virtual presence 
throughout our solar system. To achieve this will require the 
integration of advanced communications, networks and 
i,nformation technologies. The integration of these 
technologies, with high data rates, will enable a telepresence 
for near-earth and deep space scientific missions, and for 
human and robotic exploration. The transmission of data at 
high rates permits an increasingly rapid conversion of 
information to knowledge, and knowledge to new discoveries. 
Global interoperability among space-based assets and 
terrestrial telecommunications networks will diminish the gap 
‘between the sensors and the scientist. Information technology 
breakthroughs will enable the management of massive, 
diverse, multi-terabyte data sets needed to produce high-level 
information products. 
of Technology for Gould Electronics. He is a senior 
Dr. Kul Bhasin serves as the Thrust member of IEEE and is Fellow of the Society of 
Area Manager for High Rate Data lntemational Optical Engineers (SPIE). He obtained his 
Delivery. Under this area advance PhD and MS degrees from the University of Missouri and 
communication technologies for Purdue University, respectively. 
NASA enterprises are developed. 
Prior to that he was Chief of the 
Satellite Networks and Architectures 
Branch at NASA Glenn Research 
Center, Cleveland, Ohio. He is currently engaged in the 
development of satellite network architectures, 
technologies, and applications based on the lntemet to 
meethture NASA mission needs. He was a member of 
NSFRVASA blue ribbon panel for the assessment of 
Global Satellite Communications Technology and 
Systems. He represented NASA in the Ad Hoc Satellite 
Industry Task Force to define the role of satellites in the 
Global Information Infrastructure. 
Having joined NASA in 1983, he worked for several years 
as a senior research engineer on the advanced technology 
projects for next-generation communication satellite 
systems. Prior to joining NASA in 1983, he was Manager 
580 
