Autonomous Scan Management (ASM) for Earth Sensors2 
Joseph D. Anderson, Jerome M. Jump, James W. O’Malley 
INTELSAT 
3400 Intemational Drive NW 
Washington, DC 20008 
ioseph.anderson@intelsat.int 
j erome. iunip@intelsat.int 
james.omallev@intelsat.int 
202-944-7583 
Abstract- This paper describes the Autonomous Sensor 
Management (ASM) monitor used to manage the Earth 
Sensor Assembly (ESA) configurations of 26 satellites 
spread across five different series. It applies to 
geosynchronous satellites that use a scanning ESA as the 
primary sensor for attitude control. 
After an initial setup of each satellite, ASM compares the 
ephemeris data for each satellite with the ephemeris data 
for the Sun and Moon and determines when a second target 
could interfere with the ESA Field of View (FOV). When 
interference is predicted, ASM schedules the commands to 
properly configure the ESA. ASM then monitors the 
satellite telemetry data to verify the ESA is in the proper 
state. If the ESA is not in the proper state as the 
interference time approaches, ASM will alarm the satellite 
controllers to correct the problem. 
The system has performed flawlessly for several years, 
saving INTELSAT numerous man-hours and reducing the 
risks to satellite availability due to operator error. 
INTELSAT owns and operates a global communications 
satellite system providing capacity for voice, video, 
corporate/private networks and Internet in more than 200 
countries and territories. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
6. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
OVERVIEW OF EARTH SENSORS 
PREVIOUS SENSOR MANAGEMENT 
AUTOMATION OF SENSOR MANAGEMENT 
CONCLUSION 
BIOGRAPHY 
1 .  INTRODUCTION 
The INTELSAT fleet has consisted of as many as 26 
satellites in geosynchronous orbit. The attitude 
determination and control systems (ADCS) of these 
satellites are designed to maintain their earth pointing error 
to less than k 0.1 degrees in normal operations. To attain 
this performance an earth sensor is used to locate the 
center of the earth disk relative to the satellite. This sensor 
operates in the infrared wavelengths to sense the transition 
between the “hot” earth and the “cold” space. The 
INTELSAT V, VII, VI11 and New Skies Satellites NSS-K 
series satellites are all three axis stabilized and use similar 
earth sensors. The NSS-K as well as several of the other 
satellites are owned by New Skies Satellites N.V. and 
operated by mTELSAT pursuant to the transition services 
agreements governing INTELSAT’s arm’s-length 
relationship with New Skies. The INTELSAT VI series is a 
spin-stabilized spacecraft, which uses horizon-crossing 
sensors. The performance of all these sensors can be 
dramatically affected by the incursion of other celestial 
bodies (i.e., sun and moon) into their respective FOVs. To 
prevent these dramatic effects, commands must be sent to 
the spacecraft to re-configure the sensors. The re- 
configured sensor(s) will not respond to the incursion of 
the second celestial body into its FOV. The overall process 
from detecting upcoming events through commanding the 
sensor configurations is called sensor management. 
The previous technique for performing this sensor 
management involved significant human interaction and 
multiple computer platforms and software. This process 
has now been fully automated and consolidated. 
Automation of this routine process has: 
Enabled the Flight Mechanics engineers to focus more 
of their attention on maneuver planning 
Enabled the Space Segment engineers to concentrate 
on more of the non-routine operations, investigations 
and evaluations 
Reduced the high volume of repetitive command 
scheduling required by the Satellite Control Center 
(SCC) personnel 
Simplified operational procedures resulting in safer 
and more consistent operations 
0-7803-5~5/00i$l0.00 2000 LEEE 
- Updated December 15,1999 
445 
INTELSAT now has a monitor to verify, in real time, that 
the sensors have been configured properly, based on real 
time telemetry of the satellite state. This reduces the risk 
of entering a sensor management period with an incorrect 
spacecraft configuration. Such operational errors have 
resulted in large attitude transients and loss of earth lock 
for many satellite operators. ASM has been created to 
verify in real time that the spacecraft has been configured 
properly prior to any scan management period, adding 
considerable safety to satellite operations. 
This paper will provide an overview of the earth sensors 
used on INTELSAT satellites, the method previously used 
to perform scan management, and the description of ASM's 
hnctionality and benefits. 
2. OVERVIEW OF EARTH SENSORS 
Scanning Earth Sensors 
The scanning earth sensor is the most common earth sensor 
used by INTELSAT satellites. They are the primary sensors 
for INTELSAT V, W, WI and NSS-K satellites. The 
INTELSAT fleet has scanning ESAs from two different 
manufacturers: Lockheed Missiles and Space and Nippon 
Electric Corporation (NEC). What follows is a generic 
description of a scanning ESA. The description and the 
numbers specified are different for Lockheed and NEC. 
The scanning earth sensor uses a scanning mirror and two 
bolometers to detect the transitions from the cold space to 
the warm earth and vice-versa. Figure 1 is a rough sketch 
of this type of earth sensor. 
/ 
Figure 1 : Scanning Earth Sensor 
The scanning mirror oscillates on a torsion bar at a 
frequency of 8 Hz. The mirror reflects the heat energy 
scanned onto the two bolometers. One bolometer is used 
to measure the scan across the northern hemisphere, called 
the north scan, and the other bolometer measures the scan 
across the southern hemisphere, called the south scan. The 
north and south scans are separated by 12 degrees and the 
bolometers measure the energy in a swath 1.65 degrees 
tall. Each time the scan crosses from the cold space to the 
warm earth, or vice-versa, the bolometers output a pulse. 
These pulses are used to measure the north and south earth 
chord width (Figure 2). The chord widths together with the 
scan center reference are then used to determine the roll 
and pitch angle of the satellite relative to the center of the 
earth. 
I I 
Figure 2: Earth Sensor Geometry Scans 
The pitch angle is computed by comparing the center of the 
chord with the center of the mirror scan. The roll angle is 
computed by taking the difference of the north and south 
chord widths. 
The earth sensor has four modes of operation: 
1) Normal 
2) Acquisition 
3) North Scan Inhibit @SI) 
4) South Scan Inhibit (SSI) 
In Normal, NSI, and SSI modes the scan width is f 12.5 
degrees. The Acquisition mode scan width is +_ 25 degrees. 
When the sensor is in the NSI or SSI modes the earth chord 
for the scan which is inhibited is replaced with an average 
chord width measured prior to the inhibit. The pitch angle 
is then forced to use the scan which is not inhibited and the 
roll is computed by comparing the one active scan chord 
width with the average chord width from the inhibited scan 
prior to being inhibited. 
The scanning earth sensor has the ability to detect a second 
body within a scan. For example, if the moon enters into 
the scan, then the sensor would detect two warm bodies. 
When this occurs the sensor automatically inhibits the scan 
and sends telemetry indicating the presence of a second 
body. The sensor then re-enables the scan once the second 
body is no longer detected. This process works well until 
446 
the second body is near the limb of the earth. When this 
occurs, the sensor can no longer detect the difference 
between the two bodies and as a result the scan is re- 
enabled. At this point, the scan with the second body is 
significantly larger than normal (Figure 3). This results in 
an erroneous roll and pitch measurement that causes the 
satellite to point off the desired attitude with a significant 
transient. 
Figure 3: Moon or Sun on Limb of Earth 
To prevent the large attitude transients the sensors are 
commanded by ground to inhibit the scan that contains the 
second body. Once the second body is well outside the 
scan range the sensor is commanded back to Normal mode. 
This “sensor management” prevents any large attitude 
transients, whch may result in loss of communications 
traffic. 
Spinning Earth Sensors 
The INTELSAT VI series satellites are spin stabilized. This 
means that a large portion of the satellite spins at nominal 
speed of 30 RF’M while the payload platform remains de- 
spun to point at the earth. A Bearing and Power Transfer 
Assembly (BAPTA) is used to connect the spinning section 
and the de-spun platform (Figure 4). 
pulses when the scans cross the earth, moon, or sun. The 
attitude control processor records the times that these 
pulses occur. These times are used in conjunction with 
Index Pulses (IPS) generated by the BAPTA to determine 
the attitude. The index pulses provide a relative position of 
the spinning section, which contains the sun and earth 
sensors, with respect to the de-spun platform that is 
pointed at the earth. 
Four earth sensors are mounted on the spinning section 
(Figure 5) of the satellite. Two of the sensors point 5.5 
degrees north and two point 5.5 degrees south (Figure 6) .  
The earth sensors are basic bolometers similar to the 
bolometer used by the scanning sensors. The output of the 
bolometers is a trapezoidal voltage pulse proportional to 
the earth radiance. This pulse is used to indicate the 
leading and trailing edge of the observed earth (i.e., chord 
width). The attitude control processor uses the time of 
arrival of the earth sensor leading and trailing edges, sun in 
center of the sun sensor and the IPS to determine the 
satellite attitude and spin rate. 
Figure 5: INTELSAT-VI Sensor Locations (Top View) 
Figure 4: “ELSAT -VI Spin Stabilized Satellite 
(Side View) Figure 6: INTELSAT-VI Earth Sensor Scans (Side View) 
for this type Of what are For attitude control the Platform &spin Controller (PDC) 
called spinning sun and earth sensors. These sensors are 
located on the spinning section of the satellite and generate 
logic 
compute the pointing and rate 
data from the sun, earth and Ip to 
to the despun 
447 
platform via the BAPTA. The primary mode of operation 
for the PDC is called Platform Pointing Mode (PPM). 
This mode controls the inertial azimuth pointing angle to a 
value commanded by the ground. The earth or sun sensor 
may be selected, by command, as the inertial reference 
sensor (SIR). For normal operations, the earth sensor is 
typically chosen as the SIR because it provides ease of 
operation especially during eclipse season. The sensor 
management that must be performed for PDC includes: 
During eclipse season the earth sensor selection must 
be changed to use the scan that is on the opposite 
hemisphere as the sun. As a result the sensor must be 
changed in the middle of the eclipse season as the sun 
moves from one hemisphere to the other. During the 
period that the sun is in the FOV of an earth sensor, the 
earth sensor lock status will frequently change from 
lock to unlock and back again. To prevent these alarms 
this telemeq value is forced to unlock status for the 
duration of sun in the FOV. 
The PDC is also very sensitive to moon on the limb of 
the earth. Moon on the limb will cause an increase in 
the earth chord measurement. To prevent any attitude 
transient from occurring, the SIR is changed from the 
selected earth sensor to the sun sensor throughout the 
duration of the moon-on-limb condition. 
3. PREVIOUS SENSOR MANAGEMENT 
The previous method of performing sensor management 
began every Thursday when the Attitude Recovery On-Call 
Engineer (AROCE) would run one of the two scan 
interference prediction programs. These programs 
predicted the position of the sun and the moon with respect 
to the satellite, and the moon phase angle. They then 
determined the times at which the sun or moon was w i h  a 
sensors predetermined "stay-away" zone (Figure 7). 
Figure 7: Scanning Earth Sensor "Stay-Away" Zones 
Figures 8 and 9 show a one-year prediction for the sun and 
moon elevations, and moon phase. Table 1 summarizes all 
times at which the moon is within the "stay-away" zone 
elevation, with the shaded rows showing when the moon 
phase angle is greater than 80 degrees for a zero inclination 
satellite. 
SENSOR INTERFERENCE FOR INELSAT 701 ON 71111995 
SvrVMwn Ekvauon 
, ,moon 
I -._. I 
(17101 am1 tmi imi OM? MI mm1 
DsdyrvnS 
Figure 8: Sun and Moon Elevations 
h p h a a r  
Figure 9: Moon Phase 
Table 1 : Moon Interference Prediction for 3 Months 
11996 1 February I 19 I South I 5 I 
This software ran on a PC and was a mixture of FORTRAN 
and MATLAB. The FORTRAN code was a pre-compiled 
program, supplied by Flight Dynamics. It required as inputs 
the satellite position and velocity vectors, an epoch for 
these vectors, and a list of the desired times for predicting 
the satellite, moon, and sun positions. Once the ephemeris 
data is generated, the MATLAB program determined if 
448 
sensor interference would occur and plotted the positions 
of the sun and moon for each satellite in the INTELSAT 
fleet. At the end of the execution, a file was generated that 
gave the entry and exit times of the moon. 
If interference was predicted, another software product was 
run that read the table of interference’s produced by the 
previous program and produced a summary sheet for each 
satellite series. These summary sheets indicated which 
satellites required scan management, at what times, and 
which command procedures needed to be scheduled. The 
scan inhibit procedures were scheduled to execute one 
hour prior to the predicted interference and the return to 
normal mode procedures executed one hour after the 
predicted interference ends. The summary sheets were 
then compared manually by the ADCS engineers with an 
independent sensor interference output generated by Flight 
Dynamics. The summary tables were then passed on to the 
Satellite Control Center (SCC) where the command 
procedures were manually scheduled for execution. 
For the satellites that have scanning earth sensors, the 
commands for scan inhibit and return to normal mode are 
included in well defined call-up procedures. 
During eclipse season the sun enters the FOV of these 
sensors every day. Daily command procedures were used, 
that were identical to the fixed call-up procedures above, 
except that they were executed daily for as long as needed. 
These procedures needed to be manually generated each 
eclipse season. 
The INTELSAT-VI scan management procedures required 
either two or four different procedures depending on 
whether moon-on-limb condition existed or not. In 
addition, the commands changed twice per year as the 
sensor configuration changes from season to season. 
When moon interference was detected for INTELSAT-VI 
satellites, a program was run using a moon interference 
summary, provided by Flight Dynamics, to generate the 
required timed command procedures. These procedures 
were then verified, transmitted, and scheduled manually. 
The INTELSAT-VI eclipse operations requires much less 
commanding than the other satellites and much of it is still 
performed manually today. The manual activities are 
scheduled on the two days per year that the sun crosses the 
equator. On these days, the earth sensor selected for 
inertial reference must be switched. 
From the descriptions above, it can be concluded that the 
maximum number of moon interference command 
procedures that could be scheduled at one time was greater 
than 50. During eclipse season each satellite with scanning 
sensors, needs to have scan management performed each 
day due to sun interference (approximately 40 procedures 
per day). During peak times, when moon and sun 
interference occur on the same day, as many as 210 scan 
management procedures may be executed. 
4. AUTOMATION OF SENSOR MANAGEMENT 
The ASM program was created to automate and consolidate 
the sensor management process. ASM’s requirements, 
basic hctionality, and benefits are described below. 
ASM Receives and Verifies Ephemeris Data 
Each week ASM receives a two-week prediction of the 
ephemeris data for each satellite from the Flight Dynamics 
group. The table header contains the pitch, roll, and yaw 
(inverted or not) biases as well as a time stamp for this 
data. The table itself contains the following data at one- 
hour intervals: longitude and latitude of the satellite, the 
azimuth and elevation for the sun and the moon, and the 
moon phase (Figure 10). ASM uses a simplified altemate 
means to verify the predicted ephemeris data by using the 
satellite location and the time-stamp. In addition, the 
header information is verified via telemetry or some other 
means. 
Figure 10: ASM Ephemeris Data Provided Weekly 
ASM Predictions and Scheduling 
Using the Flight Dynamics data, ASM predicts the 
interference times for the duration of the ephemeris file. 
ASM schedules all commanding activities for a predicted 
interference, three days prior to its occurrence. ASM uses 
INTELSAT standard guidelines for commanding the ESA to 
inhibit mode 15 minutes prior to when the second target 
enters the “stay-away” zone and commanding the ESA to 
normal mode 15 minutes after the second target exits the 
“stay-away” zone. ASM schedules all the commanding 
activities covering a 24-hour period, three days in advance. 
In addition to the logic employed above, ASM takes 
precautions to avoid excessive commanding in cases where 
449 
the moon may briefly enter and exit a “stay-away” zone 
only to re-enter the same “stay-away” zone a short time 
later. In a case such as this, the ESA scan is inhibited 
before the first entrance to the “stay-away’’ zone and the 
ESA is returned to normal mode after the second exit. This 
special case occurs when the moon skirts along the top or 
bottom edge of the “stay-away” zone. 
ASM Monitors Data 
ASM continuously monitors the ESA configuration for all 
of the satellites in the Intelsat fleet. In the event that an 
ESA should change state and the ground did not command 
position of the moon along this path is updated in real-time. 
The arrow buttons in the upper left corner allow the user to 
zoom in and out to see more of the azimuth. The menu in 
the upper right is used to switch between the moon scan and 
the sun scan. When the sun is selected (Figure 13), it is 
seen that the “stay-away” zones are much larger. This 
figure also highlights the path and current position of the 
sun in azimuth and elevation. 
The ASM user interface allows the SCC controllers to 
filter and sort on a summary of ASMs activities and to 
easily reschedule command procedures (Figure 14). It also 
allows the user to disable ASM activities for any satellite. 
relative to the scan, 2) a plot of the sun and moon elevation 
and the moon phase versus time as seen from the satellite, 
including the elevations of the scans for this satellite, 3) 
the current moon phase as seen from the satellite, and 4) a 
menu item for setup and editing of the “stay-away zones” 
for both sun and moon interference. The raw ephemeris 
data is also accessible through this menu. 
Figure 1 1 : ASM Global View (Top View) 
In Figure 12, the moon “stay-away” zone is displayed in two 
shades. The smaller lighter shaded area is the actual scan 
size based on the size of the bolometer and sensor mode. 
The larger darker shaded area is the “stay-away’’ zone 
margin. The sensor configuration commands are scheduled 
for 15 minutes prior to entry into this region. The blue 
horizontal line is the path of the moon. The predicted 
450 
Figure 12: Moon “Stay-Away’’ Zone for Scanning ESA 
ASM Situational Awareness 
In addition to all the work ASM has relieved and possible 
traffic outages it has prevented, the situational awareness 
that it provides to the SCC staff may be equally beneficial. 
It is used immediately by the SCC controllers whenever a 
satellite experiences a pitch glitch or monitor trip. When 
one of these events occurs, the controllers and engineers 
will immediately open the ASM graphical display to show 
the position of the sun and moon with respect to the ESA 
FOV. These graphics provide immediate explanations for 
some events such as when a full-phase moon is skirting 
along the edge of the “stay-away” zone. In other cases, if 
the sun or moon is in the “stay-away” zone, a different 
procedure is needed depending on where the body is 
relative to the earth. In t h s  case, the situational awareness 
provided by ASM makes the choice of procedure fast and 
obvious. 
5 .  CONCLUSION 
An automated system was created that: predicts future 
events; automatically schedules appropriate satellite 
commanding procedures; provides real-time monitoring to 
ensure all sensors are in their proper configuration; and 
provides displays to indicate the current and future status of 
the sensor management. 
The benefits of ASM are twofold. First, it has taken a 
repetitive tedious process that was prone to errors and 
replaced it with a tool that is easy to use and has worked 
flawlessly for three years. Second, and by some 
considered to be more beneficial, is the situational 
awareness that the ASM graphm provides to the SCC 
controllers and engineers. 
Figure 13: Sun “Stay-Away‘‘ Zone for Scanning ESA 6.  BIOGRAPHY 
Figure 14: ASM Summary Activities User Interface 
Joe Anderson is the Section Manager of the ADCS group 
in the Space Segment Engineering Management (SSEM) 
directorate at INTELSAT. He has a BS in Aerospace 
Engineering from the University of Minnesota, an MS in 
Mechanical Engineering from Stanford, and an MBA 
from the George Washington University (May 2000). 
Jerome Jump is a software developer for INTELSAT. He 
has a BS in Electrical Engineering from Purdue 
University and an MS in Electrical Engineering from the 
George Washington University. 
Jim O’Malley is an engineer in the ADCS group in the 
SSEM directorate at INTELSAT. He has a BS in 
Mathematics from the Pennsylvania State University and 
an MS in Mechanical Engineering from the George 
Washington University. 
45 1 
