Quantum Cryptography For Secure Satellite 
Communications 
Richard J. Hughes*, William T. Buttler, Paul G. Kwiat, Steve K. Lamoreaux, 
University of Califomia, 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos, NM 87545 
hughes@lanl.gov 
I**- / .*I ’ - f P  ,George L. Mokgari; Jane E. Nordholt, and Charles G. Peterson 
*505-667-3876 
Abstract-Quantum cryptography is an emerging 
technology in which two parties may simultaneously 
generate shared, secret cryptographic key material using 
the transmission of quantum states of light. The security of 
these transmissions is based on the inviolability of the laws 
of quantum mechanics and information-theoretically secure 
post-processing methods. An adversary can neither 
successfully tap the quantum transmissions, nor evade 
detection, owing to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. In 
this paper we describe the theory of quantum cryptography, 
and recent results from our experimental free-space system 
with which we have demonstrated the feasibility of 
quantum key generation over a point-to-point outdoor 
atmospheric path in daylight. We achieved a transmission 
distance of 0.5 km, which was limited only by the length of 
the test range. Our results provide strong evidence that 
cryptographic key material could be generated on demand 
between a ground station and a satellite (or between two 
satellites), allowing a satellite to be securely rskeyed on 
orbit for encrypting the uplinked command path and 
downlinked data path; or to distribute keys between widely- 
separated ground stations with a satellite relay, enabling 
encrypted communications over even inter-continental 
distances. We present a feasibility analysis of surface-to- 
satellite quantum key generation. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY: THEORY 
3. EXPERIMENTAL POINT-TO-POINT QUA” KEY 
GENERATION OVER 0.5 KM IN DAYLIGHT 
4. QUANTUM KEY DISTRIBUTION TO SATELLITES 
5. S ~ Y  AND CONCLUSIONS 
6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
provable security, if the sender (“Alice”) and recipient 
(“Bob”) possess a secret random bit sequence known as 
“key” material, which they use to initialize cryptographic 
devices. The initial step of key distribution, in which the 
two parties acquire the key material, must be accomplished 
with a high level of confidence that a third party (“Eve”) 
cannot acquire even partial information about the random 
bit sequence. If Alice and Bob communicate solely through 
classical messages it is impossible for them to generate a 
certifiably secret key owing to the possibility of passive 
eavesdropping. However, secure key generation becomes 
possible if they communicate with single-photon 
transmissions using the emerging technology of quantum 
cryptography, or more accurately, quantum key distribution 
(QKD). (For reviews, see References [ l ,  21. A small 
amount of shared secret key material is required to perform 
initial authentication.) 
The security of QKD is based on the inviolability of the 
laws of quantum mechanics and provably secure 
(information theoretic) public discussior protocols. Eve can 
neither “tap” the key transmissions owing to the indivisibil- 
ity of quanta[3] nor copy them faithfully because of the 
quantum “no-cloning” theorem [4]. At a deeper level, QKD 
resists interception and retransmission by an eavesdropper 
because in quantum mechanics, in contrast to the classical 
world, the result of a measurement cannot be thought of as 
revealing a “possessed value” of a quantum state. A unique 
aspect of quantum cryptography is that Heisenberg’s 
uncertainty principle ensures that if Eve attempts to 
intercept and measure Alice’s quantum transmissions, her 
activities must produce an irreversible change in the 
quantum states (she “collapses the wavefunction”) that are 
retransmitted to Bob. These changes will introduce an 
anomalously high error rate in the transmissions between 
Alice and Bob, allowing them to detect the attempted 
eavesdropping. In particular, from the observed error rate 
Alice and Bob can put an upper bound on any partial 
knowledge that an eavesdropper may have acquired by 
monitoring their transmissions. This bound allows the 
intended users to apply conventional information theoretic 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Two of the main goals of cryptography (encryption and 
authentication of messages) can be accomplished, with 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
191 
techniques by public discussion to distill an error-free, 
secret key. 
Because it has the ultimate security assurance of a law of 
Nature, quantum cryptography offers potentially attractive 
“ease of use” advantages over conventional key distribution 
schemes: it avoids the “insider threat” because key material 
does not exist before the quantum transmissions take place; 
it replaces cumbersome conventional key distribution 
methods whose security is based on the physical security of 
the distribution process; and it provides a secure alternative 
to key distribution schemes based on public key 
cryptography, which are potentially vulnerable to 
algorithmic advances and improved computing techniques. 
Thus, quantum key distribution enables “encrypted 
communications on demand,” because it allows key 
generation at transmission time over an unsecured optical 
communications link. 
The first quantum key distribution protocol was published 
by Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard in 1984 and is now 
known as “BB84” [5]. A firther advance in theoretical 
quantum cryptography took place in 1991 when Ekert pro- 
posed [6] that Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) “entangled” 
two-particle states could be used to implement a quantum 
cryptography protocol whose security was based on Bell’s 
inequalities. Starting in 1989, Bennett, Brassard and 
collaborators performed the first experimental 
demonstration of QKD by constructing a working prototype 
system for the BB84 protocol, using polarized photons[7]. 
Although the propagation distance was only about 30 cm, 
this experiment is in several ways still the most thorough 
demonstration of quantum cryptography. 
Potentially practical applications of QKD, outside the 
carefully controlled environment of a physics laboratory, 
are largely determined by the physics of single-photon 
production, the requirement of faithful transmission of the 
quantum states involved, the existence of high-efficiency 
single-photon detectors at the required wavelengths, and 
the compatibility of QKD with existing optical 
communications infrastructures. In 1992 Bennett published 
a “minimal” QKD scheme (“B92”) and proposed that it 
could be implemented using single-photon interference 
with photons propagating for long distances over optical 
fibers[8]. Since then, several experimental groups [9, 10, 
11, 121 have developed optical fiber-based QKD systems. 
For example, at Los Alamos we have demonstrated the 
feasibility of low-error rate QKD over underground optical 
fibers that were installed for network applications[ 121. We 
have previously demonstrated QKD over 24 km of 
fiber[l3], and have operated for over one year at an 
increased propagation distance of 48 km[14]. In recent 
years there have also been considerable developments in the 
use of free-space laser communications[ 151 for high- -~ 
bandwidth terrestrial, surface-to-satellite, satellite-to- 
satellite and (potentially) deep-space communications. The 
optical pointing, acquisition and traclung techniques 
developed for laser communications could be used to make 
QKD possible over line-of-sight transmissions in free- 
space,[l6, 17, 181 provided that signal-to-noise and bit 
rates adequate for cryptographic applications can be 
achieved. There are certain key distribution problems for 
which free-space QKD would have definite practical 
advantages. For example, it is impractical to send a courier 
to a satellite. We believe that fi-ee-space QKD could be used 
for key generation between a low-earth orbit satellite and a 
ground station,[2, 181 as well as in other applications where 
laser communications are possible. To demonstrate this 
possibility, we have developed a free-space QKD system for 
such applications and have previously achieved a 
transmission distance of 1-km over a folded path (to a 
reflector and back) at night[ 181. More recently, we have 
performed the fxst demonstration of free-space QKD over a 
point-to-point 0.5-km path in daylight, and we report these 
results here. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2 we give a concise introduction to the theory of 
quantum cryptography. Then, in Section 3 we describe the 
experimental considerations underlying our implementation 
of quantum cryptography in our free-space QKD system. 
In Section 4 we present a feasibility study of QKD between 
a ground station and a satellite in low-earth orbit. Finally, 
in Section 5 we present some conclusions. 
2. QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY: THEORY 
To understand QKD, we must first move away from the 
traditional key distribution metaphor of Alice sending 
particular key data to Bob. Instead, we should have in mind 
a more symmetrical starting point, in which Alice and Bob 
initially generate their own, independent random binary 
sequences, containing more numbers than they need for the 
key material that they will ultimately share. Through public 
dscussion they agree on a QKD protocol by which they can 
perform a bitwise comparison of their sequences using a 
quantum transmission (over a “quantum channel”) and a 
public discussion of the results (over an authenticated 
public channel) to distill a shared, random subsequence, 
which will become the key material. It is important to 
appreciate that they do not need to identify all of their 
shared numbers, or even particuIar ones, because the only 
requirements on the key material are that the numbers 
should be secret and random. Several QKD protocols have 
been developed, but for simplicity we shall describe the 
minimal B92 QKD protocol[8] in terms of the preparation 
and measurement of single-photon polarization states. 
192 
(Cryptographically, the BB84 protocol has certain 
advantages, but the physics issues involved are identical 
with B92.) 
Alice’s polarization 
Bob’s polarization 
Bob’s bit value 
In the B92 QKD protocol, Alice can produce photons with 
either of G o  non-orthogonal linear polarizations: vertical 
(V) or +45” (say); and Bob can make either of two 
complementary non-orthogonal polarization measurements: 
-45” or horizontal (H) (say). Alice and Bob generate their 
own independent sequences of random binary numbers. 
Next, they proceed through their sequences bit-by-bit in 
synchronization, with Alice preparing a polarized photon 
for each of her bits according to the rules: 
“0” e v 
“1” H +45” 
Alice sends each photon over a “quantum channel” to Bob. 
(The quantum channel is a transmission medium that 
isolates the quantum state from interactions with the 
“environment.”) Bob makes a polarization measurement on 
each photon he receives according to the value of his bit as 
given by: 
“0” ++ -45” 
“1” fs H 
and records the result (“pass” = Y, “fail” = N). Note that 
Bob will never record a “pass” (a false positive) if his bit is 
different from Alice’s (they have crossed polarizers). He 
only records a “pass” on 50% of the bits that they have in 
common. In the example of four bits shown in Figure 1, 
we see that for the first and fourth bits Alice and Bob had 
different bit values, so that Bob’s result is a definite “fail” 
in each case. However, for the second and third bits, Alice 
and Bob have the same bit values and the protocol is such 
that there is a probability of 0.5 that Bob’s result will be a 
“pass” in each case. Of course, we cannot predict in any 
particular experiment which one will be a “pass,” but in 
this example the second bit was a “fail” and the third bit 
was a “pass.” 
(1) 
(2) 
+45” V +45” V 
-45” -45” H H 
0 0 1 1 
initial key material is required for authentication. This key 
material can be replaced by a portion of the key material 
generated by QKD.) He may send this information over a 
conventional (public) channel which may be subject to 
eavesdropping. Now Alice and Bob retain only those bits 
for which Bob’s result was “Y” and these hits become the 
shared key material. (In the example oEFigure 1 the third 
bit becomes the first bit of the shared key.) An ideal B92 
procedure distills on average one shared bit from every four 
initial bits assuming that there are no photon losses in 
transmission or detection. The 25% efficiency, qQ, of the 
idealized QKD process is the price that Alice and Bob must 
pay for secrecy. In a practical system, additional losses in 
transmission (efficiency factor q ~ )  and detection (efficiency 
factor qD) will occur (and can be tolerated). However, these 
losses only affect the bit rate, not the security. 
* 
In a practical system there will be errors in the reconciled 
data arising from optical imperfections and detector noise, 
which must be removed before the key material can be 
used. Alice and Bob can remove these errors using 
conventional error correcting codes over their public 
channel, but at the expense of revealing some (parity) 
information about the resulting key material to Eve. Errors 
and information leakage will also occur if Eve performs her 
own measurement of Alice’s states on the quantum channel 
and fabricates new photons to send on to Bob. To take an 
extreme case, if Eve measures each of Alice’s photons using 
Alice’s basis she will introduce a 25% error rate into Alice 
and Bob’s key material, while correctly identifying 75% of 
Alice’s bits. Of course, Alice and Bob could readily detect 
such a large error rate and would not then use their 
reconciled data for key material, but the eavesdropper could 
still gain some information at the expense of a 
proportionately smaller error rate if she only measures a 
fraction of Alice’s photons. It is the goal of quantum 
cvptography for Alice and Bob to translate an observed 
error rate into an upper bound on Eve’s knowledge of their 
reconciled data[ 191. Such bounds have been established for 
eavesdropping attacks on individual bits[20] and are the 
subject of current research in the case of coherent attacks 
Figure 1. A four-bit example of B92 quantum key distribution 
on multiple bits. Error correction should then be followed 
by a further stage of “privacy amplification” to reduce any 
partial knowledge acquired by Eve to less than one bit of 
the final key string[21]. For example, Alice and Bob could 
To complete the protocol, Bob sends a copy of his (Y or N) 
results to Alice, but not the measurement that he made on 
each bit. (It is at this data-reconciliation stage that the 
193 
choose the parities of random subsets of their error 
corrected data so that Eve will be forced to have less than 
one bit of information abciut the resulting key. These 
additional stages are performed over the public channel. 
Authentication of the pub1 ic channel transmissions is 
necessary to avoid a "man-in,-thesmiddle" -attack, in which 
Eve could igain :control of both the quantum and public 
channels, allowing her to masquerade as Bob to Alice and 
vice-versa. Alice and Bob would then unknowingly 
generate independent keys with Eve who could use these 
keys to read all of their subsequent encrypted 
communications. Alice and Bob need a short, secret 
authentication key to start the QKD procedure, and can 
replenish this key with a small portion of the QKD material 
generated. For authentication based on random hashing 
they will need O(log2n) secret authentication bits for every 
n-bit public transmission[22]. 
From the foregoing, we see that a QKD procedure may be 
broken down into the following seven stages: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Alice and Bob acquire a secret authentication key; 
Alice and Bob generate independent secret sequences 
of random bits; 
Alice and Bob use the quantum transmissions of a 
QKD protocol to compare their sequences and classical 
communications to identify a random subsequence of 
shared secret bits; 
Alice and Bob perform an error correction procedure 
on the data; 
Alice and Bob assess (from the error rate) how much 
knowledge Eve may have acquired; 
Alice and Bob perfcam an appropriate privacy 
amplification procedure over the public channel; 
Part of the resulting key material is used to replenish 
the authentication bits required in step 1, so that the 
system is ready for the next key generation session. 
The result of these steps is a shared, error-free secret key. 
(It has been proposed that the key bits generated by QKD 
should be used for the encryption of communications using 
the unbreakable "one-time pad" method[23]. However, the 
key material could equally well, and more practically, be 
used by Alice and Bob in any other symmetric key 
cryptosystem.) Of the steps above, only one (step 3) 
involves the experimental physics issues that will be crucial 
to the practical feasibility of QKD. In our work we have 
therefore focused our efforts on this component of QKD. A 
fully functional key generation system would include 
careful implementation of the other steps, but these (with 
the exception of step 5) are better understood and may be 
readily incorporated once step 3 has been adequately 
demonstrated. Step 5 relates to the physics of 
eavesdropping and a full treatment of this topic is beyond 
the scope of this paper. We will therefore limit ourselves to 
a few additional remarks on this subject. 
In the simple form described above, the B92 protocol is 
vulnerable to Eve measuring Alice's photons in Bob's basis 
and only sending on those photons she can identify. (A 
"Bob's basis" attack.) This will cause a factor of four 
reduction in bit rate unless Eve sends out multiple photons 
instead of just one. Alice and Bob can protect against this 
type of attack if Bob is able to detect the photon number of 
the received bits, as in our system described below. They 
could also avoid this problem entirely by using the BB84 
protocol, which uses four states instead of two. However, 
from the perspective of the physics, the B92 and BB84 
protocols are so similar that BB84 will also be possible 
under conditions for which QKD with the B92 protocol is 
feasible. 
In considering possible eavesdropping on a QKD system, it 
is also important to distinguish between attacks that are 
possible with existing technology, which are limited to 
individual bit attacks, and potential future attacks that are 
limited only by the laws of physics. In particular, current 
QKD experiments use approximate single-photon states 
that are obtained by attenuating the output of a pulsed laser 
so that the average photon number per pulse is less than 
one. Such pulses contain a Poisson distribution of photon 
numbers, and the low intensity is necessary to ensure that 
very few pulses are vulnerable to an eavesdropper using an 
optical beamsplitter to "tap out" a photon from pulses 
containing more than one photon. Present QKD system can 
be made secure against such attacks by appropriate use of 
privacy amplification. However, , ?s quantum-optical 
technology advances, an eavesdropper could use more 
sophisticated methods to attack such a system in the future, 
as we will discuss below. Before such attacks become 
possible it will be important for Alice and Bob to replace 
their weak laser pulse QKD source with a true single- 
photon light source. Several techniques are now becoming 
feasible for producing such states of light[24]. A 
demonstration of the feasibility of QKD with weak laser 
pulses also implies the viability of QKD with a true single- 
photon light source under the same experimental 
conditions, because of the linearity of the processes 
involved. 
3. EXPERIMENTAL POINT-TO-POINT QUANTUM 
KEY GENERATION OVER 0.5 KM IN DAYLIGHT 
The success of QKD over free-space optical paths depends 
on the transmission and detection of single optical photons 
against a high background through a turbulent medium. 
Although these are challenging problems, they can be 
194 
overcome with careful choices of experimental parameters 
and the use of various optical techniques developed for 
laser communications. The atmosphere has a high 
transmission “window” for light with a wavelength in the 
vicinity of 770 nm. Photons can be readily produced at this 
wavelength with rugged, low-power semiconductor lasers 
and their polarization properties contrslled with off-the- 
shelf optical components. Furthermore, commercial single- 
photon counting modules (SPCMs) are now available that 
can count such photons with efficiencies as high as 
qD - 65% at rates of up to 1 MHz, with dark count rates as 
low as 50 Hz. The atmosphere is essentially non- 
birefringent at these wavelengths and so will allow the 
faithful transmission of the QKD polarization states. 
However, atmospheric turbulence will introduce both 
photon arrival time jitter and beam wander (through 
variations in refractive index). The slow turbulence time- 
scales involved (0.1s to 0.01s) allow the jitter to be 
compensated by transmitting a bright timing laser pulse 
Computer Control 
System 
intervening short interval. Beam wander caused by 
atmospheric turbulence reduces the QKD bit rate, but as we 
will see later is not a critical limitation on surface-to- 
satellite paths even if left uncontrolled. However, active 
beam steering (“tip-tilt’’ control) methods have been 
developed for laser communications to keep the beam 
directed onto the receiver. Fer example, by monitoring a 
reflected component of the bright timing pulse, an error 
signal can be derived and fedback to a beam-steering 
mechanism. 
’ 
At first sight a more serious concern is that the large 
background of photons from the sun (or even the moon at 
night) could swamp the single-photon QKD signal. 
However, as we will see below, a combination of (sub)- 
nanosecond timing, narrow wavelength filters[25,26] and a 
small solid angle for photon acceptance (spatial filtering) at 
the receiver[ 171 can render this background tractable. 
Public Channel 
Indexes 4 Telemetry 
from 
Bob 
Access 
Store - Trigger 
Pulse Data Secure 
Recorder Key 
Bright 
Laser 
Laser - V polarizer 
Random 
Sequence 
Generator SM fiber 
Transmitter Optics 
BS BS (telescope) 
Figure 2. QKD transmitter (“‘Alice”) block diagram. 
(which carries no key information) at a different 
wavelength a short time (100 ns, say) before each QKD The QKD transmitter (“Alice”) in our system contains a 
photon. The arrival of this bright pulse at the receiver 1-MHz clock that synchronizes the various events. (See 
allows a definite timing window to be imposed for the Figure 2.) On each “tick“ of the clock a - 1-ns optical 
single QKD photon’s arrival, because the atmospheric “bright pulse” is produced from a “timing-pulse’’ laser 
transmission time will not have changed over the operating at a wavelength of - 768 nm. After a - 100-ns 
195 
b4Sopolarizer+ SPCM “0” Data 
. .  
Figure 3. QKD receiver (“Bob”) block diagram. 
(telescope) 
delay one of two temperature-controlled “data” diode lasers 
emits a - 1-ns optical pulse that is attenuated to the single- 
photon level and constrained by interference filters to a 
wavelength of 773.W0.5 nm. The polarization of the 
optical pulse from each laser is set to one of the two non- 
orthogonal settings required for the B92 protocol. The 
choice of which data laser fues is determined by a random 
bit value that is obtained by discriminating electrical noise. 
The random bit value is indexed by the clock tick and 
recorded in a computer control system’s memory. All three 
optical pulse paths are combined (using beam splitters, BS), 
directed into a single-mode (SM) optical fiber for delivery 
to a transmitting beam expander, and emitted towards 
Bob’s receiver. (An SPCM fiber-coupled to one of the BS 
output ports, not shown in Figure 2, monitors the average 
photon number.) The process is then repeated one 
microsecond later with the next random bit, and so on. 
Data 
Bright Gate 
At Bob’s QKD receiver the light pulses are collected by a 
3.5-inch diameter Cassegrain telescope and directed into a 
polarization analysis and detection system. (See Figure 3.) 
Public Channel 
The bright pulse triggers an avalanche photodiode detector, 
and this event sets up an electronic timing “window” about 
5-11s long in which a QKD optical data pulse is expected. 
After emerging from the collection telescope, an optical 
data pulse encounters an optical beamsplitter at which a 
single-photon would be either transmitted or reflected with 
equal probabilities. We use this quantum-mechanically 
random behavior at the beamsplitter to perform Bob’s 
random choice of which B92 polarization measurement is 
made on the arriving optical data pulse. Along the 
transmitted path, an optical data pulse’s polarization is 
analyzed according to Bob’s B92 “0” value, while along the 
reflected path a measurement for H-polarization is made 
using a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS). (The PBS transmits 
H- but reflects V-polarization.) After each polarization 
analysis stage, optical data pulses pass through interference 
filters matched to those in the transmitter, and are collected 
into (spatial filtering) multi-mode optical fibers for delivery 
to single-photon counting modules (SPCMs), one for each 
bit value. Of course, for many of the arriving bright pulses 
there will be no corresponding single-photon detection 
owing to the efficiency of the B92 protocol, the attenuation 
i 
Computer control ‘ Access 
System 
Secure 
196 
experienced by the optical data pulses, and the SPCM’s 
detection efficiency. For events on which one of the two 
SPCMs triggers, Bob can assign a bit value to Alice’s 
transmitted bit. He records these detected bits in the 
memory of a computer control system, indexed by the 
“bright pulse” clock tick. Subsequently, Bob’s computer 
control system transmits a file of index values (but not the 
corresponding bit values) to Alice over a wireless Ethernet 
link. Alice and Bob then use those detected bits as the raw 
bit sequences from which an error-free, secret key is 
distilled using further communications over the Ethernet 
channel. 
The QKD system was operated for several days over a 0.5- 
km horizontal outdoors atmospheric range from west 
(transmitter) to east (receiver) under daylight and nighttime 
conditions. A typical sample of 256 bits identified from 
50,000 initial bits under daylight conditions on November 
19, 1998 at 4.30pm, is shown in Figure 4, with Alice’s bit 
value marked as “A” and Bob’s as “B”. 
Clearly, errors must be removed before the bit strings can 
be used as key material. An efficient, interactive error 
correction procedure has been invented that can remove all 
errors from such data sets, with BERs of up to 15%[27]. 
However, for simplicity in our system we perform a two- 
dimensional block-parity error correction procedure over 
the Ethernet channel, which requires Alice to reveal some 
parity data about the bit strings. An eavesdropper could 
combine this information with any knowledge acquired 
through eavesdropping on the quantum transmissions. 
There are two ways of dealing with this issue. Alice and 
Bob could encrypt the parity information,[22] which would 
require them to have more secret bits initially, or they could 
perform additional privacy amplification to compensate for 
the information revealed,[28] which would produce a 
shorter key string. We perform a rudimentary privacy 
amplification procedure by dropping one row and one 
column from each matrix of data bits. A fully functional 
QKD system would incorporate a more sophisticated 
privacy amplification procedure. 
A 10101110 10011001 10001111 00001101 10011011 10110011 10011001 10000001 
B 10101110 10011001 1000111110001101 10011011 10110011 10011001 10100001 
A1100111001101010 10010111 10001110 10110000 11001110 11101101 10110011 
B 1100111001101010 10010111 10001110 10110000 11001110 1110110110110011 
A0100000001010001 000100000001001001000111 00010011 1100100001001001 
B 0100000101010001 000100000001001001000111 00010011 1100100001011001 
A01110101 1011001001110010 11101111 00101101 00010101 1001111100101111 
B l l l lO lOl  1011001001110010 1110111100101101 00010101 10011111 00101111 
Figure 4. A raw sample of bits identified by Alice and Bob as shared ones, using the B92 protocol over a 0.5-km 
daylight path. 
The above data set contains 5 errors (marked in bold type) 
and the bit error rate (BER) observed in the whole data set 
was approximately 1.6%. This would be regarded as 
unacceptably high in any conventional telecommunications 
application, but can be tolerated in QKD because of the 
secrecy of the bits. The effectiveness of our precise timing, 
wavelength and spatial filtering techniques for mitigating 
daylight background photon events is shown by the 
measured background rate of 1 event per 50,000 detector 
triggers, contributing only approximately 0.4% to the BER. 
Detector dark noise makes an even smaller contribution of 
approximately 0.1% to the BER. We conclude that the 
dominant contribution to the BER is from optical 
misalignment and intrinsic imperfections of the polarizing 
elements. 
The 5-kHz key rate is adequate for the onetime pad 
encryption of small image files that we have incorporated 
into our software control system[2]. Because the onetime 
pad method requires as many key bits as message bits, this 
key rate would not be adequate for more lengthy 
transmissions. Ths key rate would be acceptable and better 
used for generating session keys for use in other symmetric 
key cryptosystems because such keys need only be a few 
hundred bits in length. For example, Alice could encrypt a 
message, P, using an encryption algorithm, E, that depends 
on a secret key parameter, K, producing a ciphertext, C = 
EK(P), which she transmits to Bob. When Bob receives C he 
can invert the encryption process if he also knows K to 
produce the original message: P = Ek‘p). 
197 
The average photon number per optical data pulse for this 
data set was - 0.3, giving ai probability of 22% that the 
pulse contains exactly one photon, and a probability of 
25.9% that a pulse contains at least one photon. Thus, 
approximately 15% of the dletectable pulses contain more 
than one photon. (Such multi-photon pulses can trigger 
both of Bob’s SPCMs, but the rate for these “dual fire” 
errors is reduced below the key rate by the product of the 
BER and the multi-photon emission probability. We 
observed no dual fires in ,the entire 50-k bit sequence 
leading to the data in Figure 4. By monitoring the dual-fire 
rate, Alice and Bob could protect against the “Bob’s basis” 
attack outlined in Section 2.) So, a full security analysis of 
our system must take into account the possibility of Eve 
performing a beamsplitting attack to “tap off’ the 
occasional photon from two-photon pulses. (See ref.[ 181 for 
an analysis of this type of attack.) With appropriate privacy 
amplification procedures our system can be rendered secure 
against this and other individual bit attacks that are 
possible with existing technology. However, in the future a 
system such as ours could become vulnerable to a so-called 
QND attackJ29, 191 in which Eve uses a quantum non- 
demolition (QND) measurement to identify those pulses 
containing two photons. She could then determine Alice‘s 
bit value on these pulses, suppress the other pulses, and 
transmit a new photon to Bob, using a hypothetical lossless 
channel. Because Alice’s two-photon emission rate is larger 
than Bob‘s detection rate in our system, Bob would not 
notice a reduction in bit rate in this type of attack. 
Although the QND attack is not feasible today, this 
possibility should not be ignored. We plan eventually to 
remove this potential vulnerability by using a true single- 
photon light source instead of a weak pulsed laser source. 
We have designed our QKD system to operate at a 
wavelength near 770 nm where the atmospheric 
transmission from surface to space can be as high as 80%. 
Furthermore, at optical wavelengths the polarized QKD 
photons .can be faithfully transmitted because the 
depolarizing effects of Faraday rotation in the ionosphere 
are negligible. Because the atmosphere is only weakly 
dispersive, a bright timing pulse (which carries no key 
information) of - 100-ps duration can be used to set a short 
time window (- 1 ns) within which to look for the QKD 
photon. A single QKD-photon arriving - 100 ns after the 
bright pulse would find that the satellite had moved by less 
than 1 mm. 
To estimate the rate at which QKD photons would be 
detected at the satellite from the ground station transmitter, 
we assume 20-cm diameter optics at both the transmitter 
and satellite receiver, leading to a - 1-m diameter 
diffraction-limited spot size at a 300-km altitude satellite. 
However, there will be beam-wander owing to atmospheric 
turbulence, which at night in a high desert location such as 
Los Alamos can be 1 to 5 arc seconds.[30] For this analysis 
we assume a worst case “seeing” of - 10 times the 
diffraction limit (i.e. 10 arc seconds of wander) so that the 
photon collection efficiency at the satellite is - lo4. Thus, 
with a laser pulse rate of 10 MHz,  one photon-per-pulse on 
average, an atmospheric transmission of - SO%, a 65% 
detector efficiency and allowing for the 25% intrinsic 
efficiency of the B92 QKD protocol, a key generation rate 
of - 250 Hz is feasible. (There would be a factor of two 
higher key rate with the BB84 protocol.) 
4. QUANTUM my D I S T D ~ O N  TO SATELLITES Higher key rates would be possible under more typical 
seeing conditions. Also, with a simple beam tilt feedback 
Our proof-of-concept QKD demonstrations over horizontal 
terrestrial paths provide strong evidence that surface-to- 
satellite QKD will be possible. This is because the optical 
influence of turbulence is the major hurdle to be overcome 
in surface-to-satellite QKD, and the turbulent effects occur 
predominantly within the lowest 2 km of the atmosphere. 
Ground-to-satellite, satellite-to-ground and satellite-to- 
satellite QKD should all be possible, for both low-earth 
orbit (LEO) and geostationary satellites. For illustration we 
will here estimate the key generation capability of QKD 
between a ground station and a LEO satellite (- 300 km 
altitude) in one overhead pass (duration - 8 minutes). Our 
objective will be to produce multiple new cryptovariables, 
each of several hundred bits in length. We will assume that 
system, as used in laser communications systems, the beam 
could be locked onto the satellite, increasing the key rate to - 40 kHz. A retro-reflector on the satellite would return a 
portion of each bright pulse to the transmitter with a - 2 ms 
delay, which is much shorter than the time-scale of 
atmospheric turbulence fluctuations. (From the ground, the 
satellite would move through an angle of only - 50 micro 
radians in this time.) It would also be possible to place the 
QKD transmitter on the satellite and the receiver on the 
ground. Because most of the optical influence of 
atmospheric turbulence would occur in the final - 2-km of 
the beam path, a higher key rate would then be possible 
even without tilt control. 
the QKD transmitter (Alice) is at the ground station and 
the receiver (Bob) is on the satellite. (Similar arguments 
support the viability of satellite-to-ground QKD 
transmissions, which would have key rate and hardware 
advantages.) 
To determine if this key rate is useful we must also consider 
the error rate. We first consider errors arising from 
background photons arriving at the satellite on a nighttime 
orbit with a full moon and under (poor) 10-arc second 
seeing conditions. A typical radiance observed at the 
198 
satellite at the transmission wavelength would then be - 1 mW m-? str-’ pm-’ or - 4x10” photons s-’ m-’ str-’ pm-’. 
We will assume that the receiver “sees” a solid angle - fivetimes the apparent size of the source (i.e. 5 arc 
seconds) and that there is a 1-nm bandwidth interference 
filter placed in front of the detector, giving a background 
photon arrival rate of -225:Hz’.(full moon). (For 
comparison, detector dark counts would be - ‘ 5 0  Hz.) 
However, the single-photon detector would only be 
triggered by precursor bright pulses impinging on the 
satellite, giving a detector trigger rate of - 90 kHz (without 
beam tilt control). With a 1-ns time window applied to the 
detector, the (fractional) bit error rate (BER) from 
background photons would therefore be ,- 5 ~ 1 0 - ~  (full 
moon). With beam tilt control the fractional BER from 
background photons would be - 4x10”. In practice, errors 
from optical component limitations and misalignments will 
be larger, amounting to a 1 to 2 percent BER based on our 
experience. 
From this simple analysis using worst-case estimates, we 
see that QKD between a ground station and a low-earth 
orbit satellite should be possible on nighttime orbits. 
During the several minutes that a satellite would be in view 
of the ground station there would be adequate time to 
acquire the satellite, perform the QKD transmissions for 
1 minute, and produce a minimum of - 10,000 raw bits, 
from which a shorter error-free key stream of several 
thousand bits would be produced after error correction and 
privacy amplification. Under more typical seeing conditions 
or with beam tilt control implemented, up to 10’ key bits 
could be produced in the 1-minute QKD transmission. A 
cryptographically useful quantity of key material could 
therefore be generated between a ground station and a LEO 
(or geostationary) satellite using available technology. 
(Satellite to satellite QKD transmissions would also be 
possible.) 
On daytime orbits the background radiance would be - 4,000 times larger (- 2xlOI9 photons s-’ m-’ str-’ pm-I) 
than under a full moon, but a narrow atomic vapor filter 
(- nm filter width) [31] would keep the background 
photon arrival rate to only - 10 kHz. Assuming a typical 
daytime seeing of 10 arc seconds,[30] the key rate would be - 250 Hz, and the BER from background photons would 
then be - 2x10” (without tilt control). QKD is therefore 
also likely to be possible on daytime orbits. 
5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents the first practical demonstration that 
point-to-point free-space QKD is feasible under daylight 
conditions outside a laboratory, achieving a realistic 
propagation distance of 0.5 km that was only limited by the 
length of the test range. We are now in the process of 
improving the system and anticipate completion of a 1.6- 
km daylight demonstration in 1999, possibly increasing to 
7 km later. Free-space QKD could therefore be used in 
conjunction with terrestrial laser communications systems 
that are now commercially available. Our results also 
provide strong evidence that cryptographic key material 
could be generated on demand between a ground station 
and a satellite (or between two satellites) using QKD, 
allowing a satellite to be securely re-keyed on orbit. 
The development of QKD for satellite communications 
would represent a major step forward in both security and 
convenience. If the key material supplied at launch should 
be used up during normal operations or compromised, an 
issue arises of how to securely re-key a satellite on-orbit. In 
contrast to conventional key distribution methods whose 
security is based on assumptions of computational 
complexity, QKD is a physics-based technique and as such 
needs to be experimentally validated under the conditions 
of its intended use. To our knowledge the primary physics 
requirements for this application of QKD, namely the 
transmission and detection of single photons between a 
ground station and an orbital asset, have never been 
demonstrated. However, many of the optical acquisition, 
pointing, tracking and adaptive optics techniques developed 
for laser communications with satellites can be directly 
applied to t h s  problem. Therefore, we believe that a 
surface-to-satellite QKD demonstration experiment would 
be a logical and realistic next step in the development of 
this new field. We believe that the development of QKD for 
re-keying of satellites on-orbit would be prudent, so as to 
have an alternative to traditional key distribution methods 
that can potentially become vulnerable to unanticipated 
algorithmic or computational advances. Furthermore, with 
the use of QKD potential adversaries would have to 
contemplate high-risk active attacks as opposed to the 
purely passive attacks that are possible with conventional 
methods of key distribution. 
Satellite QKD could also be used to provide secure key 
distribution to two ground-based users (Alice and Bob) who 
do not have access to optical fiber communications and who 
are not within line-of-sight: they could each generate 
independent quantum keys with the same satellite, which 
would then transmit the XOR of the keys to Bob. Bob 
would then XOR this bit string with his key to produce a 
key that agrees with Alice’s. Alice and Bob could then use 
their shared key for encrypted communications over any 
convenient channel[32]. This procedure could extend the 
security and convenience of QKD to widely separated 
ground-based users. 
199 
6 .  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
It is a pleasure to thank Charles Bennett, Gilles Brassard, 
Thomas Draper, Norbert Lutkenhaus, J. David Murley, 
John Rarity, Robert Shea, Duncan Simpson and Elynor 
Twyeffort for helpful discussions. We especially thank 
Kevin McCabe for preparing Figure 2. 
REFERENCES 
1. R. J. Hughes et al., Contentporaiy Physics 36, 149 
(1995); C. H. Bennett et al., Scientific American 257 
no.10, 50 (1992). 
2. R. J. Hughes and J. E. Nordholt, Physics World, May 
1999,3 1 (1 999). 
3. J. F. Clauser, Phdvs Rev D 9, 853 (1974); P. Grangier et 
al., Euro Phys Lett 1, 17.3 (1986). 
4. W. K. Wooters and W. H. Zurek, Nature 299, 802 
(1982); P. W. Milonni and M. L. Hardies, Phys. Lett. 
92A, 321 (1982). 
5. C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, Proceedings ofIEEE 
International Conference on Computers, Systems and 
Signal Processing, Bangalore (New York, IEEE, 
1984). 
6. A. K. Ekert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67,661 (1991). 
7. C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, SIGACT NEWS 20, no. 
4, 78 (1989); C. H. Bennett et al., J. Crypto. 5, 3 
(1 992). 
8. C. H. Bennett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68,3121 (1992). 
9. P. D. Townsend, J. G. Rarity and P. Tapster, Elec. Lett. 
29, 634 (1994); P. D. Townsend, Elec. Lett. 30, 809 
(1994); Opt Lett. 20, 1695 (1995); P. D. Townsend, 
Nature 385,47 (1997). 
10. A. Muller et al., Europh,vs. Lett. 23, 383 (1993); A. 
Muller et al., Europhys. Lett. 33, 335 (1996); G. 
Ribordy et al., Elec. Lett. 34,2116 (1998). 
1 1 .  J. D. Franson and H. Ilves, Appl. Optics 33, 2949 
(1994). 
12. R. J. Hughes et al., Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
1109,329 (1996). 
13. R. J. Hughes et al., PROC SPIE 3076,2 (1997). 
14. R. J. Hughes et al., “Practical quantum key distribution 
over a 48-km optical fiber network”, quant-ph/9904038, 
to be published in Journal of Modern Optics. 
15. See, for example, R. M. Gagliardi and S .  Karp, Optical 
Communications (Wiley, New York, 1995) 
16. B. C. Jacobs and J. D. Franson, Opt. Lett. 21, 1845 
17. W. T. Buttler et al., Phys Rev A57,2379 (1998). 
18. W. T. Buttler et al., Phys Rev Lett 81,3283 (1998). 
19. N. Lutkenhaus, “Estimates for practical quantum 
cryptography,“ quant-pW9806008 (1 998). 
20. A. K. Ekert et al., Phys Rev A 50, 1047 (1994). 
21. C. H. Bennett et al., IEEE Trans. In$ Theory 41, 1915 
(1 996). 
(1 995). 
200 
22. M. N. Wegman and J. L. Carter, “New hash functions 
and their use in authentication and set equality,” J. 
Comp. Sys. Sci., 22,265-279 (1981). 
23. G. S .  Vernam, Trans. Am. IEE 45,295 (1926). 
24. See, for example: C. K. Hong and L. Mandel, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 56, 58 (1986); J. Kim et al., Nature 397, 500 
(1 999). 
25. J. G. Walker et al., Qtrant. Opt. 1, 75 (1989). 
26. S. F. Seward et al., @rant. Opt. 3, 201 (1991). 
27. G. Brassard and L. Salvail, “Secret-key reconciliation 
by public discussion,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science 765,4 10 (1 994). 
28. C. Cachin and U. M. Maurer, J. Cvpto. 10, 97 (1997). 
29. H. P. Yuen, Quant Senzicl Opt 8, 939( 1996). 
30. K. E. Wilson et al., Proc. SPIE 2990,23 (1997). 
3 1 .  H. Zhilin, X. Sun, and X. Zeng, Opt. Contmunications 
101, 175 (1993). 
32. E. Biham et al., “Cryptography with quantum public 
file,” (1 994). 
obtained his Ph.D. in Theoretical Elementary Particle 
Physics from the University of Liverpool, England in 1978 
and has held research positions at: Oxford University and 
The Queen’s College, Oxford; the California Institute of 
Technology; and CERN, Geneva, Switzerland. He has held 
distinguished visiting scientist positions at Oxford 
University (Dr. Lee Fellow, Christ Church, 1994) and at 
the University of Oslo, Norway (1993). In 1996 and 1998 
he was awarded Los Alamos Distinguished Performance 
Awards for his quantum cryptography research, and in 
1997 he was awarded the Los Alamos Fellows’ Prize for his 
work on quantum information science. He became a Fellow 
of the American Physical Society in 1999. 
