Demonstration of a High- Altitude Laser Crosslink1 
1Lt Daniel 3. Petrovich, Robert A Gill, and Robert J. Feldmann 
United States Air Force Research Laboratory 
2241 Avionics Circle Suite I 
Wright-Patterson AFB OH 45433-733 
dani el .De trov ich @ s ti. wpatl~. af, nu 1 
937-255-9614 
Abstract-The requirement to send ever increasing amounts 
of tactical military information between sensor aircraft and 
information processing facilities for command and control 
purposes has begun to reach the physical limits of present 
RF data links, even when data compression is employed. 
Use of laser data links is under consideration by the United 
States Air Force and development of an airbome laser data 
link is under way by the United States Air Force Research 
Laboratory Sensors Directorate (AFRLISN). This 
technology development program is being conducted in two 
phases. The first phase included the design and evaluation of 
a laser data link ground demonstration. This demonstration 
was carried out in August and September, 1995 between a 
laser terminal on Mount (Mt.) Mauna Loa on the island of 
Hawaii and a similar laser terminal on Mt. Haleakala on the 
island of Maui located 150 kilometers (km) away. The 
terminals used in this ground demonstration were capable of 
1.1 gigabits per second (GBPS), full duplex communication 
with bit error rates (BERs) of or better. A motion and 
vibration base was used to simulate flight conditions, while 
the terminal instrumentation was used to collect atmospheric 
effects data. Results of the ground demonstration, including 
signal acquisition, tracking stability, and scintillation were 
used to modify the design of the laser terminal for follow-on 
air-to-air operations. The second phase of the W S N  
development program under way is the transition of the 
ground demonstration results into a refined terminal design 
for installation into two business class jet aircraft. Right 
demonstration of the laser data link between these kinematic 
aerial platforms will be performed between two T-39A 
(Sabreliner 40) test aircraft at distances up to 500 km and 
altitudes up to 40kft (12.2km). A ground-based field test of 
these two refined laser terminals is planned for November 
1999 between Mt. Palomar in San Diego, CA and a test site 
50 km away. The installation of high-bandwidth laser data 
link terminals for communication between high-altitude 
aerial platforms provides for two advances. First, the ability 
to use advanced airborne sensors generating very large 
amounts of raw data in near real-time. Second, command 
and control decisions can be made based on a more timely 
and comprehensive database of information. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
3. SYSTEM DESCRIITION 
4. SYSTEM TESTING 
5. CONCLUSION 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The modem battlefield uses a variety of airborne sensors to 
gather data on enemy assets and capabilities. Very large 
amounts of data can be collected from some sensors such as 
a synthetic aperture radar (SAR). Storing the collected data 
on the sensor platform requires additional electronics with 
the attendant space, weight and power requirements. Real- 
time transmission of the raw collected data off the platform 
to a safe point is advantageous in reducing the sensor asset 
cost, increasing sensor payload and reducing the probability 
of data loss. Currently, sensor platforms are limited to using 
radio frequency (FW) means for transmitting the raw data. 
RF techniques and their associated hardware are beginning 
to limit sensor capability due to the their size, weight, power 
requirement and maximum data rate limitations. Efforts to 
use microwaves for transmitting compressed data from 
airborne sensors have been under development and this 
work should provide a large increase in data rate over 
present RF techniques. However, laser data links are able to 
provide major performance advantages in weight, size, 
power, data security and data rate capability over 
microwaves. Laser data links do have the recognized 
limitation of being degraded by weather and that may limit 
’ U.S. Govemment work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
Figure 1. T39A Test Aircraft with 
Laser Communications Terminal 
67 
Figure 2. Turret mechanical design 
their atmospheric use to applications where transmission is 
relatively certain, such as at mid (3OW9km) to high 
altitudes (65kfd19km). This may not be a significant 
limitation since these altitudes are the normal operational 
environment of the aerial sensor platforms. 
The development of laser crosslinks for use on high altitude 
sensor platforms provides a means for the creation of a 
wideband inter-theater communication network. 
Conceptually, an overhead network of high altitude manned 
and unmanned sensor/communication platforms can 
crosslink data via a modulated laser channel to a single 
higher altitude platform that provides multiple access service 
to the theater system. This high altitude platform can also 
provide a reachback capability by serving as a satellite 
communications node. The satellite communication 
connectivity may serve to pass secure information into and 
out of the theater and be provided by a combination of 
commercial and military service providers to achieve the 
aggregate information transfer required for the network. 
Earlier laser data link work by AFRL/SN on the HAVE 
LACE (Laser Airborne Communications Experiment) 
Program in the mid-1980s demonstrated data rates of 19.2 
kilobits per second (KBPS). These relatively large terminals 
were flown on two KC-135A aircraft at altitudes of 20 kft 
(6.1 km) to 25 kft (7.6 km) with link ranges out to 160 km. 
The most significant result of the HAVE LACE flights was 
the difficulty of initial signal acquisition between the two 
moving platfonns, since it had to be performed manually. 
However, once signal acquisition was accomplished, 
tracking proved to be robust and communications 
performance was consistently measured at bit error rate 
(BER) or better. 
Work by AFRWSN in September 1995 demonstrated laser 
communications at 1.1 GBPS over a range of 150 km from 
Mt. Haleakala on the island of Maui to Mt. Mauna Loa on 
the big island of Hawaii at an altitude of approximately 10 
kft (3.05 km). This experiment was performed with one 
laser communication terminal (LCT) mounted on a motion 
platform simulating the flight and angular vibrational motion 
of a high altitude aircraft. The other LCT was mounted on a 
stationary platform. The two LCTs used for this ground 
demonstration were originally built by ThermoTrex Corp. of 
San Diego, California for the Ballistic Missile Defense 
Organization (BMDO) Innovative Science and Technology 
(IST) office to evaluate space based laser crosslinks and 
were only slightly modified for the Hawaii ground 
demonstration. Automatic signal acquisition and beam 
tracking were successfully accomplished throughout the 
ground demonstration. Communication error rates of better 
than were achieved during simulated motion. It was 
apparent from the overall system operation that terminal 
design changes would be required to operate a laser data 
link in a kinematic airbome environment. 
Building upon the successes shown in the Hawaii ground 
demonstration, AFRWSN is nearing the completion of a 
program to develop a LCT which will be mounted in a turret 
on the underside of the fuselage of a T-39A (or Sabreliner 
40) test aircraft (Figure 1). Two of these aircraft will be 
used in the summer of 2001 to demonstrate full duplex laser 
data link communications at data rates of 1 GBPS, at ranges 
between 50 and 500 km and at altitudes up to 40 kft 
(12.2km). These flights will also be used to collect data 
about atmospheric and airflow effects upon laser beam 
propagation, scintillation and jitter. This data may then be 
used to better interlace and error-correct the data stream. 
2. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
The primary performance goal for the LCT system is to 
communicate between two aircraft at an altitude of 40 kft 
(12.2km) and ranges between 50 to 500 km at data rates of 1 
GBPS with a BER of or less. The time to acquire and 
establish the link is 10 seconds from the master control 
aircraft's initial cue. The acquisition process requires the 
sharing of global positioning systedinertial navigation 
system (GPS/INS) position data via a FW data link which 
will be established long enough to exchange a single data 
packet on aircraft position, velocity, and GPS time. A 
reacquisition algorithm will automatically engage when 
beacon tracking is lost. The LCT must be able to operate 
within temperature ranges of -62' to +55" C and be able to 
survive at low altitudes in humidity varying from near zero 
to heavy rain. 
3. SYSTEM DESCRIP~ON 
The new LCT being developed by AFFWSN is mounted in 
a two axis, 47 centimeter (cm) diameter turned aluminum 
turret which is located in the escape hatch area on the lower 
fuselage of a T-39A test aircraft in front of the leading edge 
of the wing. The turret is designed to have k190" of rotation 
in azimuth and +lo" to -90" of rotation in elevation. This 
will provide a greater than hemispherical field of regard 
(FOR) during flight operations. The turret has a 20cm 
diameter spherical glass window and can be actuated to a 
protected rear facing position during takeoff and landing. 
The turret assembly (Figure 2) and its mounting components 
68 
COARSE BEACON 
LASER DlOM 
LASER D!ODE 
BEACOk LASER 
FINE TRACKER COMMUNICATION 
COMMUNICATIONS 
TRANSMIT OPTICS 
4 PLACES 
\FAST STEERING 
MIRROR 
COARSE BEACON 
UWICATlON/CDARSE 
CWE TRACKER 
RECEIVE APERTURE 
COMMUNICATION v LASER 
TRANSMIT APERTURE 
Figure 3. Optical bench 
are made of 6061-T6 aluminum to minimize weight and 
fabrication cost. The turret drive mechanism uses a gear 
drive on both axes with a steel ring gear on the turret axis 
and a steel pinion gear on the drive motor. The turret drive 
motors are brushless direct current (DC) with an output 
torque of 13 inch-pounds at 420 rotations per minute (rpm). 
Turret angular position is determined using two speed 
resolvers having an accuracy of + lo  arc seconds (arcsec). 
The turret is designed to track through zenith or nadir as the 
LCT assembly can be mounted on the top or bottom of an 
operational host aircraft. 
assembly with telescopes 
The optical subsystem (Figure 3) consists of a 
communication and coarse tracking telescope with its array 
sensor, an atomic line filter (ALF) and communication 
sensors, two beacon lasers, a fine tracking telescope and 
sensor, four communication lasers, a visible viewing camera, 
a fast steering mirror, a two axis rate sensing gyro, and the 
optical beam train elements for the lasers and fine tracking 
receiver. Each element is attached to a composite structure 
called the optical bench. This complex structure is 
fabricated with low coefficient of expansion (near zero) 
carbon composite material and uses Invar 36 inserts for 
mounting the various optical hardware elements. 
69 
Electronics for operation of the two charge coupled device 
(CCD) sensors, the communication sensors, the beacon 
lasers, the ALF and various temperature and pressure 
sensors are also mounted on the optical bench assembly. 
The optical bench assembly is mounted on a two axis 
aluminum gimbal having a motion of approximately k6’ on 
each axis. Both axes of the gimbal are parallel to the 
azimuth and elevation axis of the turret assembly. The 
gimbal is positioned using two voice coil actuators on the 
elevation axis and one on the azimuth axis. Single speed 
resolvers having an accuracy of +IO arcsec are used on each 
axis to determine angular position. 
The turret assembly (Figure 4,7) is mounted on an aluminum 
structure that fits into the escape hatch opening of the T-39A 
aircraft thus requiring minimal modification to the aircraft 
structure. Internal turret pressure seeks equilibrium with the 
outside atmosphere and a pressure bulkhead at the escape 
hatch provides the outside air-to-cabin interface. This 
bulkhead provides the mounting surface for the turret 
assembly, servo drive electronics and various data interface 
electronics. This bulkhead also serves as a closely coupled 
mount for the GPSANU, which provides an attitude 
reference for LCT stabilization in addition to providing 
aircraft location and velocity for terminal acquisition. The 
rest of the LCT system electronics are mounted in an 
equipment rack within the cabin of the aircraft. 
This equipment module contains a VERSA Module Europe 
(VME) 6U rack for the system processor, the quad digital 
signal processor, the array sensor interface electronics and 
equipment for multiplexing video and audio signals onto the 
laser communication system. The equipment rack also 
contains the flight test instrumentation system, a RF 
transceiver for communication with the other test aircraft 
and power sequencing equipment. A laptop computer is 
connected to the LCT equipment for operator control and 
<.,& 
Figure 4. Turret mechanical design 
Figure 5.  Turret electronics support rack 
diagnostic evaluation of the system. A second laptop 
computer is connected to the flight test instrumentation 
system to display real-time flight test data and control the 
onboard data recorders. 
Link Budgets 
Communication link budgets were calculated using a 
comprehensive system model developed to assist in 
specifying the LCT system’s physical parameters (beam 
divergence, aperture size, field of view, etc.) as well as the 
expected performance of the laser air-to-air link. Part of the 
input to the model included calculations of atmospheric 
transmission performed with PCModWin 3, a moderate 
resolution (2 cm-’) model of atmospheric transmission. The 
model input included an “aged volcanic” stratospheric 
aerosol, and should therefore represent a “worst case” 
condition, barring any additional aerosol input to the 
stratosphere, for the flight demonstration in the summer of 
1999. 
Figure 6. shows the calculated BER as a function of range 
for two aircraft flying at 40 kft (12.2km). The signal 
modulation is simple on-off keying (OOK) with binary 1s 
and Os represented as fixed levels with additive Gaussian 
noise. Binary 1 is detected as signal received above a fixed 
threshold. The probability of error for any received signal 
level is determined by integrating the probability 
distributions for 1 and 0 using a given threshold value. An 
acceptable raw BER is a combined probability for Type I 
and Type I1 errors of This requires a signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR) of approximately 7-9:1, depending on the 
threshold setting. 
Link margin is the ratio of received optical power to that 
necessary to achieve the required performance. In the case 
of the acquisition and tracking channels, a S N R  of 
approximately 1O:l was deemed necessary to provide the 
requisite centroiding precision for robust tracking. Signal 
levels resulting in 1O:l SNR therefore have 0 dE? of link 
margin. The requisite signal level for communications was 
70 
After the coarse tracker locks on to the coarse tracking 
beacon, the fine tracking beacon appears within the FOV of 
the fine tracking sensor. The fine tracking servo controls the 
pointing of the communication lasers and the fine tracking 
sensor to the LOS with the use of a piezoelectrically 
operated fast steering mirror. The fine tracking sensor pixel 
FOV is 20 microrads giving an array FOV of 640 microrads. 
This servo will provide 7 microrads rms pointing accuracy 
keeping the communication laser beam (60 microrads (l/e’) 
-7.0 beam divergence) on the communication receiver. This 
servo works together with the turret and coarse tracking 
servo to keep the fast steering mirror operating in the center 
of its dynamic range and the turret window centered on the 
0.0 
-1 .o 
-2.0 
9.0 
4.0 
f5 E -5.0 
3 
4.0 
8.0  
9.0 
-10.0 moving apertures. 
600 700 8 0  gw 1wo 1100 1290 1300 
Range 
System Servos 
The LCT system servos are composed of five separate Figure 6.  Calculated bit error rate 
determined by explicitly calculating the BER for any 
received signal. A signal level with a resultant BER of 
has 0 dB of link margin. The design goal for the program is 
to provide greater than 10 dB of link margin in each mode 
(i.e., acquisition, tracking and communications) at a range of 
400 km and an altitude of 40 ft (12.2km). 
Link Acquisition and Tracking 
The GPSANU that the LCT system uses is a Honeywell H- 
7646 Embedded GPS Inertial (EGI) unit. This unit uses 
GPS P-Code to determine its attitude, location, velocity, and 
the time. This data is transmitted between the host and 
target aircraft using an ultrahigh frequency (UHF) RF data 
link. The host RF transceiver that is requesting data from 
the target RF transceiver initiates this data transfer. After 
the initial position data is transferred, the system processor 
algorithm generates the correct turret azimuth and elevation 
angles. A vector describing the position of each aircraft is 
continually updated to provide azimuth and elevation 
positions during the 10 second search time. System pointing 
accuracy is estimated to be k 3  milliradians (millirads) which 
is sufficiently accurate that the beacon will immediately 
appear on the receiving terminal when its initial pointing 
maneuver concludes. The acquisition coarse track receiver 
has a field of view (FOV) of 20.5 millirads with a pixel FOV 
of 80 microradians (microrads). A spiral scan about the 
inter-turret pointing vector is used for search if track is lost. 
If after 10 seconds the beacon is not found a new position is 
transmitted via the RF link and the process is repeated until 
acquisition occurs. 
Upon acquisition, the coarse tracker provides continuous 
tracking line of sight (LOS) data during communication to 
point the communication receiving aperture to within 20 
microrads root mean squared (rms) of the LOS. This 
ensures that the received communication signal remains 
within the FOV of the communication sensors. 
servos or servo arrangements: a turret servo, a stabilization 
servo, an acquisition servo, a coarse track servo and the fine 
track servo. A Type I1 turret servo positions the turret about 
the turret azimuth and elevation axes. In the acquisition 
mode the Type I1 servo positions the turret to the angular 
position calculated by the Digital System Processor (DSP) 
as indicated by the resolvers. In the coarse or fine tracking 
mode it is slaved to the LOS. The stabilization servo 
utilizes a two-axis rate-sensing gyro to stabilize the laser 
optical bench against base motion. The stabilization servo is 
caged around the large gimbal rather than its own gimbal 
thus improving base motion rejection. The acquisition servo 
uses a calculated azimuth and elevation angle. The resolvers 
output angle position for the servo error to drive the angular 
position to the calculated angle. This servo drives the 
difference between the calculated azimutWelevation angle 
and the actual angle from the resolvers to zero. Once the 
optical bench assembly is at this angle and the coarse beacon 
signal is observed, a centroid is calculated and the coarse 
tracking servo begins tracking the target aircraft LCT. The 
centroid represents the target aircraft LOS. The acquisition 
servo acts to align the target LOS to the system boresight. 
The coarse tracking boresight is the position on the coarse 
tracker that all of the LCT system apertures are aligned in 
parallel. The difference between the target LOS and the 
boresight represents the tracking error, which the servo 
drives to zero. The fine tracking servo consisting of the fine 
track sensor and the fast steering mirror have an alignment 
boresight position that is parallel to the LCT communication 
lasers’ LOS. The center position of the fast steering mirror 
is parallel to the coarse tracking sensor boresight position. 
Once the target aircraft LCT fine tracking beacon is received 
on the fine track sensor a centroid is calculated and the fine 
tracking servo points the steering mirror. The difference 
between the target LCT LOS (centroid) and the boresight is 
applied to the fast steering mirror driving the target LCT 
LOS to the boresight position. The designed closed loop 
bandwidth for this servo is greater than 300 Hz. 
71 
Coarse Track Receiver 
The LCT coarse tracking receiver uses a 288 x 384 
Thomson TH7863M CCD array detector operating at a 
frame rate of 118 frames per second. The coarse tracker 
array sensor is positioned at the primary focus of the large 
telescope. The optical signal is sensed through an ALF that 
has an effective transmission bandwidth of approximately 
0.02 nanometers (nm) at a wavelength of 852 nm. The ALF 
uses a Cesium (Cs) cell that is heated to 105OC and has an 
axial DC magnetic field of approximately 100 Gauss. The 
ALF is placed between two crossed linear polarizers. The 
CCD electronics are mounted at the telescope primary focus 
and the output signal is sent via fiber optics to the interface 
electronics within the aircraft cabin. 
Fine Track Receiver 
The LCT fine track receiver uses a 32 x 32 Dalsa CCD array 
detector operating at a frame rate of 10,000 frames per 
second. This CCD array is mounted on the optical bench 
assembly at the end of the beam train for the fine track 
sensor. The CCD signal is interfaced to the cabin system 
electronics through fiber optics. Noise levels are 
approximately 154 electrons per pixel. 
Communication Lasers 
The LCT system has four individual communication lasers 
which are combined into two channels with two lasers 
combined for each channel. Each channel has a peak output 
power of greater than 200 milliwatts at the aperture exit. 
The two channels are circularly polarized providing a 
clockwise (CW) and counter-clockwise (CCW) beam, each 
with 600 megabits per second (MBPS) data rate. The 
modulation is on-off keying (OOK). The transmitted beam 
divergence is 60 microrads at the l/e2 full width. Each laser 
must be aligned to each other to less than 2 microrads in the 
far field. With a magnification ratio of 6 between the far 
field and the laser source, this requires a beam alignment of 
approximately 12 microrads. 
Communication Receiver 
The LCT communication receiver detectors are placed at the 
secondary focus of the large telescope. A dichoric mirror 
reflects the incoming 810 nm signal at the center of the 
primary reflector back to a pinhole at the center of the 
secondary reflector. The circularly polarized incoming 
signal is linearly polarized and is split into its two 
multiplexed channels and focused onto two avalanche photo 
diodes (APD). These diodes, with preamplifiers, are 
mounted on the secondary obscuration along with their 
associated optics. On the bulkhead mounting plate in the 
passenger cabin are the high voltage power supplies, signal 
conditioning amplifiers and automatic gain control (AGC) 
circuitry. The AGC provides an additional 20 dB dynamic 
range to the AF'D's dynamic range of 26 dB with a 
bandwidth of greater than 1 kHz. The APD preamplifier 
bandwidth is in the range of 440 to 470 MHz. Sensitivity at 
BER is approximately -45 dBm. Background current is 
in the range of 20 nanoamperes with an illuminated noise 
equivalent power (NEP) of 0.2 picowatts per Hz. 
Fast Steering Mirror 
The LCT fast steering mirror utilizes three multi-layer 
piezoelectric transducer (PZT) actuators providing a stroke 
of 13.5 micrometers (microns) at 100 volts. The actuators 
are geometrically positioned on the comers of an equilateral 
triangular with spacing of 5.36 mm from the x and y center 
of deflection. The actuators are adhesively fastened to the 25 
mm diameter steering mirror and the steering mirror base. 
Bending of the mirror does occur but is well within the 
permitted optical figure for the deflection system optics. A 
mirror angular deflection of 1.6 millirads (3.2 millirads in 
object space) is achieved. The lowest mechanical resonance 
is greater than 4 kHz and angular noise with the drive 
electronics is less than 0.08 microrads rms. 
Beacon Lasers 
Two different beacon lasers operating at a wavelength of 
852 nm are used. One is a Cs locked beam for acquisition 
with a wide beam divergence of 6 millirads and the other is 
a beam with narrow divergence (640 microrads) for fine 
tracking. Both lasers are operated continuous wave (cw) 
with approximately 130 milliwatts of output power each. 
The Cs locked beacon uses a distributed Bragg reflector 
laser as it can be more easily tuned to the Cs absorption line. 
A small portion of the laser output is diverted through a Cs 
cell which is controlled to the same temperature as the 
receiving ALF and focused onto a detector. The laser diode 
current is set to that minimum current on the detector which 
occurs at the absorption line (852.54 nm) of the Cs vapor 
cell. The micro-controller establishes this current and then 
controls the beacon laser current tuning its wavelength to the 
Cs absorption line. Both beacons utilize laser diode 
temperature control. 
System Optics 
The LCT optical subsystem (Figure 7) includes: the Coarse 
Tracking Beacon, the Coarse Tracking Receiver, the Fine 
Tracking Beacon, the Fine Tracking Receiver, two 
Communication Transmitters, the Communication Receiver 
and the Visible Monitoring Camera. All of these subsystems 
are mounted on the optical bench which is within the turret 
assembly. 
The Communication Receiver and Coarse Tracking 
Receiver share a 134 mm diameter f/5 Maksutov collection 
telescope. This telescope consists of a spherical aberration 
correcting and antireflection (AR) coated meniscus window; 
a fA.2 gold coated spherical primary mirror and a U1.5 gold 
coated spherical secondary mirror (the reflectorized central 
obscuration of the Maksutov corrector). The corrector and 
primary mirror are mounted in a composite tube with a 
composite spacer for thermal stability. The two beam paths 
72 
are separated by a dichoric beamsplitter that sits in the 
central hole of the primary mirror. This dichroic transmits 
the 852 nm tracking signal and reflects the 810 nm 
communication signal. The coarse tracking optics and CCD 
are positioned behind the primary mirror in a composite tube 
and consist of the following in order of light propagation: 
Dichroic beamsplitter (852 / 810 nm) 
Interference filter 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
1/4 waveplate 
Polarcor linear polarizer 
Atomic line filter cell 
Polarcor linear polarizer 
Variable retarder (liquid crystal) 
Polarcor linear polarizer 
Imaging lenses 
CCD 
The communication receiver optics are positioned in the 
central obscuration of the corrector plate and consist of the 
following in order of light propagation: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6.  
7. 
8. 
9. 
Pinhole aperture (field stop) 
Collimating lens 
Interference filter (20 nm) 
1/4 waveplate 
Polarizing beamsplitter cube 
Right angle prism 
Fold mirrors 
Imaging lens 
APD 
All of the optical signals propagate through the meniscus 
turret window. The 20 cm diameter turret window is AR 
coated for 800 - 860 nm with a durable military- 
specification coating that is designed to withstand the 
anticipated operational environment. The window was 
designed to have nearly no optical power (effective focal 
length - infinity) and to have its outer radius of curvature 
matching that of the turret ball. This design minimizes 
optical pointing error as the optical bench moves through 
scan and it minimizes extemal aerodynamic flow 
disturbances. 
The Fine Tracking Receiver collection telescope is a E/2 
afocal 6x Dall-Kirkham reflecting telescope. The elliptical 
primary mirror and the spherical secondary mirror are gold 
coated. The secondary mirror is mounted and centered on 
an AR coated plane parallel window. The telescope optics 
are mounted in a composite tube. The collimated output of 
the telescope is reflected off of the fast steering mirror with 
a nominal spot size of 6 mm. The beam is converted to a 
linear polarized beam and then passed through a liquid 
crystal variable retarder and a linear polarizer for signal 
level control. Then the beam is imaged by the Fine Track 
CCD using a simple telephoto lens system. 
Figure 7. Partially assembled laser communication terminal 
The Communication Transmitter consists of four separate 
laser sources, two for each communication channel, which 
are combined through polarizing beamsplitters into two 
output beams and then through quarter waveplates to 
convert them into CW and CCW circular polarized beams. 
These two beams are then relayed through the fast steering 
mirror to the output telescopes. Using a common fast 
steering mirror surface for the communication lasers and the 
fine tracking receiver assures that all have the same LOS 
within the accuracy of their alignment. The communication 
lasers are nominally 4 mm in diameter at the fast steering 
mirror. The output telescopes are afocal 6x Galilean 
telescopes using spherical AR coated singlet refractors. 
The Fine and Coarse Tracking Beacons use a simple multi- 
element commercial off the shelf (COTS) beam expander 
lens with appropriate AR coatings. The signals are 
transmitted through quarter wave waveplates to circularize 
their polarization. 
The Visible Monitoring Camera is a simple COTS lens 
coupled to a COTS RS-170 analog CCD camera. This 
camera is coaligned with the other subsystems on the optical 
bench and indicates which direction the optical bench is 
pointed to the flight test engineers for ground calibration and 
system diagnostics. 
73 
System Control and Diagnostics 
The LCT system control hardware (Figure 7) consists of a 
rack, power supplies, environmental controls and a dozen 
VME based boards, which interface to extemal sensors or 
processors. There are low-speed interfaces to the RF data 
link, environmental sensors, a GPSDNU, power subsystems, 
a command and control graphical user interface (GUI) and 
laser communication controls. Each device communicates 
through the local area network (LAN) or the VME bus. A 
quad DSP board provides a high-speed copper wire interface 
to the turret, gimbal, fine steering mirror, two high-speed 
cameras, sensors and timers. The primary system controller 
is a 200 MHz PowerPC (PPC) single board computer 
running the real-time operating system, PSOS. The system 
controller’s primary job is to maintain high-level control of 
low speed diagnostics data collection and the DSP 
processors. It also makes the diagnostics data available over 
the LAN. The quad C40 DSP board controls all of the high- 
speed interfaces and its main function is to track targets. 
The coarse and fine tracker high-speed cameras provide 
target data for the 2-stage gimbal servo control algorithm. 
The algorithm closes the tracking loop by controlling the 
turret, gimbal and fast steering mirror. 
The system controller receives operating instructions and 
mission parameters from the Diagnostics Computer. The 
Diagnostics Computer is a laptop computer running the 
Microsoft Windows NT operating system (OS) connected to 
the system control rack via a 10/100 Mbps Ethemet network 
connection. The Diagnostics Computer software consists of 
a GUI with two interfaces; one interface acts as the 
command controller that downloads and displays mission 
parameters. The second interface reads diagnostics data off 
of the LAN and displays, stores and plots the data. The 
diagnostics portion is optional since the aircraft contains a 
flight test instrumentation system to collect and store 
diagnostics data from the single aircraft LAN. Future 
command and control systems will send packets containing 
command parameters via the high-speed laser data link, thus 
forming a two aircraft LAN. 
Digital Signal Processor 
The LCT system utilizes a quad C40 VME processor for 
signal processing and control of the tracking system. The 
software functionality is allocated to the four DSPs to 
distribute the input/output (YO) and central processing unit 
(CPU) loading evenly and to provide clean interfaces 
between each DSP and the PPC main controller. The first 
DSP is the Command DSP which receives all of the 
commands issued by the PPC controller. It is also 
responsible for notifying the PPC when a command is 
complete or if there are errors. The Command DSP either 
executes the commands itself or relays the commands to the 
appropriate DSP and returns status when notified by the 
DSP that the command is complete. The Command DSP 
also processes information from the INWGPS unit and the 
DIAGNOSTIWCOMROL 
r-7 
Figure 8. System Block Diagram 
RF data link and passes it to the Acquisitioflurret DSP by 
way of its global shared (bus accessible) memory. 
The Acquisitioflurret Servo DSP is responsible for the 
control of target aircraft acquisition; implementing its 
acquisition modes, using target aircraft waypoints and search 
patterns. It is also responsible for calculation of the target 
aircraft position from GPSDNS positions and velocities of 
both LCTs and the attitude of the host aircraft. Also 
included in the functionality of the Acquisitioflurret Servo 
DSP is the turret servo control for positioning and 
monitoring of the turret position. 
The Coarse Servo DSP is responsible for the coarse servo 
loop which includes the coarse tracking receiver, the gyro 
stabilizer and gimbal positioning actuators. This Coarse 
Servo DSP controls aspects of the coarse tracking receiver 
such as camera gains and centroiding thresholds. It also 
monitors camera information such as average background 
and its standard deviations, the number of frame pixels 
above threshold (hot pixels) and their positions, the 
maximum hot pixel value, and the sum of intensities of the 
hot pixels. It also calculates from the hot pixels azimuth and 
elevation centroids that are used in the servo loop for 
tracking. The Coarse Servo DSP hands off control of the 
gimbal gyro and actuators to the Fine Servo DSP after the 
remote terminal centroid is within the FOV of the Fine 
Tracking Receiver. 
The Fine Servo DSP is responsible for the fine servo loop 
which includes the Fine Track Receiver, the gyro stabilizer, 
the gimbal positioning actuators and the fast steering minor. 
The fine servo loop tracks the Fine Tracking Beacon from 
the target aircraft after receiving the handoff from the 
Coarse Servo DSP. This Fine Servo DSP controls aspects 
of the Fine Centroiding Camera such as camera gains and 
centroiding thresholds. It also monitors camera information 
such as average background and its standard deviations, the 
number of frame pixels above threshold and their positions, 
74 
the maximum hot pixel value, and the sum of intensities of 
the hot pixels. 
All four DSPs return diagnostic data that is logged with 
timestamps, sequence numbers and source identification 
numbers. This information is transmitted by the PPC 
controller over the LAN and stored on hard disk by a 
diagnostic computer and onto the storage of the flight test 
instrumentation system. This data is also accessed by the 
command GUI via the LAN for display to the user. The 
amount and type of diagnostic data is under user control and 
ranges from none to the normal operational level. The 
diagnostic computer has the ability to display most 
intermediate data including raw frame data from the 
cameras. 
4. SYSTEMTESTING 
The hardware components and software making up the LCT 
are undergoing a series of laboratory tests that increase in 
complexity as the components and software are assembled 
into subsystems and then into the complete LCT. A formal 
acceptance test of the LCT will be accomplished on the two 
LCTs prior to their installation into the two flight 
demonstration aircraft. Ground integration testing of the 
LCTs will then be accomplished on the aircraft to confirm 
total system operation and to calibrate and align the various 
test instrumentation sensors on the LCT and the aircraft. A 
series of demonstration flights will be performed at various 
altitudes and ranges to evaluate LCT performance and 
mission utility. 
Luboratoly Testing 
An ongoing series of individual component tests are being 
conducted as items are received from the various vendors to 
confirm that the item (e.g., laser diodes, CCDs, motors, 
gears, etc.) meets its advertised design specification. As the 
items are assembled into subsystems, such as the fast 
steering mirror, they are subjected to tests to confirm their 
operational capabilities, limitations and effects on other 
subsystems. 
The completed LCTs will be tested in the laboratory by 
placing the complete turret assembly within an 
environmental chamber which is able to simulate the 
operating altitude (U3 atmosphere) and temperature (+55 to 
-62OC). The chamber has two windows permitting full 
access of all the apertures. Simulations of tracking and 
acquisition are being carried out to evaluate operation of all 
of the servos and their tracking accuracy. Thermal control 
of the turret subsystems is being evaluated to thoroughly test 
alignment stability, electrical and optical performance with 
temperature, device temperature management, and the 
mechanical integrity of the turret and bearing system. A 
static ground test is planned for late January 2000 from 
Mount (Mt) Palomar in North San Diego County California 
to a test site 55km away in Mira Mesa Califomia. The Mt 
Palomar LCT will be 5000 ft  (1.5km) higher than the target 
LCT and the sun will appear to be nominally 36.6 degrees 
above the target LCT site. The system will completely 
demonstrate acquisition, tracking, and high-speed low 
probability of intercept (LPI) data transmission. This 
constitutes part of the formal acceptance tests that AFRUSN 
is conducting to confirm safe system operation and 
suitability to be operated in an airborne environment (i.e., 
flightworthiness). 
Aircraft Integration Testing 
Upon completion of the LCT acceptance tests in San Diego, 
California, the two LCTs will be shipped to the flight 
demonstration facility in Crestview, Florida for installation 
into the two T-39A aircraft and on-aircraft integration 
testing. This testing will ensure the electrical power, 
environmental temperature control and operator user 
interface compatibility of the installed LCT. These tests will 
include coarse alignment and boresight calibration checks, 
which will be accomplished using the second terminal. The 
ground LCT will have the same functionality as the airborne 
terminal, but will be mounted to a ground based platform. 
The ground terminal allows end-to-end validation of 
acquisition and tracking loops and safety milestones while 
providing laser eye protection to ground support personnel. 
Complete integration and checkout of the flight test 
instrumentation system will also be accomplished in parallel 
at this time. 
Flight Demonstration 
The two T-39A aircraft will be modified in early 2001 and a 
LCT integrated into each aircraft. Flight testing is scheduled 
to begin with aircraft flightworthiness tests in Spring 2001. 
This will be followed by a series of flights at Crestview, 
Florida to evaluate beacon signal acquisition and tracking, 
communication signal acquisition and quality, link 
atmospheric effects, aircraft kinematics and airflow effects, 
and operational mission requirements. The demonstration 
flights are an integral part of the LCT development process; 
therefore, the LCT is extensively instrumented and each test 
aircraft contains a complete and comprehensive onboard 
flight test instrumentation system to monitor in real-time 
LCT operation and laser data link quality. Each test mission 
is expected to consist of approximately 2 hours of data 
gathering at various test conditions. 
Initial air-to-air data link operations will be controlled by an 
onboard test engineer and monitored by an onboard systems 
engineer. A pilot and copilothest director will also be part 
of the onboard crew. Later flights, such as the operational 
mission requirements flights, will delete the onboard 
engineers as the LCT is operated in an autonomous mode. 
The saving in aircraft gross weight by their deletion will 
allow higher altitude flight and, hence, longer laser crosslink 
ranges. 
75 
The procedure for the conduct of each flight is to first 
accomplish a ground checkout and alignment calibration 
prior to takeoff. Safety switches have been incorporated 
into the laser power circuits to prevent autonomous laser 
operation on the ground since the eye safe distance of the 
LCT is approximately 1.5 km. The ball turret will be in a 
stowed position with the LCT inoperative during takeoff and 
landing to prevent turret window damage and to decrease 
system cooling requirements. When the two aircraft have 
reached their test altitude and range, the crew of the 
“control” test aircraft will request a position fix from the 
“target” aircraft via the omnidirectional UHF RF data link. 
A one-time message exchange of each aircraft’s position and 
velocity vector then takes place. Each LCT uses this 
information to acquire the other aircraft’s coarse track 
beacon. A transition is then made to the fine track beacon 
signal and link communications is initiated. This acquisition 
sequence should be complete in less than 10 seconds. If a 
test aircraft loses the track beacon signal, reacquisition is 
performed using a propagated vector of the other aircraft 
based on a track file. If reacquisition does not occur within 
1 second, then the LCT initiates a spiral search pattem for 
10 seconds. If there is still no reacquisition after 10 
seconds, then a new RF transmitted data point is obtained 
and the initial acquisition process is repeated. The UHF RF 
data link is also used continuously by each aircraft’s flight 
test instrumentation system to display the other aircraft’s 
location to the flight crew. This RF data is not fed 
continuously to the LCT for a track file; the track file is 
based only upon information derived from the track beacon 
signals. During later operational mission requirement 
flights, each aircraft will attempt to accomplish beacon 
signal acquisition based upon a priori knowledge of each 
aircraft’s location at a designated time and will not utilize 
the UHF RF data link in the acquisition process. The 
content of the 1 GBPS communication signals will consist of 
four video/audio channels, a serial digital data stream and a 
BER generator data stream. 
Operation and performance of the LCT will be recorded and 
monitored onboard in real-time by the two test engineers. 
Immediately following each flight, the flight test 
instrumentation system data disks from the two test aircraft 
will be reduced and merged for further data analysis. This 
data will form the basis for any system malfunction 
corrections, system modifications and the final evaluation 
reporting. 
5. CONCLUSION 
The data collected during the demonstration flights should 
prove the ability of a 1 GBPS wideband laser data link to 
communicate between aerial platforms in the upper 
atmosphere at ranges up to 500 km with a BER of This 
ability to communicate very large amounts of information 
(the complete Encyclopedia Britannia in less than 8 seconds 
or 180 standard format television color pictures in 1 
second) in near real-time should allow new processes to be 
formulated which take into account the timeliness and large 
amount of information available for command and control 
decision making. Present data communication rates such as 
the T1 link at 1.5 MBPS and even newer RF links at 274 
MBPS require data compression techniques be utilized to 
communicate some types of sensor data, whereas use of a 
laser data link would not constrain the type or number of 
sensors an aerial platform could carry and operate 
simultaneously. 
The flight demonstration will verify the ability of an 
extremely narrow beam laser data link to acquire and track 
another aircraft from a moving aircraft. However at the 
ranges and altitudes involved, the moving aircraft could just 
as easily track a low earth orbiting satellite and 
communicate with a similar laser terminal on the satellite. 
Several of the commercial low and medium orbit satellite 
data communication systems plan to use laser crosslinks to 
exchange data within their satellite constellation. Use of 
these satellites in conjunction with future airborne 
communication architectures containing laser data links 
could provide very large amounts of data from any location 
on earth to any other location on earth almost 
instantaneously. 
Daniel J Petrovich ILt Daniel J Petrovich is an Electro 
Optics System Engineer in the Multi-Function Electro 
Optics Branch, Electro-optics Division, Sensors 
Directorate of the Air Force Research Laboratory at 
Wright-Patterson AFB Ohio. He is responsible for 
monitoring the Laser Crosslink software and inte$ace 
development and acts as the flight test engineer for the 
flight-testing phase of the Recce/Intel Laser Crosslink 
Program. He also manages the ERASER I-D automatic 
target recognition (ATR) software development program for  
real-time target identijication. He is involved witl, flight- 
testing for staring infrared missile waming sensors and the 
associated sub-pixel target detection ATR development 
program. Mr Petrovich has a Bachelor of Science Degree 
in Electrical Engineering from the Universiq of Rochester, 
NY and a Master of Science Degree in Electrical 
Engineering, Satellite Communications and Target 
Recognition, from the Air Force Institute of Technology at 
Wright-Patterson AFB in Dayton OH. 
Robert A. Gill Mr. Robert A. Gill is a Test Engineer in the 
Customer Requirements and Support Branch, Sensor 
Applications and Demonstrations Division, Sensors 
Directorate of the Air Force Research Laboratory at 
Wright-Patterson AFB Ohio. He is responsible for 
planning, managing, conducting, and evaluating the various 
tests associated with the Recce/lntel Laser Crosslink 
Program. He also acts as an avionics test advisor to other 
programs within the Sensors and Flight Vehicles 
Directorates. For the past 27 years he has been involved 
with flight tests programs within the Air Force Research 
Laboratory such as the FDL-23 Remotely Piloted Vehicle, 
the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration (AFTI)/F--16, 
76 
the X-31, the PropulsiodAerodynamics Control Integration 
Research and Development (PACIR), the IntraFoimation 
Positioning System (IFPS), and the Airbome Information 
Transmission (ABlT) programs. Prior to coming to the 
USAF Flight Dynamics Laboratory in 1972, he was a,flight 
test engineer on the F - I l l  aircraft for  the General 
Dynamics Corporation, a flight test data analyst for  the 
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company and a flight test 
engineer on the F-4 aircraft for  the McDonnell Aircraft 
Company. Mr. Gill has a Bachelor of Science Degree in 
Aeronautical Engineering from Purdue University and a 
Master of Science Degree in Physics from Indiana State 
University 
Robert J. Feldmann Mr. Robert J. Feldmanii is Branch 
Chief of the Multi-Function Electro-Optics Branch, Electro- 
Optics Technology Division, Sensors Directorate of the US 
Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, 
Ohio. He has been involved with the exploration, 
development, and evaluation of technologies related to 
military application of laser communications for  over 15 
years. His duties involve managerial and technical 
oversight responsibilities in the areas of passive and active 
electro-optical targeting, spectral imaging and include 
serving as program manager for  the Recce/Intel Laser 
Crosslink Program. Mr. Feldmann has per$ormed as a flight 
test engineer on two previous airborne laser 
communications experiments and brings that experience to 
the current program. He has also represented the former 
Avionics Directorate as Deputy Program Manager of the 
Intra-Foimation Positioning System, a joint Avionics-Flight 
Dynamics Directorate program, requiring technical 
oversight on Low Probability of Intercept (LPI) 
communications and avionics integration issues. Mr. 
Feldmnn has a Bachelor of Electrical Engineering Degree 
from the University of Dayton, a Master of Science Degree 
in Electrical Engineering from the Air Force Institute of 
Technology, and a Master of Science Degree in Electro- 
Optics from the University of Dayton. 
77 
