New Approaches to High Speed Civil Transport 
Multidisciplinary Design and Optimization 
. .  P. Scott Zink, Dan A. DeLaurentis, Mark A. Hale, Vitali V. Volovoi 
Daniel P. Schrage, James I. Craig, Robert E. Fulton, Farrokh Mistree, Dimitri N. Mavris 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150 
Wei Chen 
University of Illinois 
Kemper E. Lewis 
University at Buffalo 
Carlos E.S. Cesnik 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
ABSTRACT 
New approaches to multidisciplinary design 
optimization have been developed and demonstrated in a 
NASA Langley funded project to look at a particularly 
challenging aeronautics problem - High Speed Civil 
Transport Aeroelastic Wing Design. In particular, the 
problem is how to incorporate key multidisciplinary 
information and knowledge as it becomes available. This 
problem results from such information not being available 
early in the design process due to dependence on higher 
fidelity models, databases and analysis tools. A Robust 
Design Synthesis methodology involving the application of 
response surface equations was developed and successfully 
applied in the solution of this problem. The approach also 
involved the incorporation of stochastic models for the 
design parameters and the development of tools for their 
propagation through the approximations generated for the 
design space under consideration. The research addresses 
several key wing design domains including aerodynamics, 
structural analysis and controls as necessary to address the 
wing aeroelasticity and transonic flutter problems, including 
the potential application to active flexible wing 
technologies. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
MSTRACT 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. MDO METHODOLOGY 
3. FOCUS AREAS IN MDO SOLUTION 
4. CLOSURE 
6. REFERENCES 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
8. AUTHORS 
1 
2 
2 
3 
8 
9 
12 
13 
Peter J. Rohl 
General Electric Corporate Research and Development 
Patrick N. Koch 
Engineous Software, Incorporated 
Timothy W. Simpson 
The Pennsylvania State University 
AFW 
ASOP 
DOE 
DREAMS 
DSIDES 
DSP 
DSPT 
FlDO 
FLOPS 
GSRP 
HSCT 
HSR 
IDEF 
IDES 
IMAGE 
ISMD 
MDO 
RCEM 
RDS 
RSE 
RSM 
SST 
ACRONYMS 
Active Flexible Wing 
Affordable Systems Optimization Process 
Design of Experiments 
Developing Robust Engineering Analysis 
Models and Specifications 
Decision Support in the Design of Engineering 
Systems 
Decision Support Problem 
Decision Support Problem Technique 
Framework for Interdisciplinary Design 
Optimization 
Flight Optimization System 
Graduate Student Research Program 
High Speed Civil Transport 
High Speed Research 
Integration Definition 
Integrated Design Engineering Simulator 
Intelligent Multidisciplinary Aircraft 
Generation Environment 
Integrated StructureA4aneuver Design 
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization 
Robust Concept Exploration Method 
Robust Design Synthesis 
Response Surface Equation 
Response Surface Methodology 
Supersonic Transport 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
355 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1 *The REAL objectives 
Mission Requirements 
Evaluate Technologies - Systems Approach 
I $, range, weighr, size 
Year 1 '> Year I 
Multidisciplinary design optimization (MDO) addresses 
the considerable challenge of concurrently incorporating 
analysis models and design parameters from several 
different discipline areas into a design synthesis prpcess that 
is implemented using powerful decision-support tools. 
Aerospace systems are inherently multidisciplinary in 
nature, and therefore MDO is a key part of the design 
process. However, it has been only in the last two decades 
that the problem complexities have risen well beyond the 
human abilities of the individual designer or the traditional 
design team. As a result, new emphasis has been placed on 
the development of powerful, flexible and robust MDO 
methods applicable to high-fidelity problems. 
The initial efforts towards MDO focused on specific 
disciplinary interactions that were growing troublesome to 
handle or that had immediate and profound impact on the 
design process, as illustrated in Figure 1 .  While there are 
still significant challenges in these areas, the problem 
addressed in the present research involves the development 
of MDO methods to handle aerospace vehicle synthesis and 
sizing at the conceptuallpreliminary phases of design. 
"Traditional" MDO 
\ Discipline interncuons 
optlmuing discipline 
objecuves Ww, C,. etc ) 
ConceptuaVPreliminary 
Vehicle Sizina & Svnthesis 
Barrier 
Figure 1. Present Solution thrust Areas 
Contrasted to Traditional MDO 
The research presented here was a planned three year 
effort and was aimed first at the description of a High Speed 
Civil Transport (HSCT) MDO problem (described in the 
next section as one that has conflicting objectives of cost 
and performance and requires high-fidelity analyses to 
solve), next at the development of MDO methods for the 
solution of the problem, and finally at the implementation of 
a solution to a significant portion of the problem. These 
phases are illustrated in Figure 2. 
--- 
e AFW MDO Structure a Design Framework * Analysis & RSE Integration 
- Computing Requirements ' Analysis TOOIS Design Exploration DSPT Research DSPPalette * IMAGE Architecture 
Figure 2. Three Year Research Schedule 
The Year 1 effort focused on identification of a specific 
(and academically "tractable") portion of a broader scope of 
HSCT design. The initial attention was on the HSCT wing 
design with consideration of product and process 
development aspects [50], but the focus shifted towards the 
multidisciplinary effort to handle the aeroelastic design of 
the wing. Year 1 was also spent on adaptation and 
development of basic decision support methods to MDO and 
on the development of computing requirements for a 
practical system, one in which information can be obtained 
for decision-making from high-fidelity tools. The Year 2 
effort involved the further development of the wing design 
framework, the development of specific classes of decision 
support, and the identification and development of specific 
analysis tools. The Year 3 effort centered on the 
incorporation of robust design simulation methods involving 
the use of response surface equations (RSE) to bring high- 
fidelity, discipline specific analysis and modeling methods 
forward into conceptual design studies from their more 
traditional places in subsystem level preliminary design. 
The methods and tools were then tested and evaluated in 
sample MDO studies using a design computing framework 
called IMAGE (Intelligent Multidisciplinary Aircraft 
Generations Environment) [ 161. 
2.  MDO METHODOLOGY 
The MDO methodology utilized in this project is 
illustrated in Figure 3 as a hierarchical system 
decomposition. The complex problem of finding good 
designs for a flexible HSCT wing is based on the combined 
(and generally conflicting) objectives of minimum cost and 
maximum performance. The solution of this problem 
requires the combined analysis capabilities from the 
aerodynamics, structures, and controls disciplines. In 
addition, the simulation is multi-leveled, with objectives, 
such as takeoff gross weight and cost, calculated at the 
system level through sizing and synthesis, and with 
subsystem objectives, such as wing weight and lift to drag 
ratio, distributed in the subsystem level disciplines. The 
contributing analyses introduced through RSEs allow a 
designer to perform tradeoffs in terms of the size of the 
design space searched and complexity of the tools used. The 
left half flow in Figure 3 illustrates the general problem 
solution process following a decision support process 
referred to here as the Decision Support Problem Technique 
(DSPT) [66]. It also illustrates how the subsystem 
356 
objectives are related to system goals through the use of 
RSEs. The right hand flow in Figure 3 illustrates how this 
process was implemented for an aeroelastic wing design 
problem. These MDO methodologies were coordinated and 
implemented in an infrastructure and integration project 
which was initially identified as the Integrated Design 
Engineering Simulator (IDES) but later came to be known as 
DREAMS (Developing Robust Engineering Analysis 
Models and Specifications) [25].  The methods were 
implemented in an open computing infrastructure deployed 
at Georgia Tech that facilitates the design of complex 
engineering systems called IMAGE. 
P 
Obiectives 
Figure 3. Hierarchical System Decomposition 
3. FOCUS AREAS IN MDO SOLUTION 
A drawback of using complex models (CFD, FEM, etc.) 
and complex tools during the research of new approaches to 
design is that the resources and time are often not available 
to synthesize more than a handful of different design points. 
The findings in this paper will show that a more desirable 
avenue for exploring new approaches, the project employed 
DREAMS to execute the integrated aero-structures-control 
methodology for the multidisciplinary design and 
optimization of an HSCT wing, as illustrated in Figure 3. A 
synopsis of the DREAMS method flow is: . Use of the DSPT for a HSCT wing using a 
satisficing approach which includes identification 
of goals, deviation variables, and design variables . Identification of required analysis/simulation tools . Identification of information exchange between 
aero-structure-control modules . Set up of the Design of Experiments (DOE) for 
design parameters and required system responses . Development of RSEs from simulation results for 
use in preliminary DREAMS demonstration . Implementation of aero-structure-controls 
integrated tool in IMAGE, with RSEs as agents . Robust Design studies using RSEs integrated with 
the synthesis/sizing tool, FLOPS (Flight 
OPtimization System), for a point design solution 
Through the use of response surfaces, analysis-oriented 
methods are incorporated into DREAMS requiring only a 
one time investment for a given class of vehicles. Further, 
increased design freedom and knowledge, as well as reduced 
cycle time at the conceptual level, make the resulting 
analysis portion of DREAMS more amenable to 
implementation in IMAGE, the computer framework in 
which the whole process is implemented. 
3.1 HSCT Approaches 
Wing aeroelasticity and the calculation of flutter during 
transonic flight has been the “long pole in the tent” for the 
development of supersonic aircraft. During the Supersonic 
Transport (SST) development of the 1960s and early 1970s 
aeroelastic calculation of flutter for closing the loop with 
design was left open - to be resolved during prototype 
development. The same relates to the recently terminated 
NASA/Industry High Speed Research (HSR) program. 
Because of the importance of flutter in viability of these 
programs, this particular aspect of the HSCT design problem 
was the subject for the methodology evaluation. Thus it can 
be seen that an appropriate grand challenge was being 
tackled. 
Wing design with consideration of both static and 
dynamic aeroelasticity presents the classical MDO challenge 
to designers working at the conceptual level: how to 
incorporate key multidisciplinary information and 
knowledge that is usually not available early in the design 
process due to its dependence on higher fidelity models, 
databases and analysis tools. For example, wing 
aeroelasticity studies and transonic flutter calculations 
require much more detailed (higher fidelity) structural and 
aerodynamic models than are typically available at the 
conceptual phase of design. Yet it is well understood that it 
is at this early stage when these complex problems can be 
most effectively and economically addressed. 
The new MDO approaches for HSCT wing design 
directly address the challenge of providing higher fidelity 
design models at the earliest stages of the design process. 
Rather than directly linking these higher fidelity discipline 
analyses to the system level, synthesis/sizing code (FLOPS 
in Figure 3), the general characteristics of each discipline 
were represented by much simpler RSEs (typically no 
greater than second order) that define the variation of key 
discipline responses with respect to the design parameters of 
interest. This accomplished three important goals: (a) 
adequate representation of the physics of the problem under 
study, (b) representation of the results in a form simple 
enough for use in conceptual phase studies and (c) 
modulaization of contributing analyses so that alternate 
tools could be easily substituted if desired. RSEs are 
certainly not new, and others have tried with varying degrees 
of success to apply them in similar situations. However, the 
success in the present application was derived in no small 
part from the development of powerful and statistically 
accountable ways to generate the needed RSEs and to re- 
generate them, when necessary, to extend the design variable 
357 
Desion Smce Definition 
DOE Table 
.... 
. . , . ’ .  . I  
I 
Tnmmed Net bads  
0 IteraUon (unfll weight converges) 
I 
Aeroelasuc Wino Wei&t Eauauon 
W=bo + b,Xl+ .... +b,,Xl’+ .... +b,,Xl.Yl+ .... 
Figure 4. RSM/DOE Application to Aeroelastic Wing Design 
space. The key insight was to base the generation of the 
RSEs on a classical DOE approach to vastly simplify the 
combinatorial explosion that results from trying to use more 
than a dozen or so design variables. 
The initial Response Surface Methodology (RSM), a 
method for finding and validating RSEs, applications done 
by the investigators were towards the analysis of HSCT 
economics, but the research has extended the applications to 
aerodynamics, structural analysis and controls as necessary 
to address the wing aeroelasticity and transonic flutter 
design, including the potential application to active flexible 
wing (AFW) technologies. Figure 3 above summarizes the 
overall MDO methodology including system level 
considerations, while Figure 4 below details the more 
“discipline-focused” aeroelastic wing design. The HSCT 
aeroelastic wing design method used in conjunction with the 
DOERSM is described in detail in Ref. [12] and [14]. The 
problem addresses a finite-element based structural 
optimization of a wing box under aerodynamic loads that is 
subjected to stress and flutter constraints. The wing is 
represented by a varying complexity spar and rib model and 
utilizes multiple shape functions for distribution of design 
parameters. A maneuver load program, called Integrated 
StructureManeuver Design (ISMD), provides for the 
computation of static external loads. The key objective of 
the wing design procedure is to balance the desire for a 
parametric procedure and a desire for increased analysis 
accuracy. 
Taken alone, the RSM only addresses the modeling of 
higher fidelity analyses at the conceptual level. Even with 
the availability of this new approach, one is still left with 
substantial uncertainty in the fundamental design data itself. 
For example, costs such as fuel or manufacturing, as well as 
projections of new technology availability are subject to 
considerable uncertainty, so that simply using purely 
deterministic values in an RSM to model a higher fidelity 
analysis may not be justifiable at the conceptual phase. To 
address this issue, a Robust Design Synthesis (RDS) 
approach was developed and applied to the HSCT 
conceptual design problem. The basic approach involves 
the incorporation of stochastic models for the design 
parameters and the development of tools for their 
propagation through the RSEs. The initial effort focused on 
basic Monte Carlo approaches to this problem but 
subsequent development has pursued the use of semi- 
analytical methods and so-called fast probability integration 
methods. The fundamental developments in robust design 
methodologies are described in more detail in the following 
section. 
358 
3.2 Decision Support Methods 
The basic HSCT wing design methodology outlined in 
the previous section addressed the challenge of moving 
higher fidelity design models and analysis tools forward into 
the conceptual and preliminary design phases of the design 
timeline and of handling the fundamental uncertainty 
inherent in the system parameters and design variables. This 
section summarizes the research effort to develop decision 
support methods to allow design decisions to be made in this 
environment with due account given to the level of fidelity 
as well as to the stochastic nature of the models and 
information. 
The DREAMS methodology is based on the DSPT, 
shown on the left of Figure 3 in which the design process is 
organized according to the types of decisions which are 
being made and the domain-dependent information which is 
available to make those decisions. Within the DSPT, two 
principal types of decisions are available to a designer - 
selection decisions [56] and compromise decisions [39] .  
Each of these types of decisions is accomplished within the 
framework of a Decision Support Problem (DSP). The 
details of a compromise DSP in the context of the HSCT 
wing design problem under study are illustrated in Figure 5. 
The compromise DSP and the DSIDES software which 
implements it form the foundation for design exploration 
within this environment. 
RCEM was then used to develop ranged sets of 
specifications which are common and good for a family of 
general aviation aircraft [64]. In addition to focusing on the 
inclusion of robustness in design, the research addressed 
methods for increasing efficiency, increasing design 
knowledge and maintaining design freedom during the early 
stages of design for open engineering systems [65]. It also 
dealt with methods for modeling design uncertainty in 
design formulations and on methods for prioritizing design 
objectives [64,65]. 
Subsystems may not be isolated, self-supporting 
entities. Constraints, goals and design variables may be 
shared between entities. However, full communication and 
cooperation often does not exist. The information may be 
incomplete, or one subsystem may dominate the design. 
Game theory was applied to the DSP involving the design of 
two coupled subsystems, one of which dominates the design 
process [37,44,45]. A conceptual framework for the 
application of game theory in complex systems design was 
developed and applied initially to the multidisciplinary 
design of a subsonic passenger transport aircraft, as 
illustrated in Figure 6. This research also led to 
development of an algorithm for solving mathematical 
models involving nonlinear functions of both discrete and 
continuous design variables [41,46]. 
Modeled as a 2 Player Gam 
-<wa"l_ll-- 
Figure 6. Alternative Decision Strategy: Game Theory 
Figure 5. Compromise Decision Support Problem for HSCT Complex systems usually involve an extensive 
hierarchical structure and this can be used to advantage in 
the decision support problem formulation. A hierarchical 
Wing Design Problem 
In the initial DSP application, the compromise DSP was 
used as the foundation for the development of a Robust 
Concept Exploration Method (RCEM) to facilitate the quick 
evaluation of design alternatives and the generation of top- 
level specifications with quality considerations in the early 
stages of design of a complex system [ 1,2]. The RCEM was 
implemented by integrating several metrics and tools 
including Taguchi's robust design [ 11, Suh's independence 
axiom [37], and DOElRSM [ l l ]  into one mathematical 
construct - the Compromise Decision Support Problem. The 
RCEM was demonstrated in the context of the design of an 
integrated HSCT airframe/propulsion subsystem [2,8]. The 
~- ~ 
robust preliminary design exploration method was 
developed to facilitate concurrent system and subsystem 
design exploitation, and specifically for the concurrent 
generation of robust system and subsystem specifications for 
the preliminary design of multilevel, multi-objective, large- 
scale complex systems [34]. This method was developed 
through the integration and expansion of current design 
techniques including: 
359 
TlME "SCHEDULE 
REOVIREMENTS 
REOUIREMEWS 
IIYAILmLE 
SPECIFICATIONS TEST OAT& 
HSCT DE IGN 
DESIGN 
AIRCRAFT 
AND 
ENGINEERS 
COMPWER 
RESOVRCES 
W,NO TUNNEL 
TUNNEL 
(a) IDEFO - Level 0 
REWIREMENTS Af1D 
SPECIFICATWNS 'IME AND SCHEDULE 
A1 
REWIREMENTS AND 
SPECIFICATIONS 
REWEST FOR 
PROPOSAL iRFP, 
PREVIOUS RESEARCH 
REWIREMENTS AND 
SPECIFICATWNS 
TIME AND SCHEDULE 
REWESTFOR 
PROWSAL iRFPl - DEVELOP 
EXISTING DESIGNS * CONCEPTUAL 
PREVIOUS ,VIEW BASELINE 
RESEARCH DESIGNS INInAL AWlLYSlS TIME AND SCHEDULE 
WRFbCED MODELS 
EXPERIENCE 
PROWSED CANDIDATE OFPROPOSED 
AIR SHOWS PROGRAMS 
DESIGN SUNG PEFORMANCE FOR 
Extsnffi AIRCRAFT ENGINEERS PROGRAMS CODES AIRCRAFT DESIGNERS 
CONFIGURATORS 
SUITbBLE DESIGNS FOR 
REFINEMEM AIRCRAFT 
DESIGNERS 
CQNFOURATORS 
CANDIDAlE CONFIGURATWN 
GEWETRIES 
REQUIREMENTS AND 
SPECIFICATIONS AND SCHEDULE 
I AVAILABLEDATA I 
AlkRAFT TUNNEL 
DlSlGNERY 
CONFIWRATORS 
REWIREMENTS AND 
SPECIFICATONS 
1 
DEMONSTRATE 
PERFORMANCE 
REFERENCE D E W N  
ENGINEERS 
AlRCRAFl 
LESIGNERSI 
CONFIGURATORS 
(b) IDEFO - Level 1 
Figure 8. IDEFO Diagrams 
. Hierarchical partitioning and modeling techniques 
for partitioning large-scale complex systems into 
more tractable pilrts and allowing integration of 
sub-problems for isystem synthesis [25,34] . Statistical experimentation and approximation 
techniques for increasing both the efficiency and 
the comprehensiveness of preliminary design 
exploration [35] 
= Noise modeling techniques for implementing 
robust preliminq design when approximate 
models are employed [6,71 
These techniques were developed for a case study performed 
with Rolls-Royce Allison and are based on an existing 
engine designed for midsize commercial, regional business 
jets. The solutions obtained are similar to the design model 
of the existing commercial engine, but are better with 
respect to many of the requirements [34]. 
Additional supporting research provided a method for 
coupling objectives related to technical and economic 
efficiency in an environment involving the simultaneous 
consideration of multiple objectives, multilevel decisions 
and uncertainty [48]. This work further compared a single 
objective model with methods founded on the Compromise 
Decision Support Problem [56,77,78]. 
3.3 Information Management in MDO 
During the course of implementing this design scenario 
of DREAMS in IMAGE, the need to have a well defined 
data model became evident. In addition, research has shown 
that advances in the aircraft technologies have resulted in a 
commensurate increase in the amount of data required to 
360 
define a design during the conceptual stages [28]. 
Conceptual design requires a tight multidisciplinary effort 
requiring large amounts of data exchange. In order to 
effectively implement the new MDO design processes 
described above, it is crucial that a top-down data 
management design structure be in place in the early phases 
of the design. This structure must provide consistency in 
data format and allow ease of data exchange between th& 
various disciplines involved in the design process. In the 
conceptual design phase, consideration must be given to the 
changing structure of the database as the product design 
evolves. Current database design approaches are typically 
limited to the detailed design phase where the data 
organization is fixed and unambiguous. 
The data modeling problem is encountered for both 
design product and process models. The use of IDEFO 
diagrams for representing a design (Figure 8) was employed 
in the research, and the use of these diagrams was extended 
to the use of Design Palettes as illustrated for the aeroelastic 
wing design problem [28]. 
A data model is also required for the product 
information. A IDEFlX model for a generalized aircraft 
component has also been developed. In this example, an 
aircraft configuration is made up of the components: engine, 
fuselage, landing gear, inlet, nozzle, canard, horizontal tail, 
vertical tail, and wing. This data model is instantiated 
within the IMAGE architecture. An expansion of this data 
model using EXPRESS, a modeling language, to provide an 
object oriented perspective was also carried out in a separate 
environment [31] and showed some of the assets and 
liabilities of such models. It was concluded that a relational 
model was often sufficient for the early design area but that 
an object model had more flexibility for evolving with the 
design. The data modeling approach was also investigated 
[9,10] as a way of identifying and tracking the impact of 
local design changes on overall system design. The data 
model provides a system level view and appears useful in 
tracking the propagation of change throughout a system. 
3.4 MDO Coinputational Frameworks 
The new MDO methodologies developed in the 
research were implemented in an MDO framework and 
integration project. The methodology was initially 
identified as IDES, but it ultimately was identified by the 
name DREAMS. Much of the computational architecture 
development was pursued under GSRP funding with the 
project name IMAGE. However, the guidance for much of 
this was based on the requirements established by DREAMS 
to accommodate the new MDO approaches being developed 
under the grant. Additional specifications were derived 
from related projects such as FIDO (at NASA LaRC) and 
ASOP (at Rockwell). 
The computational and information environment was 
designed and constructed to provide a framework for 
consistently applying a general decision-based design 
methodology within an integrated computing environment 
across the design timeline for open engineering systems. It 
is based around an agent integration technology, and results 
have demonstrated the feasibility in situations of practical 
complexity level [17-201. Side research was done on 
methods for coarse and fine grained parallelization to 
enhance the computational efficiency as documented in 
Reference [7 11. A distributed, object-oriented database 
definition with dynamic schema editing was also 
demonstrated. 
Agent 
Collaboration e e e e e 
Figure 9. IMAGE Infrastructure Which Supports DREAMS 
36 1 
The infrastructure was designed to support the 
DREAMS methodology by incorporating: . A design partitioning process . 
. A design information model 
In addition, the infrastructure supports: . 
A mechanism for solving the resulting design sub- 
problems 
Information generation in context for informed 
decision-making 
Efficient and cost-effective application of design 
resources 
. 
. Geographically distributed design activities 
The basic approach in a schematic form is shown in Figure 
9, and it refers to the following specific functional 
capabilities incorporated in the system: 
Design Activities in which a designer partitions a 
problem into activities for solution; this also 
provides for comprehensive information 
management 
Available Assets which include a variety of design 
resources (e.g., programs) that provide aid in the 
generation of design knowledge; resources may 
include performance simulation codes, object- 
oriented databases, CAD packages, etc. 
Agent Collaboration as implemented with a generic 
toolkit that allows resources to be incorporated into 
the design infrastructure with minimal effort by the 
engineering developers; the incorporation of a 
“model” (which describes precisely what an agent 
is capable of doing or providing and how it is 
accomplished) within the toolkit allows for 
knowledge to be generated in context allowing a 
designer to interrogate knowledge for the who, 
what, where, when, and how the information was 
created. . Computing Architecture which includes 
components that are required for objects to operate 
in a distributed, homogeneous computing 
environment are included in an underlying 
infrastructure. 
The computational framework is considered open because it 
provides freedom for a designer to model both processes 
and information as required at a particular point in a 
design’s timeline. This was accomplished through an 
information model which incorporated schema evolution to 
capture time-dependent product and process characteristics 
at varying degrees of accuracy and fidelity. This model 
evolved from the IDEF models described earlier. As a 
result, product descriptions can be modified as fidelity 
increases. For example, in the case of the HSCT wing 
design application considered in this project, an initial 
product description was based on parametric components. 
During finite element analysis, a more detailed model was 
required that included node and member definitions. Both 
of these representations coexisted in the information model. 
Moreover, specific instances (e.g. values) were accumulated 
for decision-making and optimization. 
. 
. 
. 
The computational framework was demonstrated in 
several different HSCT wing design studies during the third 
and fourth years of the grant. Based on evaluations of the 
framework performance as well as from user feedback, a 
number of refinements and improvements were 
incorporated. Much of this focused on improving usability 
of the integration tools and on enhancements to the user 
interface. Continuing development is moving the framework 
from its heavy dependence on the Unix environment to a 
more open architecture incorporating emerging web 
technologies and a “lean server” technology. When used in 
a client-server approach, a lean server using the hypertext 
transport protocol (http) provides a much more simplified 
server-side interface to analysis codes and decision support 
tools. Ultimately, the architecture will migrate towards a 
web-based and largely platform-independent configuration 
with most of the user interface implemented using the 
hypertext markup language (html). A current evaluation 
version of the IMAGE framework is available for download 
from: http://www.asdl.gatech.edu/image/. 
4. CLOSURE 
Research accomplishments under grant support are 
extensive and wide-ranging as documented in the grant 
bibliography listed here in the references. The findings 
include: 
Extension of traditional MDO methods to 
conceptuallpreliminaq design 
Ability to do multi-level, high fidelity system 
studies . Wing aeroelastic analysis which permits design 
trades to be done on a series of computers 
Development of HSCT aeroelastic wing weight 
equation 
Integration of decision support in design process 
Development of IDEF HSCT data models 
Consistent with the multidisciplinary theme of the grant, the 
research team included faculty and students in both 
Aerospace Engineering and Mechanical Engineering at 
Georgia Tech along with industrial participation from 
Rockwell International and Lockheed Martin (see below). 
The objective as stated in the initial proposal and refined in 
subsequent work statements for each of the 3 years was to 
develop a new MDO approach to aerospace systems design 
and to apply it to the HSCT design problem. The research 
plan was outlined in Section 2 above in four primary areas 
and substantial achievements have been made in all the 
areas. 
A new approach to MDO focusing on the conceptual 
(advanced or pre-) design and early preliminary design 
phases was developed under the first two tasks described 
above. The approach involved a combination of consistent 
refinement in the fidelity of the analysis models with the 
incorporation of decision support problem (DSP) techniques 
to synthesize form to meet functional requirements. Both 
deterministic and stochastic approaches were developed. 
362 
The remaining two tasks focused on the implementation 
of the new MDO methodologies and their evaluation when 
applied to the HSCT design problem outlined in the initial 
proposal. One area of research considered the development 
of parallel computing strategies to support MDO. The 
second addressed the development of computational 
frameworks to support MDO across the enterprise. 
New approaches to MDO have been developed and 
demonstrated during this project on a particularly 
challenging aeronautics problem - HSCT Aeroelastic Wing 
Design. This problem represents a grand challenge to the 
aerospace community because of the complex interactions 
that occur in its solution. A new framework for systematic 
problem solution, called DREAMS, was developed. This 
framework included aspects of decision-making (DSPT, 
RSM, RCEM), information technology (IDEF, EXPRESS), 
simulation capability (Parallelization), and scalable software 
design (IMAGE). As this framework was developed, a 
parallel effort was placed on its application to detailed 
aeroelastic wing design. At this level of complexity, many 
intricacies were identified and addressed. Here it was found 
that an application was needed in order to verify, as well as 
drive requirement formulation, for the methodology. The 
resulting framework is available for application to other 
complex multidisciplinary challenges. 
6. REFERENCES 
The following publications were produced in whole or in 
part with funding from the NASA Grant. 
1. Chen, W., “A Robust Concept Exploration Method for 
Configuring Complex Systems,” Ph.D. Dissertation, 
School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA., 1995. 
2. Chen, W., Allen, J.K., Mavris, D., Mistree, F, “A 
Concept Exploration Method for Determining Robust 
Top-Level Specifications,” Engineering Optimization, 
Chen, W., Simpson, T.W., Allen, J.K, and Mistree, F., 
“Satisfying Ranged Sets of Design Requirements using 
Design Capability Indices as Metria,” Engineering 
Optimization, vol. 31, no.4., pp. 615-639, 1999. 
Chen, W., Allen, J.K, Tsui, K-L and Mistree, F., “A 
Procedure for Robust Design: Minimizing Variations 
Caused by Noise Factors and Control Factors,” ASME 
Joumal of Mechanical Design, vol. 118, no. 4, pp. 478- 
485,1996. 
5. Chen, W., Allen, J.K. and Mistree, F., “System 
Configuration: Concurrent Subsystem Embodiment and 
System Synthesis,” ASME Joumal of Mechanical 
Design, vol. 118, no. 2, pp. 165-170, 1996. 
Chen, W., Allen, J.K, Tsui, K-L and Mistree, F., “A 
Procedure for Robust Design: Minimizing Variations 
Caused by Noise Factors and Control Factors,” ASME 
Joumal of Mechanical Design,vol. 118, no. 4, pp.478- 
485,1996. 
Chen, W., Allen, J.K., Schrage, D.P. and Mistree, F., 
vol. 26, pp. 137-158, 1996. 
3. 
4. 
6.  
7. 
“Statistical Experimentation For Affordable Concurrent 
Design,” AIAA Journal, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 893-900, 
1997. 
Chen, W., Allen, J. K., and Mistree, F., “The Robust 
Concept Exploration Method for Enhancing Concurrent 
Systems Design”, Concurrent Engineering: Research 
and Applications, vol. 5,  no. 3, pp. 203-217, 1997. 
9. Cohen, T., “A Data Approach to Tracking and 
Evaluating Engineering Changes”, Ph.D. Thesis, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, 1997. 
10. Cohen, T., Fulton, R.E. (1998) “A Data Approach to 
Tracking and Evaluating Engineering Changes”, 1998 
ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences, 
Proceedings of DETC’98, Atlanta. 
11. DeLaurentis, D., “A Probabilistic Approach to Aircraft 
Design Emphasizing Stability and Control 
Uncertainties,” Ph.D. Dissertation, School of Aerospace 
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
November 1998. 
12. DeLaurentis, D., Cesnik, C., Lee, J., Mavris, D., 
Schrage, D., “A New Approach to Integrated Wing 
Design in Conceptual Synthesis and Optimization,” 6th 
AIAANSAFINASAIISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, 
WA, September 4-6, 1996. AIAA-96-4000. 
13. DeLaurentis, D.A., Mavris, D.N., “An IPPD Approach 
to the Preliminary Design Optimization of an HSCT 
using Design of Experiments”, 20th ICAS Congress, 
Sorrento, Italy, September 1996. 
14. DeLaurentis, D.A., Zink, P.S., Mavris, D.N., Cesnik, 
C.E.S., Schrage, D.P., “New Approaches to 
Multidisciplinary Synthesis: An Aero-Structures- 
Control Application Using Stastical Techniques,” 1st 
A I M S A E  World Aviation Congress, Los Angeles, 
CA, October 21-24, 1996. AIAA-96-5501. 
15. Hale, M.A., “A Computing Infrastructure that 
Facilitates Integrated Product and Process Development 
from a Decision-Based Perspective,” Ph.D. Thesis 
Proposal, School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, January, 1995. 
16. Hale, M.A., “An Open Computing Infrastructure that 
Facilitates Integrated Product and Process Development 
from a Decision-Based Perspective,” Doctoral Thesis, 
School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA. July 1996. 
17. Hale, M. A. and Craig, J. I., “Preliminary Development 
of Agent Technologies for a Design Integration 
Framework,” 5th AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO 
Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and 
Optimization - Panama City, September 7-9, 1994. 
18. Hale, M. A. and Craig, J. I., “Use of Agents to 
Implement an Integrated Computing Environment,” 
Computing in Aerospace 10, AIAA, San Antonio, TX, 
March 28-30, 1995. AIAA-95-1001. 
19. Hale, M. A. and J. I. Craig, “Techniques for Integrating 
Computer Programs into Design Architectures,” Sixth 
8. 
AIAA-94-4297. 
AIAA I NASA I USAF I ISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, 
WA, September 4-6, 1996. AIAA-96-4166. 
20. Hale, M. A., "Dynamic CATIA CATGEO Access: 
Powerful Interpretive Technologies Based on TWtcl," 
presented at the CATIA Operators Exchange Meeting, 
Long Beach, CA, October 8-12, 1995. 
21. Hale, M. A., "IMAGE: A Design Integration 
Framework Applied to the High Speed Civil 
Transport," HM301: First UniversityJIndustry 
Symposium on High Speed Civil Transport Vehicles, 
North Carolina State University, December 4-6,1994. 
22. Hale, M. A., "Preliminary Agent Technologies with 
CATIA," presented at the CATIA Operators Exchange 
Meeting, Dallas, October 9-13, 1994. 
23. Hale, M. A., Craig, J. I., Mistree, F. and Schrage, D.P., 
"On the Development of a Computing Infrastructure 
that Facilitates IPPD from a Decision-Based Design 
Perspective," 1st AIAA Aircraft Engineering, 
Technology, and Operations Congress, Anaheim, CA, 
September 19-21, 1995. AIAA-95-3880. 
24. Hale, M. A., Craig, J. I., Mistree, F., Schrage, D. P., 
"Implementing an IPPD Environment from a Decision- 
Based Design Perspective," ICASELaRC Workshop on 
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization, Hampton, VA, 
March 13-16, 1995. 
25. Hale, M. A., J. I. Craig, F. Mistree and D. P. Schrage, 
"DREAMS & IMAGE: A Model and Computer 
Implementation for Concurrent, Life-Cycle Design of 
Complex Systems," Concurrent Engineering: Research 
and Applications, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 171-186, June 
1996. 
26. Hall, N., and Fulton, R.E., "A Relational Database 
Application to Multidisciplinary Conceptual Design for 
HSCT," (Submitted for the publication). 
27. Hall, N., and R. Fulton, "A Relational Database 
Approach to a Multidisciplinary Conceptual Design for 
the HSCT," Georgia Institute of Technology, 
September, 1994. 
28. Hall, N. S. and Fulton, R. E., "An Investigation of a 
Relational Database Approach to a Multidisciplinary 
Conceptual Design for the HSCT", 1996 ASME Desim 
En~neering Technical Conferences and Computers in 
Engineering Conference, Irvine, California, August 18- 
22, 1996, Paper Number 96-DETCEIM-1425. 
29. Hall, N. S. and Fulton, R. E., "Impact of Data Modeling 
and Database Implementation Methods on the 
Optimization of Conceptual Aircraft Design", Research 
Paper, School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, 1996. 
30. Hall, N.S.; Fulton, R.E. (1997), "Impact of Data 
Modeling and Database Implementation Methods on the 
Optimization of Conceptual Aircraft Design", ASME 
Engineering Information Management Symposium 
(EIMS'97) at DETC'97, Sacramento. 
31. Hall, N.S., "Impact of Data Modeling and Database 
Implementation Methods on the Optimization of 
Conceptual Aircraft Design", M.S. Thesis, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, 1996. 
32. Har, J. and Fulton, R. E., "A Technical Note: Parallel 
Finite Element Implementation for Wing Models," 
Parallel Computing Research Lab, School of 
Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute' of 
Technology, May 5, 1995. 
33. Har, J. (1998) "A New Scalable Parallel Finite Element 
Approach for Contact-Impact Problems". 
34. Koch, P., "Hierarchical Modeling and Robust Synthesis 
for the Preliminary Design of Large Scale Complex 
Systems," Ph.D. Dissertation, School of Mechanical 
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA., 1997. 
35. Koch, P.N., Allen, J.K. and Mistree, F., "Problem of 
Size in Robust Design," Advances in Design 
Automation, (Parkinson, A. Ed.), New York: ASME 
36. Koch, P.N., Simpson, T.W., Allen, J.K., and Mistree, 
F., "Statistical Approximations for Multidisciplinary 
Optimization: The Problem of Size," Joumal of 
Aircraft, Special MDO Issue, vol. 36, no.1, pp. 275- 
286,1999. 
37. Lewis, K, "An Algorithm for Concurrent Subsystem 
Embodiment and System Synthesis," Ph.D. 
Dissertation, School of Mechanical Engineering, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA., 1996. 
38. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F, "On Developing a Taxonomy 
for Multidisciplinary Design Optimization: A Decision- 
Based Perspective," First World Congress of Structural 
and Multidisciplinary Optimization, Goslar, Germany. 
Paper number 118., 1995. 
39. Lewis, K., Smith W.F. and Mistree, F., "Ranged Set of 
Specifications for Complex Engineering Systems" in 
Simultaneous Engineering: Methodologies and 
Applications, pages 279-304, (U. Roy, J.M. Usher and 
H.R. Parsaei, Eds.), New York: Chapman-Hall, (1999). 
40. 40. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F., "Collaborative, 
Sequential and Isolated Decisions in Design," ASME 
Design Theory and Methodology '97, (Shah, J. Ed.), 
New York ASME 1997. ASME97-DETC97DTM- 
3883. 
41. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F., "Foraging-Directed Adaptive 
Linear Programming: An Algorithm for Solving 
Nonlinear Mixed DiscreteIContinuous Design 
Problems," Advances in Design Automation, (Dutta, D. 
Ed.), New York: ASME 1996. ASME96-DETC/CAD- 
1601. 
42. Lewis, K., Lucas, T. and Mistree, F., "A Decision- 
Based Approach for Developing A Ranged Top-Level 
Aircraft Specification: A Conceptual Exposition," 5th 
AIAAINASAI USAF/ISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Panama 
City, FL,, September 7-9, 1994. AIAA-94-4304. 
43. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F., "The Other Side of 
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization: 
Accommodating a Multiobjective, Uncertain and Non- 
.. - 
1997. ASME97-DETCICAD-3983. 
364 
Deterministic World," Engineering Optimization, vol. 
31, no. 2, 1998. 
44. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F., "Modeling Interactions in 
Multidisciplinary Design: A Game Theoretic 
Approach," AIAA Journal, vol. 35, no. -8, pp. 1387- 
1392,1997. 
45. Lewis, K: and Mistree, F., "Collaborative, Sequential 
:.; and Isolated Decisions in Design," ASME Joumal of 
* MechanicalDesign, vol. 120,110.4, pp. 643-652, 1998. 
46. Lewis, K. and Mistree, F., "FALP: Foraging-Directed 
Adaptive Linear Programming - A Hybrid Algorithm 
for Discrete/Continuous Problems," Engineering 
Optimization, (in press). 
47. Lucas, T., "Formulation and Solution of Hierarchical 
Decision Support Problems," M.S. Thesis, School of 
Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 1995. 
48. Lucas, T., Vadde, S., Chen, W., Allen, J.K. and 
Mistree, F., "Utilization of Fuzzy Compromise DSPs 
for Hierarchical Design Problems, '' 
AIAA/ASMElASCElAHS/ACS 35th Structures, 
Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference, Hilton 
Head, South Carolina, April 18-20, 1994. AIAA-94- 
1543. 
49. Man ,  W. J., Mavris, D. N., and Schrage, D. P., "A 
Hierarchical Aircraft Life Cycle Cost Analysis Model," 
1st AIAA Aircraft Engineering, Technology, and 
Operations Congress, Los Angeles, CA, September 19- 
50. Marx, W. J., Mavris, D. N., and Schrage, D. P., 
"Integrated Design and Manufacturing for the High 
Speed Civil Transport," 19th ICAS Congress I AIM 
Aircraft Systems Conference, Anaheim, CA, September 
51. Mam, W. J., Mavris, D. N., and Schrage, D. P., 
"Integrated Product Development for the Wing 
Structural Design of the High Speed Civil Transport," 
5th AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Panama 
City, FL, September 7-9, 1994. AiAA-94-4253. 
52. Mam, W. J., Mavris, D. N., and Schrage, D. P., 
"Knowledge-based Manufacturing and Structural 
Design for a High Speed Civil Transport," AS205: 1st 
IndustryIAcademy Symposium on Research for Future 
Supersonic and Hypersonic Vehicles, Greensboro, NC, 
December 4-6, 1994. 
53. Marx, W. J., Schrage, D. P., and Mavris, D. N., "An 
Application of Artificial Intelligence for Computer- 
Aided Design and Manufacturing," International 
Conference on Computational Engineering Science; 
Supercomputing in Multidisciplinary Analysis and 
Design, Mauna Lani, HI, July 30 - August 3, 1995. 
54. Mavris, D.N., Bandte, O., and Schrage, D.P., 
"Economic Uncertainty Assessment of an HSCT Using 
a Combined Design of Experimentshlonte Carlo 
Simulation Approach", 17th Annual Conference of the 
21, 1995. AIM-95-3861. 
18-23, 1994. ICAS-94- 10.8.4. 
ICES-95-B6-3. 
International Society of Parametric Analysts, San 
Diego, CA, May 1995. 
55. Miller, G.D., "An Active Flexible Wing 
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Method", 
AIAAAJSAFAVASMSSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Panama 
City, FL, 7-9 September 1994. 
56. Mistree, F., Lewis, K. and Stonis, L., "Selection in the 
Conceptual Design of Aircraft," 5th 
AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Panama 
City, FL, September 7-9, 1994. AIAA-94-4382. 
57. Mistree. F., Patel, B. and Vadde, S., "On Modeling 
Multiple Objectives and Multi-Level Decisions in 
Concurrent Design," Advances in Design Automation, 
pp. 151-161, (Gilmore, B.J., Hoeltzel, D., Dutta, D. and 
Eschenauer, H., Eds.), New York: ASME, (1994). 
58. Nottingham, C.R., Ortega, R.A., Rangarajan, B., Koch, 
P.N., and Mistree, F., "Designing for Maintainability in 
the Preliminary Stages of Aircraft Engine Design," 
Advances in Design Automation, (Parkinson, A. Ed.) 
New York ASME 1997. ASME97-DETC97K)AC- 
3963. 
59. Rohl, P., Mavris, D.N., and Schrage, D.P., "A 
Multilevel Wing Design Procedure Centered on the 
ASTROS Structural Optimization System," 5th 
AIAA/NASA/USAFIISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization - Panama 
City, September 7-9, 1994. AIAA-94-4411. 
60. Rohl, P.J., , "A Multilevel Decomposition Procedure for 
the Preliminary Wing Design of a High Speed Civil 
Transport Aircraft," Ph.D. Thesis, School of Aerospace 
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, June 
1995. 
61. Rohl, P.J., Mavris, D.N., and..Schrage, D.P., "A 
Multilevel Decomposition Procedure for the 
Preliminary Wing Design of High-speed Civil 
Transport Aircraft," First Industry/Academy 
Symposium on Research for Future Supersonic and 
Hypersonic Vehicles, Greensboro, NC, December 1994. 
62. Rohl, P.J., Mavris, D.N., and Schrage, D.P., 
"Preliminary HSCT Wing Design Through Multilevel 
Decomposition," lSt AIAA Aircraft Engineering, 
Technology, and Operations Congress, Los Angeles, 
CA, September 19-21,1995, AIAA 95-3944. 
63. Rohl, P.J., Schrage, D.P. and Mavris, D.N., "Combined 
Aerodynamic and Structural Optimization of a High- 
Speed Civil Transport Wing," 36th AIAA Structures, 
Dynamics, and Materials Conference, New Orleans, 
64. Simpson, T.W., Chen, W., Allen, J.K. and Mistree, F., 
"Conceptual Design of a Family of Products Through 
the Use of the Robust Concept Exploration Method," 
AIAA/NASA/USAFASSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, 
Washington, September 4-6, 1996, pp. 1535-1545. 
ASME DE-Vol. 69-2. 
LA, April 1995, AIAA 95-1222. 
365 
A I M  Paper Number 96-4161. 
65. Simpson, T.W., “Development of a Design Process for 
Realizing Open Engineering Systems,” M.S. Thesis, 
School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, August 1995. 
66. Mistree, F., Smith, W. F., Bras, B., Allen, J. K. and 
Muster, D., “Decision-Based Design: A Contemporary 
Paradigm for Ship Design”, Transactions, Society of 
Naval Architects and Marine Enrzineers, vol. 98, pp. 
67. Synn, S.Y. and Fulton, R.E., “Practical Strategy for 
Concurrent Substructure Analysis,” Joumal of 
Computers Structures, vo1.54, no.5, 1995. 
68. Synn, S.Y. and Fulton, R.E., “The Concurrent Element 
Level Processing for Nonlinear Dynamic Analysis on a 
Massively Parallel Computer,” Third National 
Symposium on Large-scale Structural Analysis for 
High-Performance Computers and Workstations, 
Norfolk, VA, November 8- 11, 1994. 
69. Synn, S.Y. and Fulton, R.E., “The Prediction of Parallel 
Skyline Solver and It’s Implementation For Large Scale 
Structural Analysis,“ Third National Symposium on 
Large-scale Structural Analysis for High-Performance 
Computers and Workstations, Norfolk, VA, November 
8-11, 1994 (also in Jounzal of Computer Systems in 
Engineering). 
70. Synn, S.Y. and Fulton, R.E., “The Prediction of Parallel 
Skyline Solver and its Implementation for Large Scale 
Structural Analysis,” Third National Symposium on 
Large-scale Structural Analysis for High-Performance 
Computers and Workstations, Norfolk, VA, November 
8-11, 1994, (Also, in Jountal of Computer Systems in 
Engineering). 
7 1. Synn, S.Y., “Practical Domain Decomposition 
Approaches for Parallel Finite Element Analysis”, 
Ph.D. Thesis, School of Mechanical Engineering, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, January 1995. 
72. Synn, S.Y., K. Schwan and Fulton, R.E., “Analysis of 
Large Scale Heterogeneous Structures on Massively 
Parallel Computers,” Jourrzal of Concurrency, 
Practice/Experieizce, 1995. 
73. Synn, S.Y.; Fulton, R.E. (1995), “Performance 
Prediction of a Parallel Skyline Solver and its 
Implementation for Large Scale Structure Analysis”, 
Computing Systems in Engineering: An Intemational 
Journal, Vol., 6,  No. 3, Pergamon Press Inc., 
74. Synn, S.Y.; Fulton, R.E. (1995), “Concurrent Element 
Level Processing for Nonlinear Dynamic Analysis on a 
Massively Parallel Computer,” Computing Systems in 
Engineering: An Intemational Joumal, Vol. 6, No. 3, 
Pergamon Press Inc., Tarrytown, NY, USA, 285-293. 
75. Synn, S.Y., “Practical Domain Decomposition 
Approaches for Parellel Finite Element Analysis”, 
Ph.D. Thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, 1995. 
76. Synn, Sang Y. and Fulton, Robert E., “Prediction of 
Parallel Computing Performance”, Research Paper, 
565-597, 1990. 
T a n y t o ~ ,  NY, USA. 275-284. 
Parallel Processing Lab, School of Mechanical 
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 1996. 
77. Vadde, S., “Modeling Multiple Objectives and 
Multilevel Decisions in Concurrent Design of 
Engineering Systems, ” M.S. Thesis, School of 
Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 1995. 
78. Vadde, S.. Allen, J.K., Lucas, T. and Mistree, F., “On 
Modeling Design Evolution Along a Design Time- 
Line,” 5th AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO Symposium on 
Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization - Panama 
City, September 7-9, 1994. AIAA-94-43 13. 
79. Vadde, S. and Mistree, F., “Design of a Shaft-Disk 
System: Modeling Interactions Between Design and 
Manufacture,” AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO 
Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and 
Optimization, Bellevue, Washington, September 4-6, 
1996, pp. 1546-1557. AIAA Paper Number 96-4162. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge support from the NASA 
Langley Multidisciplinary Optimization Brach for this work 
under grant NGT 51102L. Advisors included Dr. David 
Rudy, Dr. Thomas Zang, and Dr. Robert Weston. Research 
results from students funded by NASA Multidisciplinary 
Analysis (MDA) and Graduate Student Research Program 
(GSRP) is acknowledged. 
Grant industrial partners included Rockwell International - 
North American Aircraft (now Boeing), Seal Beach, CA and 
Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Company (now Lockheed 
Martin), Marietta, GA. Their assistance throughout this 
effort is appreciated. 
All research done by the authors was conducted while in 
studies at Georgia Tech funded under the projects given 
above. Current affiliations are listed in the introduction. 
366 
8. AUTHORS 
P. Scott Zink is a Ph.D. Student in the 
Georgia Tech Aerospace Systems 
Design Laboratory. He is researching 
integrated aeroelastic optimization 
techniques for active aeroelastic wing 
technology and developing a method 
by which structural designs can be 
acquired that are robust to maneuver 
load uncertainty. He received a 
Bachelor of Aerospace Engineering 
aizd M.S. in Aerospace Engineering from Georgia Tech in 
I995 and 1997, respectively. Mr. Zink can be reached at 
404/894-3343 and scott.zink@asdl.gatech.edu. 
Daniel A. DeLaurentis, Ph.D., is a 
Research Engineer I1 in the School of 
Aerospace Engineering at Georgia 
Tech and co-leads the advanced 
design methodology thrust area for 
the ASDL and Center for Aerospace 
Systems Analysis (CASA), which 
includes elements of system 
engineering and system analysis 
evaluation. He is the author of 
several papers OIZ the topics of uncertainty modeling for  
complex systems, robust design methods, and 
multidisciplinary design (MDO). Dr. Dehurentis’ 
education includes a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering at the 
Florida Institute of Technology and a M.S. and Ph.D. in 
Aerospace Engineering at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology. Dr. DeLaurentis can be reached at 404/894- 
8280 and dandelaurentis @ae.gatech.edu. 
Mark A. Hale, Ph.D., conducts 
research 011 computational 
enterprise management for 
integrated product and process 
development from a decision- 
based perspective at the Georgia 
Tech Center for Aerospace 
Systems Analysis. He developed a 
computer architecture name 
IMAGE (Intelligent 
Multidisciplinary Aircrafi Generation Environment) for  this 
research. Dr. Hale has over 15 refereed publications and 
conference publications in the field. He is a member of 
IEEE, AIAA, SAE, and ASME. Dr. Hale can be reached at 
404/894-9810 and markhale @ ae.gatech.edu. 
Vitali V. Volovoi, Ph.D. is a Post 
Doctoral Fellow in the School of 
Aerospace Engineering at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. Dr. Volovoi 
conducts research in structural 
mechanics with emphasis on the 
analysis and design of advanced 
co;nposite structures iizcluding elastic 
tailoring of composites, integration of 
. %  
high fidelity structural tools into the general framework for 
conceptual aizd preliminary design of modern aircrap, 
structural optiini:atioiz techniques, failure c1zaracteri:atiorz 
of composites; finite elemeiit methods for structural and 
multi-body dynamics, rotorcraft and fixed wing 
aeroelasticity. Dr. Volovoi has over IO  publications in 
refereed journals and coizference proceedings. His 
education includes a University Diploma Cum Laude in 
Applied Mathematics from the Moscow State University and 
a Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering $-om the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. 
Daniel P. Schrage, Ph.D., is 
director of the Center for 
Excellence in Rotorcrap 
Technology, and a Professor at 
the School of Aerospace 
Engineering at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. His 
education includes a B.S., 
General Engr., USMA,. West Point, NY; M.S., Aerospace 
Engr., Georgia Tech; DSc., Mechanical Engiizeering, 
Washington U,, St. Louis, MO; and M.A., Bus. Admin., 
Webster U. Government experience includes engineering 
and management experience at AVSCOM as Director for 
Advanced Systems; ChieJ; Structures & Aeromechanics Div. 
and Aeromechanics Branch ChieJ: Former member of the 
Army Science Board, current member of the Air Force 
Studies Board and NASA’s ARTS Committee. Military 
experience: Reserves: COL, MOBDES Faculty USMA Dept. 
Mech. & Civil Eng.; Active Duty: 9 years an an Army 
Aviator with combat experience and 2 years as a Field 
Artillery O f i c e .  Publications include over 50 technical 
paperdreports with 18 refereed and contributed chapters to 
three books. 
James I. Craig, Ph.D., is co- 
director of the Georgia Tech 
Center for Aerospace Systems 
Analysis. His current research 
interests and sponsored 
projects are focused on 
problems involving complex 
engineering systems design, 
structural dynamics and active 
structural control. Dr. Craig may be reached at 404/894- 
3042 and james.craig@ae.gatech.edu. 
367 
Farrokh Mistree’s, Ph.D., 
design experience spans 
mechanical, aeronautical, 
structural, industrial and 
sofrware engineering. His 
research focus is on developing 
the means to enhance the ability 
of human designers to make 
decisions in the early stages of 
distributed collaborative systems design, integrated product 
and process development, and computer aided design 
(CAD) and optimization. Dr. Cheiz received her Ph.D. 
from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1995. She is 
the recipient of the 1996 NSF Faculty Early Career Award 
and 1998 ASME Pi Tau Sigma Gold Medal achievement 
award. She is a member of ASME, AIAA, and ASQC. Dr. 
Chen can be reached at 312/996-6072 and 
weichenl @uic.edu. 
any product rea1i;ation process. He is particularly 
interested in learning how to manage design freedom 
associated with the design, deployment, operation and 
support of open and sustainable engineering systems. Since 
1992 he has been Professor of Mechanical Engineering at 
Georgia Tech. He received his Bachelor of Technology 
with Honours from I.I.T. Kharagpur, India and his M.S. and 
Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1970 
and 1974, respectively. DK Mistree can be reached at 
404/894-8412 and farrokh.mistree@me.gatech.edu. 
Dimitris N. Mavris, Ph.D. is an 
Assistant Professor and Mmager 
of the Aerospace Systems Design 
Laboratory Engineering at the 
Georgia Institute of Technology. 
Dr. Mavris is responsible for  the 
research of 25 graduate students 
working in a variety of research 
areas which are sponsored by the 
U S .  Army, Air Force, Navy, 
NASA, and industry. He has authored 35 publications, and 
his working experience includes involvement in the study of 
rotor/fuselage interaction aerodynamics, helicopter and 
aircraft design, Navy Ship airwake turbulence modeling, 
and the High Speed Civil Transport metrics program as 
part of the NASA team. Dr. Mavris is presently involved 
with the study of advanced propulsion concepts for the Joint 
Advanced Strike Technology (JAST) program, and the 
design for affordability of future supersonic, very large 
subsonic transports, general aviation, and civil tiltrotors. 
Wei Chen, Ph.D., is an Assistant 
Professor in the Department of 
Mechanical Engineering at the 
University of Illinois at Chicago, 
where she is director of the Design & 
Integration Engineering Laboratory. 
Her main research area has been 
engineering design and 
manufacturing. Her research goal is 
to advance the theory, methods, and 
tools for those design and manufacturing problems with a 
magnitude of complexity, in the context of globally 
competitive markets and the need to quickly respond to the 
change. Her current research involves issues such as 
robust design, multicriteria decision making under risk and 
uncertainty, concept exploration of complex systems, 
Peter Rohl, Ph.D., received his 
Master Degree in Mechanical 
Engineering from Technical 
University of Braunschweig, 
Germany, in 1990, and his P1z.D. 
in Aerospace Engineering from 
the Georgia Institute of 
Technology in 1995, focusing on 
struchiral optimization and 
multidisciplinary optimization applied to supersonic 
transport aircrajl design. Since then he has been working 
at the General Electric Corporate Research and 
Development Center in Schenectady, NY. His areas of 
research include the integration of design and 
manufacturing process simulation tools into an optimization 
and robust design framework, parametric CAD modeling, 
integration of CAD and CAE software and overall design 
tools development. Dr. Rohl can be reached at 518/387- 
4004 and rohl@crd.ge.com 
Kemper Lewis, Ph.D., is an 
Assistant Professor at the University 
at Buffalo in the Department of 
Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering, His research and 
education interests lie in developing 
decision support tools for 
multidisciplinary design, 
characterized by multiple 
objectives, uncertainty, and 
distributed design environments. Dr. Lewis is funded by the 
National Science Foundation, NASA-Langley Research 
Center, Praxair Inc., Rodgard Co., Allison-Rolls Royce 
Engine Co., and the Australian Defence Force Academy. 
Dr. Lewis can be reached at 716/645-2593, ext.2232 and 
kelewis @eng.buffalo.edu. 
368 
Patrick N. Koch, Ph.D., is 
currently employed by Engineous 
Sofmare, II~c., where he is focusing 
on the development, 
implementation, and application of 
methods for  addressing uncertainty, 
including robust optimization and 
six sigma techniques, reliability 
analysis and probabilistic 
optimization techniques, and Monte Carlo simulation 
techniques. Dr. Koch completed his doctoral research at 
Georgia Tech in December of 1997. He received his M.S. 
degree in Mechanical Engineering from Georgia Tech in 
1994, and his B.S. in Mechanical Engineering with 
distinction from the University of Minnesota, Institute of 
Technology in 1992. Dr. Koch can be reached ar 919/319- 
7666 ext. 262 and koch@engineous.com. 
Carlos E. S. Cesnik, Ph.D., received 
his Engineering Degree in 
Aeronautics and Masters in 
Aeronautical Engineering from the 
Instituto Tecnoldgico de Aerona'utica 
(ITA, Brazil), and Ph.D. in Aerospace 
Engineering from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. Previously to 
his current appointment as the 
Boeing Assistant Professor of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIZ he worked as a 
research engineer at Embraer and as a research fellow at 
Georgia Tech. Prof. Cesnik's educational and research 
interests include nonlinear aeroelastic modeling and 
analysis for  multidisciplinary design environments, with 
emphasis on highly flexible structures and distributed 
embedded actuation. He teaches structural dynamics, 
aeroelasticity, and structural design courses. Dr. Cesnik 
can be reached at (61 7) 252-1518 and ccesnik@mit.edu. 
Tim Simpson, Ph.D., is an assistant 
professor at Penn State University 
with a joint appointment in the 
Departments of Mechanical & 
Nuclear Engineering and Industrial 
& Manufacturing Engineering. He 
obtained his Ph.D. and M.S. degrees 
in Mechanical Engineering in 1998 
and 1995, respectively, from the 
Georgia Institute of Technology. His 
research interests include 
multidisciplinary design and optimization, surrogate 
metamodels for  engineering design, and product family and 
product platfonn design for  mass customization. He is a 
member of ASME, A I M ,  and ASEE. Dr. Simpson can be 
reached at 814/863-7136 and tws8@psu.edu. 
369 
