Dual-Use Personal NavCom Service' 
Policy Considerations for a Combined Military and Civil Service 
Raymond DiEsposti 
The Aerospace Corporation, MY68 1 
P.O. Box 92957 
Los Angeles, CA 90009-2957 
ravniond.s.dissposti~ aero.org 
310-336-8404 
Abstract -- The Global Positioning System (GPS) and Per- 
sonal Communication Services (PCS) satellites are both 
information system technologies applicable to the mobile 
user. GPS, which was developed by the United States 
military, is one of the most successful dual-use systems. 
The size of the military GPS user equipment market cur- 
rently is only a small fraction of the civilian market. GPS 
enables accurate timing, positioning, and navigation capa- 
bilities on a worldwide basis, whereas PCS satellites also 
enable worldwide communications. 
In the past, commercial GPS user sets have been integrated 
with digital maps and computer databases (yellow pages) 
to enable user situational awareness. For example, this type 
of implementation has been integrated into auto navigation 
systems. However, in many applications, the user requires 
time-evolving environmental data for enhanced situational 
awareness. For example, the automobile navigator would 
like information on traffic patterns, accidents, and road 
construction. Since the user is mobile, he needs a driver 
information service supplied through a wireless data link. 
In the past, we have proposed Personal Navigation Service 
(PNS) as wireless PCS tailored to the mobile con- 
sumerhavigator. 
Military battlefield planners and participants have similar 
types of requirements for situational awareness involving 
both navigation and wireless data communication. Current 
world political situations require an effective military net- 
work centric global grid, which maximizes information 
superiority for the US and our allies. Shared communica- 
tion links and the PVT (position, velocity and time) 
strengths of GPS create many opportunities (many yet to 
be conceived) for improved mission effectiveness. 
There is a compelling opportunity for a complementary 
space-based Navcom satellite architecture to meet the 
needs of both the military and civilian users. Global civil 
Navcom systems for air, rail, road traffic and infrastructure 
management (among many others) parallel many aspects 
James Johansen 
The MITRE Corporation 
P.O. Box 886 
El Segundo, CA 90245-0886 
jdj @mitre.org 
3 10-363-3 139 
of military Navcom systems for battlefield awareness inside 
the zones of armed conflict. Agreed upon overlapping ele- 
ments of constituent civil and military navigation and 
communication systems can be integrated into a common 
infrastructure. Open system PNS standards illustrate some 
of these shared architecture concepts [ 11. 
With a dual-use system, there are several issues, which need 
to be resolved. 
(1) Can a cost-effective Navcom Sat system be developed 
that meets all of the requirements of both military and ci- 
vilian users? 
(2) Why should the military consider dual-use? 
(3) Why should the civilian sector consider dual-use? 
(4) Can dual-use be developed without compromising mili- 
tary performance, availability, and security? 
(5) How does dual-use benefit the military as well as the 
civilian sector? 
( 6 )  Why should navigation service and communication 
services be integrated on the same satellite system? 
This paper will address these questions as well as identify 
many issues associated with dual-use, integrated Navcom, 
and propose solutions to those issues. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
ARCHITECTURE DEVELOPMENT 
SUMMARY AND FURTHER STUDY 
RATIONAL FOR DUAL-USE NAVCOM 
APPENDIX - TBMCS OVERVIEW 
' 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 copyright 2000 IEEE 
69 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Integrated navigation and communication - Does the idea 
have merit, or is it just an interesting notion? Dual-use (a 
system used for both military and civilian applications) 
communication system - Is this possible or practical? What 
about a dual-use navigation system - Is this practical? 
Well, the answer to the dual-use navigation question is 
easy. The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a dual-use, 
satellite-based navigation system. For over 10 years, both 
civilians and military users have been using GPS satellites 
for positioning and timing applications. GPS is also an 
intemational dual-use system, since civilian users world- 
wide and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
members utilize the system extensively. 
The GPS satellites broadcast two types of codes: (1) the 
C/A code, which is available to both military and civilian 
users, and (2) the encrypted Y code, which is only avail- 
able to authorized users. For GPS, which was originally 
developed by the military for military applications, the size 
of the civilian market has even surpassed the military mar- 
ket. The civilian market has created thousands of jobs in 
the high tech sector with applications ranging from auto 
navigation, surveying, synchronizing electric power grids 
and communications networks, to measuring earth plate 
motion and continental drift. 
What about dual-use communication and navigation sys- 
tems? Does it make sense to integrate the navigation and 
communication functions on common satellites and utilize 
in integrated navigation and communication user sets? Do 
typical navigation users also require the ability to commu- 
nicate? Do wireless communication users sometimes need 
the ability to navigate? Are the two functions compatible 
with a common placement of the satellites and satellite 
constellation configuration? Can terrestrial-based, dual-use 
augmentations provide some benefit? We believe that the 
answers to these questions are yes as explained below. 
The baseline GPS constellation consists of 24 satellites (six 
orbital planes with four satellites in each plane) in 12-hour 
Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) with nominal radius of 26,600 
km. Assuming this to be a good constellation configuration 
for navigation, is this acceptable for communication? A 
main concem for real-time voice is the delay due to signal 
propagation. Assuming worst case of 26,600 km, the round 
trip delay is about 0.18 seconds, which may cause notice- 
able degradation. However, some applications, such as 
messaging and paging, do not have to operate in a real- 
time, two-way fashion and can tolerate small delays up to a 
few seconds. Secondly, the coverage requirements for 
navigation and communication are different. For example, 
at least four visible satellites, having good geometry for 
triangulation, are required for navigation, whereas, only a 
single satellite in view is needed for communication. With 
the GPS constellation, typically 6 or more satellites are in 
view a large percentage of the time. This redundancy allows 
graceful degradation in the case of a satellite failure and for 
situations such as masking due to buildings. The same ar- 
.< gument can apply to a satellite-based communication 
function. Though failure of different payloads on single 
satellites may complicate planning, the high level of satellite 
redundancy may help to alleviate this concem, especially for 
the communication function. 
Other technical issues on constellation architecture include 
link margin (and signal attenuation due to propagation path 
length), satellite Doppler effects, satellite time in view, 
routing and handover of any cross-links between satellites. 
Other technical issues associated with Low Earth Orbit 
(LEO) vs ME0 vs Geostationary Orbit (GEO) orbits are 
launch vehicle size and cost, number of satellites, satellite 
footprint, orbital periodtime in view, power and link mar- 
gin, occultation, satellite dynamics control, effect of satellite 
dynamics on the signal and operation. For com applications, 
geostationary satellites are desirable since they are fixed 
relative to the earth and require only a few for worldwide 
coverage (except at very high latitudes), but they also have 
some undesirable features, such as signal propagation delay 
and more signal path length attenuation than LEO’S. 
One possible hybrid architecture is to have a ME0 constel- 
lation provide nav service only while a few GEO satellites 
provide both augmented nav service plus com service. The 
augmented nav service provided by the GEO sats could pro- 
vide integrity and differential corrections to the ME0 
constellations, since they are more suited to real-time op- 
eration due to their fixed earth geometry. This is the 
approach taken by INMARSAT, which has added a naviga- 
tion capability to their GEO com satellites to serve as the 
Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) to GPS for 
added navigation availability and integrity in the U.S. Na- 
tional Air Space (NAS). One of at least two candidate 
architectures in the European Galileo navigation satellite 
system consists of a 24 satellite ME0 plus 9 satellite GEO 
constellation [2]. The Europeans are also considering a 
communications service for position-related data. Further 
discussion on this concept will be provided later in the Ar- 
chitecture Development section of this paper, along with 
ideas on augmentations involving terrestrial wireless net- 
works. 
Finally, from a user requirement viewpoint, does it make 
sense to integrate the navigation and communications func- 
tions in transceivers? For resource monitoring applications, 
relay of the location or track of an asset via a wireless data 
link, is essential. Wireless access to a server database of 
latitudeflongitude addresses (enhanced yellow pages) may 
be essential for user-friendly auto navigation. Also, for 
70 
many navigation applications, situational awareness is a 
tremendous enhancement. Sometimes, overlaying the user 
location on a map provides suitable situational awareness. 
However, in many applications, the user must also be 
aware of his movement relative to other users, or objects in 
the vicinity, or be aware of other intelligence 0; bulletin 
information. For example, air navigation, forest firefight- 
ers, and soldiers on the battlefield, have this requirement. 
For situational awareness that involves moving objects or 
time-evolving information, such as locations of enemy 
forces, weather conditions and bulletins, both positioning 
and a wireless data link are essential. For emergency situa- 
tions, the ability to communicate and locate is extremely 
important for both the people needing assistance and the 
rescuers. As an example, the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) has mandated that wireless handsets 
have an auto-location capability by 2001 for E-91 1 appli- 
cations. The military counterpart is the Combat Survivor 
Evader Locator (CSEL), which is the integrated GPShadio 
handset for survivor rescue shown in Figure 1. 
\. 
Figure 1 CSEL Handheld Unit 
With the availability of small, low-cost GPS chipsets, inte- 
gration of GPS into other sensors and equipment is likely 
to become more prevalent. Certainly the commuter would 
like to carry a single integrated transceiver rather than a 
separate cell phone and a GPS receiver. The typical foot 
soldier, whose gear can approach 100 lbs, is very interested 
in integrated electronics equipment to reduce carry weight. 
What are the feasibility and/or practicality of dual-use navi- 
gation and communication? GPS was already cited as an 
extremely successful dual-use navigation system. But, what 
about dual-use communications systems? The main argu- 
ment in favor of such a concept is now presented. 
Military satellite communication systems typically have to 
be designed to provide a worldwide, traffic increase or surge 
capability. Worldwide, since a conflict can arise anywhere 
in the world, while a surge capacity is needed to support 
large increases in traffic (sometimes localized) during times 
of conflict, but typically little bandwidth (except for local- 
ized and training events) during times of peace. On the other 
hand, commercial communication systems are sized to han- 
dle a nearly constant capacity (at least averaged over the 
period of a day or week), though peak loading can occur 
during holidays and a disaster. Considering the commercial 
and military requirements, a reasonable implementation of a 
dual-use satellite system would be to assign resource prior- 
ity to the military during times of conflict (such as number 
of satellites, power, bandwidth, channels, etc). During times 
of peace, though, the civilian sector would utilize most of 
the resources. Revenues generated through the civilian use 
would help offset the cost of the system. For the military, 
the main concern would be to ensure priority when needed, 
especially if the user equipment gets integrated into the in- 
frastructure. Precedence exists for a conceptually similar 
type of dual-use utilization, e.g. the Civil Reserve Air Fleet 
[3]. Further discussion on this will be provided later in the 
paper. 
2. RATIONALE FOR DUAL-USE NAVCOM 
The following discussion provides more detail into the 
many issues associated with dual-use and integrated naviga- 
tion and communication systems. 
Markets 
There are many large markets in both the civilian and mili- 
tary sectors. On the civilian side, there are markets in city, 
local, state, and the federal governments, as well as com- 
mercial markets for personal Navcom, transportation, and 
emergency applications. Police and firefighters could make 
use of Navcom systems to allocate and control resources in 
efficient manners and maintain situational awareness. 
Commuters can make use of these systems for auto naviga- 
tion, which is tied in to traffic, weather, and road condition 
notification systems. Consumers can also get directions or 
enhanced yellow-page information from wireless service 
providers that tap into Internet databases. Federal agents can 
make use of Navcom for border patrol applications. Simi- 
larly, the Coast Guard can make use of these systems for 
71 
emergency, rescue, and anti-smuggling operations. Relief 
agencies can make use of Navcom systems in situations of 
disaster relief - for some disasters which destroy local in- 
frastructure, satellite systems may be the only ones 
functional in the locality. Airlines can make use of these 
systems for enhanced cockpit awareness during free flight, 
automatic relay of voice and data recorder (black box) 
data, and automatic collision avoidance. Freight companies 
can track assets to monitor the location of resources, esti- 
mate time-of-arrival, and to prevent theft. GPS and Satcom 
are indispensable for sea navigation and have recently been 
applied as a countermeasure to piracy. 
Since the U.S. government is prevented from competing 
directly with commercial communications providers, em- 
phasis should be placed on com applications, which service 
government and military organizations. However, even 
these markets can be quite large. Also, since the com serv- 
ice is satellite-based, the cost for consumer voice 
transmission may be excessive, whereas packet data or 
data broadcast (which enhances the navigation function), 
may be more reasonably priced. Alternatively, if govem- 
ments and commercial companies can reach a partnership 
arrangement, which limits the scope of the services, and 
provides it as a utility to improve infrastructure, this should 
hela, to develop a standardized system, which lowers cost. 
This is not very different from how older public utilities 
and road systems were standardized, financed, and devel- 
oped through government involvement. More information 
will be provided below in the section on Financing. 
On the military side, again, there are many applications. 
The National Guard can implement these systems for 
command and control in cases of national emergencies. 
The Army wants to digitize the battlefield, showing loca- 
tion and attributes of friendly and unfriendly forces. The 
Navy and Air Force would like to know the location and 
characteristics of their assets for battle planning, command 
and control. Reliable information of this nature provides 
tremendous benefit during times of conflict. 
OSA and Technology 
The military has been advocating Open Systems Architec- 
ture (OSA) as a means to increase competition, lower 
maintenance and upgrade costs, and enhance the technol- 
ogy upgrade cycle [4]. The OSA business model has been 
very rewarding to the civilian consumer. For example, in 
the last few years, personal computers have come down in 
price while at the same time their capabilities have been 
greatly enhanced. Similarly, competition in the cell phone 
market has caused mobile wireless communications to 
come down in price and usage has expanded rapidly. Com- 
petition has also occurred with civilian GPS receivers, 
bringing a receiver cost down to a few hundred dollars, and 
GPS chipsets to a few 10’s of dollars. Several cell phone 
vendors are now planning to integrate GPS chipsets into 
their handsets and offer location services [ 5 ] ,  [ 6 ] ,  and [7]. 
While the military has been advocating OSA, commercial 
acquisition, and technology insertion, they have had far less 
success than the commercial sector, especially when it 
comes to consumer electronics. One way for the military to 
lower their development and procurement costs in this area 
is to leverage off of the much larger civilian markets. If both 
military and civilian systems are based on the same stan- 
dards, it should be much easier for the military to take 
advantage of the competition, lower costs, and faster tech- 
nology insertion cycles typical in the competitive 
commercial sectors. The military systems, though, would 
most likely require some modification of the civilian stan- 
dards to enable better anti-jam capability, security, and 
survivability. It’s possible that a civilian market may de- 
velop for ruggedized military products, which omit critical 
technology components or subsystems. For example, it may 
be possible to market a civilian version of a military GPS 
receiver, provided that it does not include the security sub- 
systems. The user and device interfaces, other hardware and 
software, could be the same, though. In theory, a large ci- 
vilian market for such a device could help lower cost for the 
military counterpart. 
Similar Applications and Standardization 
Many of the applications in the civilian sector are similar to 
those in the military sector. For example, the operations of 
civilian rail or ground traffic management, situational 
awareness for forest firefighters and border patrol may be 
functionally similar to that of Tactical Situational Aware- 
ness (TSA) of the digitized Army battlefield. All three 
involve maintaining and relaying data relevant to a user’s 
environment. Cockpit awareness and collision avoidance for 
commercial airlines free flight may be very similar to situ- 
ational awareness for the Air Force jet pilot. In fact, it 
makes sense to develop common international standards for 
military and civilian aircraft, otherwise military aircraft may 
not be permitted to fly over national airspaces and land, due 
to safety violations. It should be possible to develop com- 
mon standards for maps, databases, interfaces, and 
communications protocols for multiple applications. Devel- 
oping common standards for the larger civilian markets 
should have the effect of lowering costs for the smaller 
military market. 
Financing, Development, Deployment, Control, and Main- 
tenance 
The government can also facilitate lowering the cost of 
military, civilian government, and civilian commercial sys- 
tems by financing, helping to develop, and endorsing 
standards. For example, the U.S. government encourages 
acceptance and integration of GPS into peaceful civil, com- 
72 
mercial and scientific applications worldwide and thus 
make GPS the standard for worldwide navigation. If the 
world were to adopt this standard, the costs associated with 
airline navigation could decrease dramatically. In standards 
development, the government could serve the role of the 
facilitator, trying to balance commercial interests versus 
government and military requirements in a fair and unbi- 
ased, open-competition fashion. Government funding and 
endorsement can help to stabilize commercial enterprises. 
This may be especially important for high-risk businesses 
involving satellites. Meanwhile, commercial interests have 
profit motivations, which could help to improve product 
quality with less government oversight. The t ick is to 
structure the joint governmentkivilian enterprise so as not 
to stifle competition and innovation. Also, with a single 
service, there is also the risk of poor quality and high cost, 
which results from a lack of competition. An optional 
growth component, such as a personal Navcom service, 
may help in improving cost and quality. 
Government funding for R&D can help to advance tech- 
nology, whereas, all-civilian enterprises may not have the 
funds to do R&D, at the same time while building and de- 
ploying the system. Since the development, building, and 
deployment cycles associated with satellite constellations 
involve many years, it may be difficult to find civilian 
funding that may not realize a return on investment for up 
to a decade. On the other hand, the return on investment 
motivation of the civilian sector can help to speed-up and 
control costs in development, constellation deployment, 
and maintenance. Government sponsorship can help to 
develop commercial markets and economic growth for 
long term investment. 
Funding should come from various domestic and partner 
international government agencies and commercial com- 
panies who are interested in participating. This way, all 
parties have a vested interest in seeing the program suc- 
ceed and lowering cost. Commercial companies should 
have equal opportunity to compete for building and main- 
taining the satellite and ground segments, providing a 
service, and building and integrating user equipment. In- 
ternational standards and open systems architectures would 
help to maintain fair and open competition and enhance 
product quality. Less risk also results from multiple ven- 
dors, rather than single source production vendors, as is 
typically done in the military sector. In this case, proprie- 
tary interfaces often makes it difficult to re-compete a 
contract to maintain competition. Common financial inter- 
ests also help to stabilize economies and keep relations 
between national governments on good terms. Government 
partnerships can also help to alleviate liability concerns 
compared to an all-private enterprise. 
A complication arises in that the military and NATO needs 
to have priority and control over the system resources 
during times of conflict, in particular, the communication 
system resources. However, since World War 11, conflicts 
have typically been between rogue nations and NATO or its 
allies. This trend is likely to continue. Many systems can be 
adapted for coalition operation like what was seen in Desert 
Storm or Kosovo. 
To guarantee access and priority, the military can contract 
for continuous, exclusive, cost-free access to a percentage of 
the resources, for example, 10%. In return for this, the gov- 
ernment would provide funding for development, 
implementation, and maintenance. This capability would be 
adequate for military testing and training. The remaining 
90% would be available to the civilian sector during time of 
peace. However, during time of war, the military retains the 
priority right to a larger percentage of the com resources and 
compensates the service provider via a leasing agreement to 
replace the revenue lost from reduced commercial opera- 
tions. 
The ideal implementation would be to have a variable re- 
source switch responsive to demand and priority. Critical 
government and emergency civilian systems would also 
have high priority, whereas consumer systems that improve 
“quality of life” could have the lowest priority. This way, 
the United States and NATO could maintain control over 
resources, which may happen to be employed by unfriendly 
entities during time of war. 
To better maintain control, the government may want to 
manage the operations of the space and ground segments. 
Fees, added to the civilian services, could help to offset the 
government’s cost of operations and maintenance. Other 
shared maintenance or acquisition agreements could also be 
established as different ways to do cost and risk sharing 
among partners. 
User Set Operation and Market 
By an appropriate division of communication and naviga- 
tion functions, it may be possible to design an enhanced 
integrated system and user set capability. For example, 
based on the current GPS design and 50 Hz data message, 
the minimum time to get a fix is about 40 seconds following 
turn-on if new ephemeris needs to be read. For Cold Start 
conditions, a fix may take many minutes. One way to speed- 
up this process is to provide the GPS navigation message on 
a much higher power, higher bandwidth broadcast data link. 
Also, communication signals, which are synchronized to 
GPS time, may allow a ranging capability, though the proc- 
essing gain may be lower due to the higher data rate. In 
general, a tight integration of GPS and communication 
functions in user sets enables a synergistic enhancement 
compared to individual navigation and communication sets. 
Since common components in integrated sets can be shared, 
integrated sets should have less cost than individual sets, 
73 
especially if the security functions can be made common 
and meet national security requirements. The ability to 
perform two-way communication can enable much better 
security for integrated sets vs. GPS-only receivers. 
Governments and international companies would like to 
share in the lucrative and high-tech user set market. This is 
one of the reasons that the Europeans have started to de- 
velop their own navigation satellite system, called Galileo 
[SI. Again, international standards and OSA will help to 
keep competition open and fair and should better enable 
international companies to compete in the user equipment 
market. Also, a single common standard should help to 
reduce costs for civilian as well as military systems. 
Economies of scale, associated with dual-use, international 
markets should help to bring down costs. 
Common standards based on Navcom satellite systems 
should help to reduce the cost of integrated Navcom user 
equipment. With an integrated Navcom constellation, the 
user knows that the system will support both functions. 
Also, user equipment developers will have standards avail- 
able for both systems, rather than having to rely on 
separate, piecemeal navigation and communication stan- 
dards and systems. For example, suppose a user wanted to 
develop an integrated Navcom handset for a satellite-based 
OSA navigation system, and a proprietary terrestrial-based 
communication system. In this case, since the communica- 
tion system involves proprietary interfaces or designs, it 
may be very difficult to compete the integrated handset to 
reduce cost. Also, since the integrated handset requires a 
terrestrial communication infrastructure, it may not be at- 
tractive to the military as a device that can be used 
anywhere and anytime. Line-of-sight limitations for a ter- 
restrial communication link may also be a concern. 
3. ARCHITECTURE DEVELOPMENT 
In this section we will discuss some dual-use, mili- 
tarykivilian system concepts and related issues. Military 
system specifications will not be analyzed in detail. Mili- 
tary system components will be addressed to point out 
architecture considerations. More detailed concepts can be 
presented in the future as military and civil systems de- 
velop, such as integrated military Command and Control 
(C2) systems, fused data products, and combined cell 
phone and internet systems. If we leverage off of the best 
the military has to offer and the best the civilian world has 
to offer, the outcome should be better capabilities and re- 
duced cost for both parties. 
Analysis and trade-off studies are needed to define archi- 
tecture candidates that meet the requirements of the 
military and civilian users and keep costs low. The military 
requires a reliable, secure, AJ resistant system, with as- 
sured worldwide access. Civilians require a reliable system 
that matches market demand. Both require low cost. 
Integrated Navcom and multi-mission satellites are not new 
to GPS. Indeed, the Nuclear Detonation System (NDS) was 
originally an-add-on to the navigation mission of the GPS 
constellation. In addition, studies like the Global Positioning 
Communications Satellite System (GPCS) [9], have taken 
place. Integration of GPS with the Joint Tactical Informa- 
tion Dissemination System (JTIDS) was considered during 
GPS initial architecture development [ 101. 
What military and commercial components should be com- 
bined? -- Tough question actually. Who would have 
predicted the difficulties for Iridium? The panacea of lim- 
itless commercial SATCOM may not come as initially 
hoped. The free enterprise commercial market place will 
filter out who the winners are. Similarly, time will tell 
which military systems like GPS will remain effective 
across the board in military concepts of engagement in the 
future. 
Why not leverage military expertise in Command and Con- 
trol (C2) and Command, Control, Communication, 
Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
(C4ISR), mission planning, situational awareness, data links 
(such as the Joint Tactical Information Dissemination Sys- 
tem/ Multifunctional IDS (JTIDSNIDS)) and SATCOM? 
Similarly, why not leverage civil commercial prowess in the 
internet, PCS, windows-based software, palm tops, Personal 
Computers (PCs), cell phones, and wireless communica- 
tion? 
Sharing military system technology with civilian users 
could enable militarykivilian market development. Theater 
Battle Management Core System (TBMCS) is a good ex- 
ample of how to leverage command and control technology. 
TBMCS integrates three important theater operational ele- 
ments into one consolidated product, namely intelligence 
information, command and control and automated theater 
planning. See the Appendix for more information on 
TBMCS. Together these enable Air Force MAPE (monitor, 
assess, plan, execute) command and control tasking doctrine 
described in AFDD 1-1 Air Force Task List, AFT 7 [ I l l .  
Specifically TMBCS commanders monitor global condi- 
tions and events, assess global conditions and events, plan 
military operations and execute military operations. This 
type of CONOPS (Concept of Operations) could be utilized 
in a civilian system. One could monitor key threshold con- 
ditions, plan optimization correction and take appropriate 
action. Aspects of military technology could be leased or 
sold to civilian users. Alternatively, this type of capability 
could be traded (e.g. trade for free PCS airtime) with civil- 
ian partners as a combined militarykivilian system is 
developed. 
74 
How much of military and civilian systems should be put 
into the trade space when military users require assured 
access and the flexibility to quickly change how they use 
systems? With a large civil commercial use this would not 
be allowed - similar to what is now happening with GPS 
Modernization. Some of these tough questions cannot be 
answered in this paper. 
GovernmenVMilitary 
assets 
Command and control (C2) 
systems 
(e.g.GCCS.TBMCS) 
JTJDSMlDS 
Government imagery 
Logistic control 
Intranets 
DMSP. etc. 
MUOS, MILSATCOM 
Blue Force Tracking 
GBS, lBS 
GPS P(Y), Lm codes 
architecture 
DII COE compliant open 
We envision a system where information (video, voice, 
navigation, timing, communication, sensor information, 
data cast, push/pull information, internet access, etc.) is 
transmitted and received by a consumer (or warfighter) 
based on geo-location, surrounding circumstances, the con- 
sumer’s mission or requirements and command and control 
(or equivalently resource orchestration) of the entire sys- 
tem. 
CommerciaVCivil asset 
Air, land, sea and infrastructure 
control 
PCS, chat rooms 
Commercial imagery and video 
products (freeway cameras to 
satellite sensors) 
Inventory maintenance 
Internet 
Weather - GOES 
MSS SATCOM systems (Irid- 
ium GlobalStar. INMARSAT, 
ICO, etc.) 
Resource tracking - 
ORBCOMM, OMNITRAK 
DirecTV, DirecPC 
GPS CIA code 
Windows based software 
Another noteworthy concept point is enabling multiple 
data products to be available from common transmitters 
(e.g. satellites, Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAVs), 
mountaintop, etc.) platforms, or from a variety of trans- 
mitter platforms that are in view and in-band of the 
receiver. Why not consider a scaled version of products 
like DirecPC, DirecTV, Global Broadcast Service (GBS), 
and sensor information? 
Some of these “out of the box” concepts are being consid- 
ered in think tanks. Questions like “What should the GPS 
Block I11 constellation look like?” are being thought about. 
Commercial entrepreneurs are always dreaming up better 
“widget” concepts. 
For user equipment, ranging from handheld to transport- 
able, we will consider using the items mentioned in Table I 
for system components. The rough equivalence for military 
and civil system components are shown in the same row of 
the table. The ideal dual-use system would combine the 
best technologies and attributes from both the government 
and civilian systems. 
As mentioned in the Introduction section, a hybrid system, 
that augments the current (and future) GPS ME0 constel- 
lation with GEO Navcom satellites, may make the most 
sense. This way, the government can retain control of the 
core GPS system, while government and industry partner- 
ships can develop, operate, and maintain the augmentation 
system. The core GPS service would continue to be pro- 
vided free of charge, whereas, the enhanced nav and com 
capabilities of the GEO satellites can generate revenues for 
the civilian sector during times of peace, and provide a 
reserve capacity for the military during times of conflict. 
To alleviate availability concerns associated with interfer- 
ence-prone environments, a terrestrial-based network 
component, such as JTIDS, can be added. JTIDS, which is 
designed for robustness, can relay data more reliably to 
users in stressed areas than satellite-based systems. For ex- 
ample, JTIDS could provide GPS navigation message data, 
differential corrections, and integrity data from a remote 
node to an integrated GPS receiver in a stressed environ- 
ment. This mode of operation should allow enhanced GPS 
performance. However, since JTIDS is a terrestrial, net- 
work-based system, it is usually a local rather than global 
system. 
Table 1 Government and Commercial Asset 
Comparisons 
From a military point of view, a shared data environment 
such as JTIDS (or equivalently MIDS for coalition use) is a 
good start. Information is shared between users. Data is 
transmitted through other users, which also function as net- 
work nodes. GPS and JTIDS originally were to be fielded as 
a combined system [lo]. Maybe it is time to re-consider 
their synergism and integrate them. For this paper we have 
not investigated the reason why they were separated (this 
will be one of the things to consider in future research). A 
JTIDS network is shown pictorially in Figures 2 and 3. 
International spectrum allocation is becoming a very diffi- 
cult issue to manage. How can the US and its allies 
effectively maintain spectrum to do today’s and tomorrow’s 
missions? Using the spectrum we already have more ef- 
fectively so it is not re-allocated to other intemational 
entities, is one way. JTIDS spectrum, or spectrum near the 
JTIDS band, could be used for a civil complement to 
JTIDSMIDS. The commercial market could help advance 
standards and technology development for a future JTIDS- 
like system, which could be better designed for satellite 
connectivity, improving on the airborne 300-500 nm theater 
system limitation JTIDS has today. 
75 
Civil users could benefit from icivil versions of JTIDS nets 
that could be used over oceans where there are no naviga- 
tion augmentation systems and limited communications 
system nodes. With international and civil advocacy for 
spectrum, the approval of a space-based JTIDS component 
is more likely to happen through the frequency allocation 
process. 
Despite all of the advantages, sometimes dual-use intro- 
duces complications. A good example is GPS 
Modernization. The primary military objectives of mod- 
ernization are to protect the availability of GPS for allied 
use in stressed environments and to prevent enemy exploi- 
tation of GPS. Since both the military and civilian signals 
are broadcast from the same satellites in the same fre- 
quency bands, this becomes a very difficult problem. 
GPS IIF Modernization has encountered different organi- 
zations showing interest in being part of the GPS ME0 
constellation. The Army Grenadier BRAT Program is an 
example. Grenadier BRAT is a beyond line-of-sight track- 
ing and messaging system that collects unit identification 
and location and feeds this data to the Common Operating 
Picture (COP) via UHF TRAPRIBS broadcast. The Army 
inquired about using some of the reserve space on the IIF 
space vehicle. Unfortunately, the bill was too expensive for 
one mission to pay the non-recumng cost for retrofit of the 
vehicles. With more organizations working together, the 
unit cost per mission area would be much more reasonable. 
A theme of this paper is to use the best of both worlds - 
strengths of each of the military and the civilian sectors, 
and the market trends to set a fi-amework for a future sys- 
tem. We suggest to leverage and use military kernels like 
C2 modules for civil or dual-use Navcom systems, and the 
use of Commercial-Off-the-shelf (COTS) Non- 
Developmental Item (NDI) equipment wherever practical 
and possible. 
Developing a road map for a dual-use system will require 
support from high-level govemment entities and a com- 
mercialkivil venture capital enthusiasm. The potential 
impact and pay back could be very large. Naturally, both 
military and commercial systems will evolve, but without 
government direction, they may not converge into the best 
architectural solutions for both military and commercial 
users. 
4. SUMMARY AND FWRTHER STUDY 
The paper discussed some of the issues associated with 
dual-use and provided arguments why dual-use is a good 
idea, which can benefit both civilian and military users. 
Technical issues associated with an integrated Nav and 
Com satellite system were presented. To enhance perform- 
ance, augmentations with terrestrial-based data links, such 
as JTIDS, were discussed. 
Architecture and trade-off studies are needed to fully ex- 
plore the benefits of dual-use Navcom. These studies can 
also consider the mission enhancement features of inte- 
grated Navcom and the financial benefits of dual-use. Such 
studies need to consider the basic military and govemment 
requirements as well as explore commercial and civilian 
markets for demand. Dialogue between government, mili- 
tary, and industry is needed to identify commercial interest 
and suitable partnership arrangements. 
As an example architecture, a geostationary Navcom con- 
stellation was proposed to augment the current and future 
GPS ME0 constellation. In addition to com capabilities, 
the GEO sats provide GPS integrity and differential correc- 
tions, and can build upon the existing GPS core 
constellation. 
GPS JIF Modernization is considering various options for 
future navigation systems. If better requirement satisfaction 
and operational performance can be achieved through a dif- 
ferent acquisition approach, the new approach will win out. 
With limited acquisition dollars available, more capable, 
multipurpose military systems are desirable. Commercial 
venture capital is conditional, based on risk and rate of re- 
turn. Having multipurpose systems developed reduces 
commercial risk and creates more markets for profit. If the 
systems can be used concurrently and collaboratively, there 
are new CONOPS paradigms to be explored, which can lead 
to new and greater possibilities. 
Architectures that are scaleable according to demand are 
ideal. Systems like Iridium, which pushed the envelope on 
fast, low-cost, assembly line production and near throwaway 
satellites, is ideal. Some other commercial-like concepts to 
be considered by the military: 
Replace or updating satellites as practical, with the 
most lucrative and most militarily useful systems. 
Standardize operational control, so control modules can 
be reused in a Defense Information Infrastructure 
Common Operating Environment (DII COE) windows- 
like OSA operating system. 
5. APPENDIX - TBMCS OVERVIEW 
An overview of the Theater Battle Management Core Sys- 
tem (TBMCS) [12] C2 system requirements are spelled out 
below: 
The operational mission of the TBMCS C2 system is to de- 
velop, integrate, field, and maintain an evolving sequence of 
increasing capabilities for computer-supported management 
of theater airborne assets, in peacetime, exercise, and war- 
76 
time environments at the force and unit levels. The 
TBMCS C2 system provides automated decision support 
tools to improve the planning, preparation, and execution 
of joint air combat capabilities. They also provide support 
for operations other than war, e.g., humanitarian, United 
Nations peacekeeping, etc. The system provides full sup- 
port to force-level and unit-level warfighters throughout all 
phases of military operations: Readiness, Deployment, 
Employment, Sustainment, and Reconstitution. TBMCS 
C2 system links the various organizational levels of com- 
mand, control and execution as they relate to air 
operations. The acquisition of these systems allows the 
execution of planning, intelligence, and operational func- 
tions in support of the Commanders. The TBMCS 
architecture is shown in Figure 4. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 “Open System Standards for Tightly Integrated 
GPS/PCS Systems: Issues and Trades,” R. DiEsposti, S. 
Saks, Proc of 1999 National Technical Meeting of the 
Institute of Navigation, Jan 1999. 
[2] “Galileo - Europe’s Contribution to the Next Genera- 
tion of GNSS,” J. Wolfrum, M. Healy, J. Provenzano, T. 
Sassorossi, Proc of Institute of Navigation (ION) GPS-99 
Conference, Sept 1999. 
[3] Civil Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF), 
http://w\~w.aCiniln~~~s/factsheets/Civil Reserve Air Flee 
U, 12 Dec 1997. 
[4] Hanratty, J.; Lightsey, R.; Larson, A.; “Open Systems 
and the Systems Engineering Process,” Office of the Un- 
dersecretary of Defense (Acquisition and Technology), 
Open Systems Joint Task Force, wu;w.aca.osd.nil/ositf, 21 
Dec 1998. 
[ 5 ]  “Of Mutual Benefit: Merging GPS and Wireless Com- 
munications,” R. DiEsposti, S. Saks, L. Jocic, Capt J. 
Kayloe, GPS World Magazine, April 1998. 
[6] Driscoll, C., “Wireless Caller Location Systems, “ GPS 
World, Vol9, No 10, October 1998. 
[7] “An Enhanced GPS Assistance Protocol,” Scott Bloe- 
baum and Vincent Jolley, 11 August 1999, 
httn://tl .orrz/inded0521 .htm 
[SI “Galileo - Enthusiasm and Money Propel Europe’s 
GNSS, ” GPS World Magazine, Nov 1999. 
[ 101 LtCol P. Vaccaro, Technical Interchange Meeting, 
GPS JPO, 23 Sept 1999. 
[ 1 I] httn:.ilnfpubs.hcl.nf.nzj1izlec-t~roductsl~ubpagrs/dd- 
pubs.sttn 
[12] Theater Battle Management Core System, System/ 
Segment Specification (SSS), 30 April 1997. 
Raymond DiEsposti is a Project Engi- 
neer in the GPS Joint Program OfJice 
(JPO), currently serving as systems 
eizgineer for the Defense Advanced 
GPS Receiver (DAGR). Prior experi- 
ence includes missile guidance system 
design at General Dynamics and elec- 
tric space propulsion system analysis 
at NASA. 
James Johansen is the chief MITRE en- 
gineer within the GPS program ofice 
(SMC/CZ). Additional responsibilities 
include working on ficture M E 0  multi- 
mission concepts with SMC/XR. Prior to 
working within the GPS JPO Jim worked 
within the MILSATCOM program ojfice 
(SMC/MC). Previous experience in- 
cludes working for Lockheed Martin on a 
large SATCOM receiving facility contract and at Hughes 
Aircrafi on numerous SATCOM systems. 
[9] Development of a Global Positioning Communications 
Satellite System (GPCS),” presented to the Dept of the Air 
Force, HQ Space Division (AFSC), 9 Nov 1988. 
77 
NETS 
0 TO 
126 
0 
Figure 2 JTIDS Information Sharing Example 
Figure 3 JTIDS Theatre Architecture Example 
78 
Figure 4 TBMCS Architecture 
79 
