Proceedings ofthe 3d World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation June 28-July 2,2000, Hefei, P.R. China 
The Modeling, 0 timization, Planning and Execution of Sup 1 Chain 
Management in Enterprises Integration Based on ARIS an%S?rAP/R3 
7 
Production of 
raw materials 
Hao ZHANG, Qidi WU 
CIMS Research Center, 
Tongji University 
200092 Shanghai, 
China 
7 7 T Y 
Pre-supplier Component Producer/ Vendor Consumer 
Supplier Consumer 
L L 
Abstract-The development trend of industry production 
management will come from information and process 
integration to enterprise integration. Supply Chain 
Management (SCM) is a big trend to enterprise integration. 
This paper presented the definition and the requirements of 
enterprises SCM and discussed the modeling method of SCM 
based on ARIS and the optimization, planning and execution 
of SCM Based on SAPIRL). The real SCM example also was 
discussed and presented. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The requirement of worldwide competition let enterprise 
always use new production organization and management 
concept. By Using of CIMS, CAD/CAPP/CAM and 
MRP-11, all the production information have been 
integrated. It can increase the production management 
efficiency. But the integration of production information 
can not optimize the production processes. By using of CE, 
PDM and BPR, the production processes have been 
integrated and optimized. 
All enterprise has the requirement of supply chain 
management. With the application of 
PJTERNETRNTRANET and IT, the moden E W  system 
A.-W. SCHEER 
IDS 
Saarbruecken University 
D-66 1 15 Saarbruecken 
Germany 
can real support SCM. In order to realize SCM for 
enterprises, we must estabilish SCM model by using of 
ARIS and do the optimization, planning and execution of 
SCM based on SAPlR3 ERP system. 
2. THE DEFINITION AND REQUIREMENT OF 
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
The definition of supply chain within enterprises is 
shown in Fig.1.A supply chain is the entirety of business 
processes, which are required for the satisfaction of 
demands for products or service. It start fi-om requirements 
of raw materials and ends with the delivery to the 
end-consumer. That means “from supplier’s supplier to 
customer’s customer”. 
The deferent enterprise has deferent supply chain. A 
manufacturer’s supply chain start from buys ingredients and 
components. After makers a production, the products moves 
to a distribution center, stores and sells it to customers. A 
retailer’s supply chain start from buys the cereal from the 
manufacturer or wholesaler. Then stores it in a warehouse, 
moves and stores it to stores and sells it to customers. 
Combined with this two typical enterprise supply chain, the 
multi-entemrise SUPP~Y chain can be gotten. 
From new surve result, today’s supply chain coordination 
is instable. It can be shown in Fig.2. We must use moding 
and ERP tools to deal with this problem. 
3. MODELING FOR SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT REFERENCE MODEL METHOD 
BASED ON ARIS 
In order to get efficient SCM operation, The modeling 
work must be down for SCM operation. So we use the SCM 
operation reference model SCOR. 
SCORspans 
--All customer interaction, from order entry through paid 
invoice 
--All physical material transactions, from your supplier’s 
supplier to your customer’s customer, including equipment, 
suppliers, spare parts, bulk product, software. etc. 
--All market interactions, from the understanding of 
aggregate demand to the hlfillment of each order 
0 SCOR does not include 
--Sales administration and infrastructure processes 
--Technology development processes 
--product and process design and development processes 
--post-delivery customer support operations including 
technical support processes 
SCOR is found on four distinct management 
processes(Fig.3). They are Source, Make, Deliver and Plan. 
industry L J  Time 
Fig.2 Instability of today’s supply chain Coordination  
! .  
Supplier Your Company Customer 
Fig.3 Four distinct management processes of SCOR 
4 
f 
Fig.4 SCOPE, Supply Chain Optimization, Planning and Execution within the SAP Business Framework 
1936 
4. THE MODELING, OPTIMIZATION, PLANNING 
AND EXECUTION OF SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT IN ENTERPRISES INTEGRATION 
BASED ON S A P W  
SCOPE, Supply Chain Optimization, Planning and 
Execution provide state-of-the art Supply Chain 
Management capabilities within the SAP Business 
Framework (Fig.4) and includes 
0 R3 Business components 
0 Industry expertise and services 
0 Integration of partner solution 
5. THE EXAMPLE OF SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT 
The example of supply chain management is a German 
automotive Manufacturer. Fig. 5 shows the overseas supply 
chain network. 
__+ Information Flow 
Requirements 
Explosion 
Fig. 5 The example of supply chain management 
6.CONCLUSION 
The development trend of industry production 
management will come from information and process 
integration to enterprise integration. Supply Chain 
Management(SCM) is a big trend to enterprise integration. 
In this paper, we present the definition and the requirements 
of enterprises SCM and discuss the modeling method of 
SCM based on ARIS and the optimization, planning and 
execution of SCM Based on SAP/IU. The real SCM 
example also was discussed and presented. The conclusion 
is that the SCM based on ARIS and the optimization, 
planning and execution of SCM Based on SAP/IU is a good 
method to increase competition for enterprises. 
REFERENCES 
[I] Zhang Hao, SCM based on tele-service and 
tele-engineering support computer network, 
Proceeding of mechanical engineering conference, 
Mechanical Industry Press 1995 
[2] 1998August- Wilhelm Scheer, Architecture of 
Integrated Information Systems - Foundations of 
Enterprise Modeling, Springer- Verlag Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 1992 
[3] Lee,H.L.,C.Billington, Material management in 
decentralized supply chains, Operations Research, 
41(5), Sept.Oct.,1993,p.835-47. 
[4] Harland,C., Supply Chain Operational Performance 
Roles, Integrated Manufacturing Systems, 8(2), 1997, 
[ 5 ]  Jack C., Achieving Maximum Supply Chain 
Efficiency, IIE Solutions, Jun. 1997,p30-35. 
[6] Gupta,S., Supply Chain Management in Complex 
Manufacturing, IIE Solutions, Mar. 1997,p.18-23. 
[7] Robert G,. Beyond ERP and MRPII-Optimized 
Planing and Synchronized Manufacturing, IIE 
Solutions, Sept. 1996,p.33-35. 
[8] Lee,H.L., and C., Billington, The Evolution of Supply 
Chain Management models and practice at Hewlett 
Packard, Interfaces, 25(5), 1995,p42-63. 
[9] Lee,H.L., and V. Padmanabhan, S. Whang, 
Information Distortion in a Supply Chain: The 
Bullwhip Effect, Management Science, 43(4), 1997, 
p.70-78. 
p. 1546-558. 
1937 
