Silicon Micromachines for LiQhtwave Networks: 
Can Little Machines Make it Big? 
Dave Bishop, Vladimir Aksyuk, Cris Bolle, Randy Giles, 
Flavio Pardo and Jim Walker 
Bell Laboratories 
Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 
Abstract: 
Silicon micromechanics is an emerging field which is beginning to impact almost 
every area of science and technology. In areas as diverse as the chemical, 
automotive, aeronautical, cellular and optical communications industries, Silicon 
micromachines are becoming the solution of choice for many problems. In this 
paper we will describe what they are, how they are buillt and show how they 
have the potential to revolutionize lightwave systems. Devices such as optical 
switches, variable attenuators, active equalizers, add/drop multiplexers, optical 
crossconnects, gain tilt equalizers, data transmitters and many others are 
beginning to find ubiquitous application in advanced lightwave systems. We will 
show examples of these devices and describe some of the challenges in 
attacking the billions of dollars in addressable markets for this technology. 
What is a MEMS Device? 
MEMS research is an outgrowth of the vast capabilities developed by the 
semiconductor industry, including deposition, etching, and lithography, as well as 
an array of chemical processes such as anisotropic and highly selective etches 
having different etch rates for different crystallographic orientations and 
materials. These processes, which were originally developed to build 
microelectronic devices, are also capable of building micromechanical 
device-structures capable of motion on a microscopic scale. MEMS devices 
are built in much the same way as a silicon integrated circuit (see the figure, 
upper left hand side). Various films such as polysilicon, silicon nitride, silicon 
dioxide, and gold are deposited and patterned to produce complicated, multilayer 
three-dimensional structures. However, the major difference is a release step at 
the end. In a MEMS device, some of the layer materials are removed using a 
selective etch, leaving a device with moveable elements. 
MEMS devices offer a number of advantages to designers. They are made using 
integrated circuit (IC) batch-processing techniques, so although fabrication may 
consist of a complicated, multistep process, the devices are economical to 
produce because many are made simultaneously. In addition, designers and 
manufacturers can exploit the extensive capabilities of the IC fabrication industry 
and can profitably use previous-generation equipment. In an era in which an IC 
7 
factory costs a billion dollars and is obsolete in less than five years, the ability to 
reuse the equipment for a new class of cutting edge products is very appealing. 
IC fabrication techniques also allow designers to integrate micromechanical, 
analog, and digital microelectronic devices on the same chip, producing multi- 
functional integrated systems. Contrary to intuition, MEMS devices have proven 
to be robust and long-lived, especially ones whose parts flex without microscopic 
wear points. Research in this area has been extremely active over the last 
decade, producing microscopic versions of most macro-machines. In particular, 
many of us believe that the size scale at which these machines work well make 
them a particularly good match to optics problems where the devices, structures 
and relevant wavelengths range in size from one to several hundred microns. 
Where in a Lightwave Network will they be Applied? 
Work at Bell Labs in Optical MEMS has focused on a number of devices such as 
optical modulators, variable attenuators, switches, add/drop multiplexers, active 
equalizers and optical crossconnects. Shown in the figure (upper right hand 
side) is an overview of places in lightwave networks where we see application for 
MEMS components. Each red dot is a place where MEMS can be the solution of 
choice. Clearly, there exist many opportunities[References 1-41. 
In the figure, LHS center, is a micrograph of our 1x2 MEMS optical switch. The 
mirror is connected to a see-saw and either reflects the light from the optical fiber 
on the left to the fiber at right angles to it or moves out of the way to allow the 
light to go straight into the other fiber. In the figure, RHS center, is a micromirror 
for use in a variable attenuator. Light from a fiber at right angles to the mirror 
gets reflected to an output fiber and the coupling between the two can be 
adjusted by applying a voltage to the electrode to the left of the large mirror. In 
the figure on the lower LHS is an array of micromirrors for use in an add/drop 
multiplexer. In operation, each wavelength of light in an optical fiber gets 
spatially demultiplexed by a grating and lands on its own mirror to be correctly 
routed to either the output port or the drop port. Finally, shown on the lower RHS 
is a two axis micromirror for use in a I xN  optical switch. The mirror is doubly 
gimbaled so that light can be routed in two directions to allow complex switching 
functions to be accomplished. Clearly, the possibilities for novel optical devices 
and functions are endless. 
Summary: 
Although no MEMS device has yet been deployed in an active lightwave 
network, the wealth of new capabilities presented by MEMS optical devices 
places them as certain candidates for imminent commercial success. The 
optical MEMS industry is estimated to become a multi-billion dollar business in 
five years. Many companies, including Lucent Technologies, identify MEMS as a 
strategic technology they cannot afford to neglect and we believe it will provide 
exciting challenges for many years to come. 
8 
References: 
1. C.R. Giles, B. Barber, V. Aksyuk, R. Ruel, L. Stulz and D. Bishop, 
“Reconfigurable 16-channel WDM DROP Module using Silicon MEMS Optical 
Switches,” accepted for publication in Photonics Technology Letters, 1998. 
2. Randy Giles, Vladimir, Aksyuk, Brad Barber, Andrew Dentai, Elles Burrow, 
Charlie Burrus, Larry Stulz, Joel Hoffman, Brian Moyer, David Bishop, “Highly 
efficient light-actuated micromechanical photonic switch for enhanced 
functionality at remote nodes,” postdeadline paper PD2, Optical Fiber 
Conference, San Jose CA. 1998. 
3. A.G. Dentai, E.C. Burrow, C.R. Giles, C.A. Burrus, J.C. Centanni, “High- 
voltage (2.1 V) integrated InGaAs photogenerator,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, 
no. 8. pp 718-719, 1997. 
4. J. E. Ford, V. Aksyuk, D, J. Bishop, J. A. Walker, “Wavelength Add-Drop 
Switching using Tilting Micromirrors”, in J. of Lightwave Technology, vol. 17, 
pp. 904-91 1, 1999. 
Figure Caption: 
Shown in the figure are a schematic MEMS device (ULHS), schematic lightwave 
network with MEMS applications shown as red dots (URHS), a 1x2 switch 
(CLHS), a variable attenuator (CRHS), an array of micromirrors (LLHS) and a 
two axis micromirror (LRHS). 
9 
c 
/ Silicon Substrate 
10 
