Characterization and Mapping of Kimberlites and Related 
Diatremes Using Hyperspectral Remote Sensing 
Fred A. Kruse and Joseph W. Boardman 
Analytical Imaging and Geophysics LLC 
4450 Arapahoe Ave, Suite 100 
Boulder, Colorado, USA, 80303 
kruse@aigllc.com, boardman@aigllc.com 
303-604-2844 
Abstract-Airborne Visiblehhred Imaging Spectrometer 
(AVIRIS) and commercially-available HyMap hyperspectral 
data were used to study the occurrence and mineralogical 
characteristics of kimberlite diatremes in the State-Line 
district of ColoradoiWyoming. A mosaic of five flightlines 
of AVIRIS data acquired during 1996 with 20-m resolution 
is being used to locate and characterize the kimberlite 
diatremes. Higher spatial resolution data (1.6m AVIRIS and 
4m HyMap acquired in 1998 and 1999, respectively) are 
being used to map additional detail. Poor exposures, 
vegetation cover, and weathering, however, make 
identification of characteristic kimberlite minerals difficult 
except where exposed by mining. Minerals identified in the 
district using the hyperspectral data include calcite, 
dolomite, illite/muscovite, and serpentine (principally 
antigorite), however, most spectral signatures are dominated 
by both green and dry vegetation. The goal of this work is 
to determine methods for characterizing subtle mineralogic 
changes associated with kimberlites as a guide to 
exploration in a variety of geologic terrains. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. COLORADO AND WYOMING KIMBERLITES 
3. AVIRIS PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS 
5. FJELD RECONNAISSANCE AND LAB SPECTRA 
6. PROSPECTS FOR ADDITIONAL WORK 
4. HYMAP DATA ANALYSIS 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Kimberlites are the principal source of diamonds and thus of 
high economic interest and importance. They originate as 
the result of intraplate alkaline magma, apparently generated 
at deeper levels in the mantle than most other magmas'. 
Kimberlites consist of predominantly ultramafic matrix 
material that has crystallized in situ, associated megacrysts 
formed in the upper mantle from the kimberlite magma, and 
mantle-derived xenoliths incorporated during magma 
transport. Common matrix minerals include olivine, 
phologopite, perovskite, spinel, chromite, diopside, 
monticellite, apatite, calcite, and serpentine (commonly Fe- 
rich)'. Alteration of some of these minerals to serpentine 
and calcite is common. Additionally, kimberlites usually 
contain transported sedimentary and crystalline rocks. 
Information from deep mining of kimberlites in South Afiica 
has illustrated that the diatremes commonly thought of as the 
source of diamonds are in fact part of a larger magmatic 
system including a hypabyssal root zone, the diatreme, and 
eruptive rocks. Thus three genetic groups of rocks are 
recognized; hypabyssal facies, diatreme facies, and crater 
facies', '. Kimberlite diatremes are generally vertical or 
steeply inclined cone-shaped intrusive bodies. They 
typically cross-cut host rocks, outcrop as approximately 
circular or elliptical bodies, and decrease in diameter with 
depth. Host rock contacts are sharply defined with little 
associated structural and contact metasomatism or 
metamorphism. The diatremes are typically exposed at the 
surface as shallow depressions. Hypabyssal facies 
kimberlites represent the root zones of diatremes and may 
also occur as dikes and sills. The hyperbyssal facies rocks 
are characterized by irregular outcrop plan, as the root zone 
is strongly influenced by the joint and fracture patterns of 
the host rocks. There are only a few known locations of 
crater facies rocks, which occur as lavas, pyroclastic rocks, 
and epiclastic rocks where erosion has been limited2, 32 '. 
Imaging spectrometer data (also known as hyperspectral 
data) are under consideration by several mining companies 
for kimberlite exploration and characterization. This paper 
describes the use of Airborne Visible/Mared Imaging 
Spectrometer (AVIRIS) and commercially available HyMap 
data to study the occurrence and mineralogical 
characteristics of kimberlite diatremes in the State-Line 
district of ColoradoiWyoming. Hyperspectral sensors 
measure reflected light in up to several hundred narrow 
(approximately 10 nm) bands. Several of the minerals 
associated with kimberlites, in particular the serpentine and 
associated calcite are easily detected using the shortwave 
infi-ared region of the spectrum. 
The Airborne Visiblehftared Imaging Spectrometer 
(AVIRIS) is a 224-channel imaging spectrometer with 
' 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 Q 2000 JEEE 
299 
approximately 10 nm spectral resolution covering the 0.4 - 
2.5 pm spectral range at 20 m spatial resolution5. Several 
AVIRIS scenes acquired in August 1996 covering sites in 
ColoradoJWyoming were analyzed. Selected results were 
previously reported in Kruse and Boardman (1997)6. 
HyMap, the most advanced commercial hyperspectral sensor 
available today, provides high accuracy, calibrated radiance 
data over 126 channels covering the 0.4 - 2.5 pm spectral 
range with approximately 15-20 nm spectral resolution and 
3- 1 Om spatial resolution'. The system provides precisely 
geolocated data. Analysis of two 4m-resolution HyMap 
flightlines acquired for some of the sites is in progress. We 
expect that this improved spatial resolution may help resolve 
some of the spectral mixing problems inherent in the larger 
20m pixels. The goal of using the combined 
AVIRISEIyMap data is to develop methods for 
characterizing subtle mineralogic changes associated with 
kimberlites and related diatremes, examining the effect of 
scaling and spatial resolution on detection, characterization, 
and mapping of these changes, and developing exploration 
models valid for a variety of geologic terrains using both 
airborne and spaceborne hyperspectral sensors. 
2. COLORADO AND WYOMING KIMBERLITES 
The State-Line kimberlite district of ColoradoiWyoming, 
discovered in the early 1960s, contains a number of 
Devonian-age diamondiferous kimberlitic diatremes that 
penetrate the crystalline basement', 93 lo. Prominent joint sets 
and faults apparently helped control placement of the 
diatremes, which occur on an approximately north-south 
trend roughly paralleling the eastem edge of the Front Range 
(Figure 1). Diatremes are emplaced in Precambrian igneous 
and metamorophic rocks. Kimberlites occurring in the 
State-Line district are similar mineralogically and 
chemically to other known kimberlites world-wide; a breccia 
of subrounded to angular clasts in a fine crystalline matrix 
consisting of serpentine, calcite, dolomite, phologopite, 
magnetite, perovskite, chlorite, talc; and hematite'. State- 
line kimberlites also include blocks and .fragments of 
Paleozoic dolomite, congolomerate, and sandstone. The 
kimberlites themselves are deeply weathered, and alteration 
typically consists of serpentization and carbonitization. 
3. AVIRIS PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS 
Five flightlines of AVIRIS data consisting of approximately 
50 scenes were acquired during 1996. Analysis of these 
data (Figure 2) using standardized methods developed by 
AIG". l2 (Figures 3 and described below) is in progress. 
The 50 ColoradoiWyoming AVIRIS scenes were processed 
to apparent reflectance using the ATREM soft~are '~.  
ATREM is an atmospheric model-based routine that 
converts the calibrated radiance measured by the sensor to 
apparent surface reflectance without requiring in-situ 
measurements14. A common reference altitude was used for 
all of the ColoradoIWyoming data to avoid obvious changes 
in reflectance across scene boundaries. This, however, 
introduces elevation-related atmospheric artifacts into some 
of the data, but these are outside the spectral range used to 
analyze these data. 
20 4Okm , 
Figure 1: Location of the State Line District, 
ColoradoJWyoming (From Coopersmith and 
Schulze)" 
Figure 2: AVlRIS True Color (0.66, 0.55, 0.45 pm, RGB) 
composite image of two concatenated AVIRIS 
scenes (12km x 20 km) showing approximate 
location of the Kelsey Lake kimberlite pipe along 
the left edge of the image. 
300 
Methods being used in the analysis (implemented in the 
“ENVI” image analysis soha re )  include spectral data 
reduction using the Mini” Noise Fraction (MNF) 
transf~rmation’~, spatial data reduction using the Pixel 
Purity Indexm (PPI)16, an n-Dimensional Visualizerm to 
determine image endmembersl62 17, identification of 
endmembers using their reflectance spectra’” l9 in the 
Spectral Analystm, and mineral mapping using several 
and also outlined in Kruse (1997)”. methods20. 21,2?, 23 
/Apparent Reflect 
< MNF > 
< PPI 3 
/a. 
/ \ 
, \ 
/ 
IMF & MTMF 
SFF 
Figure 3 AIG Standardized Processing methods for 
hyperspectral data analysis. 
Operationally, last 60 AVlRIS bands (1.92 - 2.5 1 pm) were 
linearly transformed using the MNF transformation, and the 
top MNF bands, which contain most of the spectral 
information, were used to determine the most likely 
endmembers using the PPI procedure. These potential 
endmember spectra were loaded into an n-dimensional 
scatterplot and rotated in real time on the computer screen 
until or extremities on the scatterplot were exposed. 
These projections were “painted” using Region-of-Interest 
(ROI) defintion procedures and then rotated again in 3 or 
more dimensions (3 or more bands) to determine if their 
signatures were unique in the AVIRTS MNF data. Once a 
set of unique pixels were defined, then each separate 
projection on the scatterplot (corresponding to a pure 
endmember) was exported to a ROI in the image. (Note: 
when trying to locate ‘kare” or sub-pixel targets (such as 
kimberlites), selection of the signal vs noise cut-off in the 
MNF is critical. Care must be taken not to eliminate too 
many MNF bands or the targets of interest will not be 
located). Mean spectra were then extracted for each ROI 
from the apparent reflectance data to act as endmembers for 
spectral mapping (Figure 4). These endmembers or a subset 
of these endmembers were used for subsequent classification 
and other processing. Three digital mapping methods, the 
Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM)”, Linear Spectral 
, and Matched filtering24 were used to 
produce mineral abundance maps (Figure 5). The results are 
generally presented as gray-scale images with values from 0 
to 1.0, which provide a means of estimating mineral 
udhg16, 17, 22, 23 
abundance. Brighter pixels in the images represent higher 
mineral abundances. These can then be combined as color- 
coded images to show the distribution of principal 
mineralogies (Figures 6 and 7). 
Figure 4: AVIRIS endmember spectra. Tentative 
identifications are: EM#l Serpentine 1, EM#2 
Calcite, EM#3 Carbonate/Serpentine 2, EM#4 
Antigorite (Serpentine 3), and EM#5 Dry 
Grass. 
Figure 5 :  Grayscale abundance images for the minerals 
Serpentine 1 (EM#l) and Antigorite (EM#4). 
Brighter pixels indicate higher abundances. 
30 1 
Figure 6: AVIRIS Mineral Map produced from the two AVIRIS scenes. EM#1 (Serpentine 1) Orange; EM#2 (Calcite) 
Purple; EM#3 (Serpentine 2) Green; EM#4 (Antigorite [Serpentine 31) Cyan; EM#5 (Dry Grass) Yellow. 
302 
Figure 7: AVIRIS Mineral Map produced ffom the two AVIRIS scenes overlaid on a grayscale image. EM#1 
(Serpentine 1) Orange; EM#2 (Calcite) Purple; EM#3 (Serpentine 2) Green; EM#4 (Antigorite [Serpentine 
31) Cyan; EM#5 (Dry Grass) Yellow. 
303 
There are several things to note when analyzing the 
hyperspectral data of kimberlite occurrances. First, unless 
the minerals are very well exposed (for example surface 
outcrop in an arid terrain, or as here in mined areas), the 
signatures will be very subdued when compared to the 
spectral libraries (Figure 8). They may be so subdued in 
fact that the spectra will appear very similar to those for dry 
grass or other dry vegetation (Figure 9). In the case history 
described here for the State Line district, the similarities to 
dry grass has serious implications. as much of the area is 
covered by dry grass anyway. Also. note that we have 
differentiated several serpentines despite not being able to 
clearly distinguish the exact mineral. EM#4 is clearly 
identifiable as antigorite (there may be some mixed 
phlogopite and or lizardite as well. see Figure 8). however. 
the other serpentines, though clearly serpentine do not match 
a specific mineral from the spectral library (and may in fact 
be mixtures). 
I i T  1 '  i ~ TQ 
+d- , i  
: r r  . . . &L&.*- ?.&~,&:;,**>~ 
Figure 8: Comparison of EM#4 (AVIRIS spectrum 
identified as Antigorite) to spectra of minerals 
from the U.S. Geological Survey spectral 
libra#. 
Figure 9: AVRIS EM#4 (Antigorite) and EM#l (Dry 
Grass) compared to Dry Grass spectrum from 
the U.S. Geological Survey spectral library. 
Finally, the AVIRIS data did detect minerals diagnostic of 
kimberlites, however, these occurred principally where 
exposed in mined areas. There are a few minor occurrences 
that do not appear to be associated with the obvious mines 
and prospects, but these will require additional work with 
higher spatial resolution hyperspectral sensors and/or field 
confiiation. 
4. HYMAP DATA ANALYSIS 
The AVIRIS analysis above produced enough infomiation 
that AIG elected to acquire higher spatial resolution 
hyperspectral data over several of the serpentine areas. Two 
flightlines of HyMapTM data were flown during September 
1999 at approximately 4m spatial resolution. HyMap is a 
state-of-the-art aircraft-mounted commercial hyperspectral 
sensor developed by Integrated Spectronics, Sydney, 
Australia, and operated by HyVista Corporation, Sydney, 
Australia. The sensor provides unprecedented spatial, 
spectral and radiometric excellence'. The system is a 
whiskbroom scanner utilizing diffraction gratings and four 
32-element detector arrays (1 Si. 3 liquid-nitrogen-cooled 
InSb) to provide 126 spectral channels covering the 0.45 - 
2.5 pm range over a 512-pixel swath. The Y-direction of 
the imagery is provided by the aircraft motion. HyMap 
provides high spatial resolution data ( 3  -5 m). however, has 
slightly broader spectral bands than AVIRIS (-17nm for 
HyMap VS -10nm for AVIRIS in this wavelength range). 
These are still adequate for identification of specific 
kimberlite minerals (principally serpentine). The last 29 
bands 2.0 - 2.48 pm) were used for this analysis. 
Figure 10 shows a geocorrected false color-infrared 
composite (CIR) image of the two flightlines acquired for 
location purposes. The flightlines cross at their north-west 
ends over the Kelsey Lake Mine. 
304 
