A Space Instrument Application Of An Uncooled Infrared 
Microbolometer Array' 
H. Ray Tsao ', LMIRIS, (781)863-3709 ray.t\,noCi 1mco.com 
Kevin R. Maschhoff ', LMIRIS, (78 1)863-3900 kc\ in.niaschhoff'icl,Iinco.com 
Walt Watson ', LMIRIS, (78 1)863-4739 wr~lt.~c.at\onfcZ,,lmc~.com 
Joe W. White a, LMIRIS, (781)863-3082 joe w . a  hiiekt1nico.com 
Lockheed Martin IR Imaging System, Lexington, MA 02421-7306 
Lany L. Gordley b, B. Tom Marshall b, 
GATS Inc., Newport News, VA 23606 
Abstract - Microbolometer-based infrared array tech- 
nology is making rapid progress in a variety of commercial 
and tactical military applications. Its suitability for space 
instrument applications is examined in this paper. Due to 
fundamental differences in sensitivity between uncooled and 
cooled detectors, a measurement strategy consistent with the 
microbolometer technology is needed. A specific example, 
ozone limb sounding in the Mid IR was the topic of a re- 
cent study, and the results of this study, including the meas- 
urement requirements, approach, and on-board data proc- 
essing approach will be presented. The study concluded that 
an instrument based on a microbolometer array could dra- 
matically improve earth coverage, vertical resolution, and 
mixing ratio accuracy. A microbolometer array has already 
flown and performed well in space-as part of a get-away 
special aboard the shuttle [ 13. A key space qualification test, 
high energy proton total dose testing, has been successfully 
completed and is reported here. 
Keywords: Ozone, profile, profiler, microbolometer, un- 
cooled, limb sounder, NPOESS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
CONCLUSIONS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
REFERENCES 
OZONE LIMB SOUNDING APPROACH 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Ozone is a naturally occurring atmospheric gas that plays a 
big role in the health of our planet. In the upper atmosphere 
it absorbs ultraviolet energy, protecting life at the planet 
surface and strongly driving the heat budget. In the infrared 
it also provides part of the cooling process. In the lower 
atmosphere it can cause oxidation processes that are in- 
volved in urban pollution as well as forms of air cleansing. 
Monitoring the concentration of ozone throughout the at- 
mosphere on a global scale has been a recognized national 
priority and critical activity for deducing atmospheric health 
and climate. 
One of the missions of the National Polar-Orbiting Opera- 
tional Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) is to pro- 
vide long term monitoring of the changes of the atmospheric 
ozone. The required performance of this monitoring system 
is expressed as the Environmental Data Record (EDR), 
which is the benchmark for hture space borne atmospheric 
measurement instruments. This paper describes an approach 
to meeting the ozone monitoring needs in a robust and cost- 
effective manner by applying an algorithm with solid heri- 
tage and using commercial-off-the-shelf components. 
The approach described here is intended to meet the ozone 
profiling requirements of the EDR shown in Table 1. In 
addition, the instrument must meet the practical limitations 
imposed by spacecraft for long-life missions. Similar con- 
figurations could address ozone profiling and other meas- 
urements cited for NASA earth observing missions in the 
post 2002 era. 
2. OZONE LIMB SOUNDING APPROACH 
Observation Technique and Measurement Strategy 
Sensors for precise long-term monitoring of ozone column 
abundance have been in orbit for decades (ex. the Solar 
Backscatter Ultraviolet Sensors/Total Ozone Mapping Sen- 
sors - SBWROMS). However, these instruments have 
limited vertical resolution, on the order of 7 to 8 kilometers 
with very little ability to discern tropospheric concentrations 
from stratospheric concentrations. This separation requires 
accurate profiling measurements. Even profile measure- 
ments down to cloud-top or tropopause could be used with 
SBUV/TOMS type data to infer accurate troposphere con- 
centrations. High-resolution profiles of ozone are also in- 
valuable for high altitude research studies and modeling. 
Combining a limb-viewing instrument with an 
SBUV/TOMS type instrument would provide these needs. 
Limb viewing is a well-established method for atmospheric 
sensing in both planetary and Earth environments. The ad- 
vantages [2] of limb viewing (Figure 1) include extra air 
mass (a factor of 100 over nadir viewers) allowing both 
high altitude and trace gas sounding, excellent vertical 
resolution (optically induced instead of spectrally) and a 
well defined boundary condition (cold space or sun or 
stars). 
'0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 @ 2000 IEEE 165 
Table 1. Limb Profiling EDR 
Parameters 
Horizontal Cell Size 
Vertical Cell Size 
0 km - Tropopause 
Tropopause - 25 km 
25 - 60 h 
Vertical Reporting Interval 
Horizontal Coverage 
Vertical Coverage 
Measurement Range 
0 km - Tropopause 
Tropopause - 60 km 
0 km - Tropopause 
Tropopause - 15 km 
Measurement Accuracy 
1 5 h - 6 O k m  
Measurement Precision 
0 km - Tropopause 
Tropopause - 15 km 
1 5 k m - 5 0 h  
50 - 60 h 
Long Term Stability 
Mapping Uncertainty 
Max Local Average Revisit Time 
Threshold 
250 km 
NIA 
5km 
5km 
Vertical cell size 
Solar zenith angles < 80 deg 
Tropopause - 60 km 
NIA 
0.1 - 15 ppmv 
NIA 
Greater of 20% or 0.1 ppmv 
Greater of 10% or 0.1 ppm 
NIA 
10% 
3 Yo 
10% 
2 % 
25 km 
7 days 
Objectives 
250 km 
3 k m  
l k m  
3km 
Vertical cell size 
Global 
0 - 6 O h  
0.01 - 3 ppmv 
0.1 - 15 ppmv 
10 Yo 
10 % 
5 Yo 
10 % 
3 % 
1 Yo 
3 Yo 
1 YO 
25 km 
24 hrs 
“ ” *-- The occultation sensors have the advantage of measuring 
only the relative intensity change due to the atmosphere, 
which requires only the inference and modeling of extinc- 
tion properties along the “pencil beam” view paths (see 
Figure 1). The occultation source function (the solar disk) 
is a well-measured boundary condition obtained from views --- above the atmosphere. Therefore, occultation allows scat- 
tering (under most circumstances) to be ignored while ad- 
dressing only extinction. Unfortunately, coverage is limited 
to orbital sunrise and sunsets along the daylnight terminator. 
-” “- 
Figure 1. The IR Limb Emission Problem - Profiler 2-D 
Onion Peel Procedure. The algorithm will process full orbit 
segments of data in a 2 dimensional procedure. Starting at 
the top of the atmosphere, T, P, and O3 are retrieved for a 
pressure surface and along track gradient fields inferred. 
These fields are then used in modeling the upper altitudes as 
the process continues with successively lower tangent 
heights. 
The basic approach is to make highly resolved measure- 
ments of the limb radiance fields, model the measurements 
as a function of known and retrieved parameters, matching 
model to measurement by adjusting the retrieved parame- 
ters. With careful selection of spectral bandpasses and ac- 
curate and precise measurements, excellent retrieval of high 
resolution profiles for a variety of gas species has been 
demonstrated, particularly with occultation sensors like 
W O E  (the Halogen Occultation Experiment) and SAGE 
(the Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment), and to a 
nearly equal quality, but with global coverage, from sensors 
like LIMS (Limb Infrared Monitor of the Stratosphere) and 
MLS (Microwave Limb Sounder). 
Limb viewing, without a direct celestial source (non- 
occultation), requires a direct atmospheric source (emission) 
or an indirect source (ex. solar scatter). Solar scatter 
changes the problem from one restricted to conditions along 
the direction of the limb “pencil” rays to one where the 3 
dimensional radiance field (diffuse and single scatter) must 
be accurately addressed. The varying albedo of the lower 
Earth boundary now both increases and severely modulates 
the scattering function along the beam, leading to major 
problems in data interpretation. In effect, the secondary and 
tertiary error factors that impact short-wave occultation ac- 
curacy (ex. modeling aerosol scatter, multiple scattering, 
and cloud scatter), become major components of the pri- 
mary signal for limb scatter measurements. To date, there is 
little evidence that these interpretation problems can be 
overcome to the degree necessary to produce reliable and 
accurate lower-stratospherehpper-troposphere ozone re- 
trievals. For example, the SOLSELORE mission on STS- 
87 in November 1997 found that even data over clear-sky 
ocean (i.e., very small albedo, optimum conditions) was 
extremely difficult to analyze below mid stratosphere. The 
short-wave advantage of simple low power instrumentation 
comes with possibly intractable data interpretation problems 
when applied to limb viewing below the mid stratosphere. 
166 
The IR avoids these problems because it depends on only an 
emission source function. This reduces the modeling prob- 
lem to conditions solely along the "pencil" beams, making 
the measurement insensitive to the variable lower bound- 
ary. In addition, in the lower atmosphere (mid mesosphere 
and below) the emission source function is the well known 
Planck function, allowing accurate modeling of wavelength 
dependence, as opposed to scattering source functions 
which have complicated wavelength dependencies dictated 
by aerosol extinction conditions (which are also more se- 
vere at short wavelengths). 
Although the infrared has many additional advantages, in- 
cluding nighttime coverage, it has inherent problems as 
well. In the Mid-IR, 5 to 20 microns, there is a rich mo- 
lecular spectrum of various species (Figure 2) .  Systems 
with high S / N  can be built to tap this information, but the 
thermal dependence of the source function and limitations 
in past detector technology have demanded expensive and 
risky cooling systems. 
Microwave and millimeter wave systems (typically beyond 
100 microns) can avoid the cooling problems, but the -1 
arcmin resolution necessary for accurate lower stratosphere 
and upper troposphere retrieval of ozone requires very large 
antenna systems and substantial power. This has been pro- 
hibitive for achieving inexpensive long-term monitoring 
systems. In addition, the exposed antenna cannot be baffled 
like the telescopes on shorter wave systems and is, there- 
fore, susceptible to off-axis radiance from the underlying 
Earth emission due to side-lobe problems that can challenge 
the demanding combination of high accuracy and spatial 
resolution. 
Another problem that has faced IR limb viewers is the verti- 
cal measurement fidelity. The retrieval of constituent pro- 
files that decrease in density at lower altitudes demands 
very high fidelity measurements of limb radiance profiles, 
on the order of a few arcseconds error in angular sample 
spacing and fractions of a percent in angular scale. This is 
difficult with scanning systems on a spacecraft with even 
the slightest attitude uncertainty. 
Benefits of IR Limb Sounding with Staring Microbolometer 
Arrays 
Uncooled (thermal-electric stabilized) microbolometer 
technology has now successfully mitigated the accuracy and 
precision barriers facing Mid IR sensing. A recent exten- 
sive feasibility study has concluded that temperature and 
ozone retrieval quality should match or exceed results from 
any previous sensor, including the occultation sensors (see 
Figures 3 , 4  and 5). These studies included realistic global 
ozone fields (Figure 3) and all significant error mechanisms 
in a Monte Carlo type retrieval simulation. Figures 4 and 5 
show the total uncertainty in PPMV due to systematic errors 
(which are nearly always larger than random error) for typi- 
cal and moderate conditions of atmospheric aerosol. These 
results were achieved with a set of 6 broadband (about 30 
cm-' each) spectral channels placed throughout the 10 to 17 
micron region (Table 2) .  
~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Figure 2. IR Limb Emission Spectral Survey 
167 
7Q 
ea 
eo 
E5 
sn 
46 
40 
25 
20 
2 1  
kU 
1 s  
10 
Figure 3. 
168 
LatltLde 
Figure 5. 
Channel Number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Species Wavenumber Range NEN Watt/cmz-sr Maximum Signal Watt/cm2-sr 
C02(mod) 620 - 645 8E-4 2.0 
CO2 / 0 3  (mod) 700 - 735 8E-4 . 2.5 
CO2 (strong) 635 - 705 1E-3 6.0 
CO2 /03 (weak) 725 - 765 7E-4 3.0 
5 I 03 (strong) 
By imaging the limb at high resolution and high S/N with a 
microbolometer focal plane assembly (FPA), many tradi- 
tional problems are reduced or nearly eliminated, finally 
allowing the Mid-IR benefits to be fully realized. The bene- 
fits of the approach are as follows: 
Scan Fidelity - Small jitter or boresight movement does 
not impact angle scale error or sample spacing error, both 
significant past problems. Jitter now only negligibly de- 
grades resolution. 
Resolution - S/N and pixel pitch can easily achieve < lkm 
vertical resolution at the limb with moderate aperture size, a 
necessary requirement for tropopause sounding. 
Wideband Spectral Response - Mid-IR Limb ozone 
sounding requires spectral information ranging from 9 to 
nearly 17 microns. A single microbolometer array can cover 
this entire spectral range. If we were to use quantum de- 
tectors, we would need detectors and readout circuits with 
different characteristics, making the focal plane assembly a 
significant development item. 
~ 
985 - 1065 7E-4 4.0 
Channel Alignment - Because the inherent microbolome- 
ter response is excellent from 5 to 20 microns, all channels 
can be measured with the same FPA. Consequently nearly 
perfect channel alignment can be achieved by cycling 
quickly through spectral bandpasses with a filter wheel as- 
sembly (our example) or other spectral dispersion methods. 
It is critical that the channels (spectral regions) used for 
retrieving the source function be aligned with species tar- 
geted channels. This has been a subtle but major problem 
with many past sensors, but now eliminated. 
Attitude - This relates to channel alignment and altitude 
scale, both important. Imaging of the curved Earth limb 
makes attitude easily observed and the effects modeled. 
Simultaneity - Temporal measurement coincidence allows 
viewing of the same space at the same time with all chan- 
nels. This solves another channel alignment problem inher- 
ent with many scanning systems. 
Long-Term Calibration - Exceptional scan fidelity has 
allowed a new approach for determining absolute response 
calibration [3]. The hydrostatic nature of the atmosphere 
allows retrieval of temperature and pressure profiles without 
6 I Window 
169 
940 - 965 7E-4 2.5 
absolute response calibration. The temperature profile can 
now be used to calculate the flux input to the CO2 bandpass 
channels and, therefore, the calibration of those channels. 
Extrapolation to other channels is very reliable since all 
channels use the same FPA. This, along with the in-flight 
calibrator (source) and companion UV Mapper instrument, 
allows unprecedented triple redundancy in absolute calibra- 
tion. 
Chopping Simplicity - Uncooled IR systems require that 
the measured radiance be chopped to allow for accurate 
separation from the background instrument emission. By 
imaging at nearly fixed pointing angle instead of scanning, 
the chopping can be replaced with a slight mirror dither 
between space-look and limb-look. This combines the 
chopping function with the zero offset function while chop- 
ping the energy at the very front of the optical train, mini- 
mizing effects of internal emission. 
Day-night Observation and Global Coverage for all Sea- 
sons - Since the only source of IR limb sounding is due to 
the thermal emission of gases along the line-of-sight (LOS), 
the observation can be made day and night, so the ozone 
profiles at the polar regions can be measured both in winter 
as well as in summer. 
No Cryogenic Cooling - The use of microbolometer tech- 
nology for Mid JR observation eliminates the power, 
weight, microphonic, size, reliability and cost issues associ- 
ated with cryogenic systems. 
Derived Key Instrument Requirements 
The observation strategy to meet the EDR flows down the 
requirements to the instrument. The key requirements that 
have major affects on the observation results are as follows: 
Observation Duration - The orbital parameters and the 
need to have a 250 km along track horizontal cell size limits 
the integration time to less than 38 seconds 
Field-of-View (FOV) - The orbital parameters and the 
desire for covering the whole earth in 7 days requires a 
horizontal FOV of greater than 4.3 degrees. The altitude 
range of ozone and the extra high altitude to enhance meas- 
urement accuracy determines the vertical FOV of greater 
than 1.5 degrees. 
Vertical Instantaneous Field-of-View (IFOV) - The ob- 
jective vertical cell size of l-km height requires the vertical 
IFOV of less than 420 micro-radians. 
Noise-Equivalent-Radiance PEN) in Each of the Spectral 
Bands - The measurement precision that the algorithm 
needs to discriminate against offending species and the 
available observation time determines the NEN shown in 
Table 2. 
Spatial co-registration among spectral channels - The 
algorithm requires co-registration of the channels in order to 
meet the objective EDR precision and accuracy. The co- 
registration among the spectral channels, after corrections, 
must be better than 40 micro-radians. 
Long Term Radiometric Accuracy after Calibration - The 
short-term calibration accuracy is 5% and long-term stabil- 
ity is 1% to meet the objective of accurate long term trend- 
ing. 
These are challenging parameters to meet within the practi- 
cal constraints of weight, power size and lifetime require- 
ments of a spacecraft instrument. The derived requirements 
are a result of many iterations between the algorithm and 
instrument teams, with the conclusion that a reliable and 
practical instrument can be built to meet these requirements, 
the EDR and ultimately the science objectives. 
System Design Considerations 
The profiler system design was challenging due to the tight 
constraints on power, weight and volume. Table 3 summa- 
rizes these. The usual design rules for space borne LWIR 
sensors could not accommodate these requirements. Previ- 
ous limb profiling systems, such as LIMS, used single de- 
tector elements or linear arrays of cryogenically cooled de- 
tectors scanned vertically as the spacecraft moves forward 
along the orbit. The approach chosen uses an off the shelf 
uncooled microbolometer focal plane array (FPA) [4,5]. 
This approach eliminates the need for the weight and vol- 
ume of the cryogenic cooling system plus the power to op- 
erate it, as well as the need for a continuously moving scan 
mirror with its real time pointing knowledge requirement. 
Cryogenic ice cube cooling, like that used on LIMS, was 
not possible due to the 7-year on-orbit life required. Also, 
the down link bandwidth of 10 kbps required on board sig- 
nal processing consisting of temporal and spatial aggrega- 
tion of FPA pixel responses. The instrument spectral re- 
sponse requirement spans the range 9 to 17 pm, which falls 
well within the capabilities of the microbolometer FPA. An 
all-reflective optical system was chosen to maximize 
throughput and spectral response. The six bands are ob- 
tained using narrow band filters aperture calibrator operat- 
ing sequentially in time. The concept features alternating 
views of the limb and space for offset reference, as well as 
periodic looks at a full at spacecraft ambient temperature. 
The design used met all system threshold requirements and 
some system objective requirements. 
Table 3. Ozone Profiler System Physical Requirements 
Parameter I Units I Value 
Power I Watts 1 20 
Weight I Kg I 25.5 
Volume I Cm x cm x cm I 32 nadir x 54 velocity x 28 
I I I cross track I 
I Data rate I KBPS I 10 
Optical Characteristics 
Optics - For the ozone profiling sensor, the most critical 
optical design considerations were having a low focal ratio 
for high sensitivity, an all reflective design for high 
throughput and good spectral response and a compact de- 
sign that meets the thermal and structural needs of the sen- 
sor. The optical system characteristics were driven by the 
orbital viewing geometry and by the detector noise equiva- 
lent power. An all-reflective, 3 element, optical system 
having a unity focal ratio was chosen. A fold was added for 
packaging convenience. This system had a horizontal FOV 
of 4.3 degrees to obtain a 250-km swath from orbit and a 
1.5-degree vertical FOV to subtend the Earth’s limb from 
the hard Earth to 90-km altitude. The vertical resolution 
was 1 km at the limb, which corresponds to one row of FPA 
pixels. FPA pixels could be combined in many ways, with 
170 
the smallest grouping being row segment containing 19 
contiguous pixels. 
The optical system used a steering mirror to direct the line- 
of-sight (LOS) in accordance with several instrument func- 
tions. Normally the optics viewed the limb alternately with 
a space reference view. This dithering function was per- 
formed by the steering mirror. Other functions of the 
steering mirror were to periodically direct the LOS to the 
full aperture calibrator and to the poles of the Earth to get 
full global coverage. 
Optical Filters - For the ozone profiling sensor the most 
critical filter characteristics were spectral stability over the 
long mission time, narrow bands with steep edge slopes to 
minimize out of band contamination and good LW and SW 
out of band rejection, especially on the LW side. The pro- 
filer used six IR optical bands, previously discussed. These 
bands were isolated using interference filters, which were 
introduced into the optical train sequentially. Each optical 
band was contained on a single optical substrate. All meas- 
urements using the FPA were performed with the filters at 
rest to eliminate filter non-uniformity as a source of noise. 
There was no dependence on the detector cut-off character- 
istic to provide blocking as is traditionally done when using 
cryogenically cooled quantum detectors. 
Detectors 
For this sensor with its low power, weight and volume re- 
quirements, an uncooled detector is needed. The detector 
must be provided with good thermal stability and must itself 
have sufficient radiation tolerance over the life of the mis- 
sion. 
An FPA which is a more recent version (the one used for 
ISIR) was chosen for this instrument. The array would be 
selected out of the current production run of FPAs being 
built at the time of Profiler construction. It would use some 
external custom parts as needed by the long-life radiation 
environment of a low earth orbit. The normal video drive 
electronics, which would not be needed by the Profiler, 
would be replaced by custom electronics to do the on-board 
temporal and spatial aggregation of pixels into the down 
link data items. This FPA is in production for large volume 
applications. The product line is constantly being improved 
in order to remain competitive. We have now demonstrated 
the - 30 mK NEDT microbolometer arrays that will be in 
production in mid 2000. 
AAer fundamental radiometric sensitivity, the next critical 
qualification to address is radiation tolerance. 
Recently, three focal planes have been exposed to high en- 
ergy proton radiation test in conjunction with Lincoln Labo- 
ratories. A baseline focal plane test applying our produc- 
tion Acceptance Test Procedure was done before the test. 
The focal planes were exposed in 5 kilo-rad increments at 
Harvard University’s cyclotron. Between exposures, ac- 
ceptance tests were repeated. Bias voltage and load resis- 
tance was adjusted if needed. This is permissible because 
our instrument will have that capability. The following is a 
summary of the results. 
All three IRFPAs tested showed no measurable performance 
changes through a dose of 30 krads. This is a dose sufficient 
for many remote sensing applications. At 35 krads and 
above, two of the IRFPAs began to show anomalous be- 
havior linked to changes in specific CMOS circuits. These 
circuits were expected to show tolerance in this total dose 
range due to their design. All of these circuits have been 
redesigned for the chip to be in production in 2000. All 
three IRFPAs failed the standard acceptance test after a 
dose of 50 krads due to anomalous emos circuit behavior. 
This behavior was not present after the 45 b a d  acceptance 
test, so we pronounce failure for total dose in the range be- 
tween 45 and 50 krads. 
The microbolometer detector elements show an even higher 
proton total dose tolerance than the readout IC. No detector 
NEDT changes have been measured through a dose of 50 
krads-the highest dose in the present testing. A small resis- 
tance decrease with dose, approximately 1% after 50 krads, 
is easily compensated for in standard operation of the 
CMOS Readout IC. 
An important conclusion of these total dose tests is that the 
focal plane, with typical levels of aluminum radiation 
shielding, can survive the dosage level of at least seven 
years in space (in an 833 km sun synchronous orbit). 
Mechanical and Thermal Characteristics 
Structure - The structure needs to provide mounting in a 
passive thermal environment to meet the optics pointing 
requirements and to maintain the temperature temporal gra- 
dients low enough to satisfy the system NEN. The Profiler 
structure provides for mounting of the instrument directly to 
the spacecraft interface and for mounting Profiler optics, 
steering mirror, calibrator and electronics, the principal in- 
strument components. It is a one-piece aluminum structure 
having 3 point mounting to the spacecraft. The packaging 
space was used efficiently to provide mounting and operat- 
ing space for the steering mirror assembly, calibrator and 
optics assembly in a structurally sound and thermally effi- 
cient design. The structure was also used to provide 
mounting for the electronics. 
Heat Rejection - A door covers the Profiler optical open- 
ing for launch. The door opens on orbit and stays open for 
the mission duration of 7 years. The door also provides 
mounting for electrical heat rejection in the nadir direction. 
Electronics are mounted in the structure walls at the hinged 
end of the door, and heat is strapped to the door from the 
structure. Heat rejection is in the nadir direction, so the 
instrument can be placed anywhere on a spacecraft, as long 
as there is an unobstructed view to the earth limb along the 
orbital path. A maximum heat transfer of two watts to the 
spacecraft is allowed for the Profiler. 
Electrical Characteristics 
Electronic functions include signal processing, instrument 
control and health and status measurements. The microbo- 
lometer chosen, having a digital output directly from the 
FPA, offers big electronics benefits because the digital 
electronics do not contribute drift error and are ideal for 
long life operation. The electronics provide servo control 
for the steering mirror and optical filter movement, as well 
as position readouts for the mirror and filters. The science 
data word provided for down link by the spacecraft is gen- 
erated in the electronics and includes the temporally and 
spatially aggregated FPA response and other data needed 
for ground processing, including temperatures of the detec- 
tor, optics, filters and calibrator, mirror and filter positions. 
171 
The data word also transmits health data on motor and 
board temperatures and on voltages and currents. 
The main function of the signal processing is to improve 
signal-to-noise ratio by reducing noise. Part of this signal 
processing is done on orbit in order to meet the data rate 
allocation for this instrument. Table 4 lists the type of noise 
in the row entries and the method of noise reduction in the 
column entries. The x in the table marks which type of 
noise is reduced by which method. 
The correlated temporal noise and low frequency instrument 
temperature fluctuation errors are removed by using the 
deep space as the reference, i.e., the limb measuring frames 
are subtracted by the deep space measurements. The ran- 
dom temporal noise is reduced by the temporal integration 
of several frames of limb signal. Integrating the pixels par- 
allel to the image of the horizon reduces the random spatial 
noise. This is possible because the required horizontal 
resolution is very coarse compared to the vertical resolution. 
We apply two methods to reduce correlated spatial noise. 
Correlated spatial noise is either row or column oriented. 
The first method is to use the unused rows (columns) as 
reference and subtract from the sensing rows (columns). 
The second method is to orient the focal plane so that the 
image of the horizon runs diagonally across the focal plane 
so the correlated spatial noise pixels parallel to the horizon 
are scrambled and become random spatial noise. Then, the 
averaging of the pixels parallel to the image of the horizon 
reduces the spatial noise by the square root of l/n. 
Table 4. Noise Types and Methods of Reduction 
Temporal Spatial Frame Row Column Rotated 
Aggregation Aggregation Subtraction Reference Reference FPA 
Random Temporal X 
Random Spatial X 
Correlated Temporal X 
Correlated Row X X X X 
Correlated Column X X X X 
CONCLUSIONS 
An instrument built with a commercially available infrared 
microbolometer array can meet the sensitivity, precision, 
accuracy and vertical cell size of future IR limb profiling 
needs. Such an instrument takes advantage of the well- 
known thermal properties of gases along the LOS and is 
insensitive to errors from unwanted scattered energy. The 
instrument can cover earth including the winter polar re- 
gions. The uncooled IR technology saves on power, size 
and weight. 
In summary, uncooled microbolometer technology promises 
to make Mid IR limb viewing less costly, more accurate and 
more reliable by removing many of the fundamental prob- 
lems that have plagued these systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the NPOESS Integrated Pro- 
gram Office (IPO). The authors would like to thank IPO 
and thank Dave Kenyon of Orbital Science Corporation for 
his guidance and leadership on this work. 
N O M ,  working through the Lincoln Laboratories, is evalu- 
ating various cooled and uncooled IR detector technologies 
from a variety of industry sources for potential application 
on future N O M  missions. Their support for the proton 
total dose radiation tests of the uncooled microbolometer 
IRFPA is gratefully acknowledged. 
172 
REFERENCES 
[l] Hoffman, J.W. and R.C. Grusch, “The Design and Fab- 
rication of the Infrared Spectral Imaging Radiometer (ISIR), 
SPIE Optical Science And Instrumentation ’97 Symposium, 
San Diego, CA, 3 1 July 1997. 
[2] Gille, J. C. and F. B. House, “The Inversion of Limb 
Radiance Measurements, 1, Temperature and thickness”, J 
Atmos. Sci., 28, 1427 - 1442, 1971. 
[3] Gordley, Larry L. and B. T. Marshall, “In-Orbit Cali- 
bration of Limb Emission Sensors Using CO2 Band Obser- 
vations, Proceedings of In-Flight Calibration Session of 
Symposium on Infrared Radiometric Sensor Calibration”, 
presented at Utah State University, Sept. 22 - 24, 1998 
[4] Marshall, C. A., Breen, T., Kohin, M., Watson, W., 
Murphy, R., Butler, N., Parker, T. and Perich, L., “Quanti- 
tative and Imaging Performance of Uncooled Microbo- 
lometric Sensors”, SPIE Proceedings, Vol 3061, April 
[5] Breen, T., Butler, N., Kohin, M., Marshall, C. A., Mur- 
phy, R., Parker, T. and Silva, R., “Applications of Uncooled 
Microbolometer Sensors”, SPIE Proceedings Vol 33 79, 
April 1998, p p  145-1 56. 
1997, p p  191-197. 
