A Numerical Evaluation Method of the Revised ACAS 
Algorithms Using a Smoothed Spline Interpolation12 
w .  Masayulu SHIRAKAWA, Yasuto SUMIYA, Shigeru OZEKI 
6-38-1 Shinkawa, Mitaka, 
# *  I /.. . Electronic Navigation Research Institute, Ministry of Transport 
Tokyo 181-0004, JAPAN 
+81-422-3173 
shirakawa@enri.go.jp sumiya@enri.go.jp ozeki @enri.go.jp 
Abstract- This paper discusses the evaluation method of 
Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS) algorithms. 
The risk ratio analysis is discussed using probability theory. 
Natural spline functions are presented as a tool for radar 
data smoothing and interpolation. Finally, the risk ratios of 
sample situation are calculated. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. PRINCIPLE OF ACAS 
3. RISKRATIO 
4. PROFTLE MODELS 
5. SIMULATION METHOD AND SOME RESULTS 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The International Standards of International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) on ACAS (sometimes TCAS) came 
into effect from November 1994. In U.S.A., Japan and 
Europe, installation of ACAS started. 
In Japan, before and after the decision of the installation, 
ACAS Operational Survey Committee continued the 
monitoring of ACAS operation. This survey includes the 
classification of pilot and controller comments and radar 
data analysis. The result was reported in the annual report 
of the committee. The committee finalized the survey on 
March 1998. 
While the algorithms of the beginning phase were evaluated 
to be effective according to pilot comments, there were also 
many complainants on operational problems, especially on 
unnecessary alerts. The fust revisions were made soon. 
participate in the operational monitoring. 
In this paper, the smoothed interpolation method used in 
radar analysis is discussed. The risk' ratio analysis using 
probability theory is also discussed. 
2. PRINCIPLE OF ACAS 
ACAS Operation 
ACAS obtains the relative position data through the small 
Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) on board, and issues 
Traffic Advisories (TA) and Resolution Advisories (RA) to 
pilot [l]. The data are relative range, direction from 
heading and pressure altitude. ACAS calculate the velocity, 
predicted relative range and altitude, and time to Closest 
Point of Approach (CPA). 
TA is an alert which indicate the possible risk existence and 
relative position of surrounding traffk and does not show 
the pilot how to avoid the collision risk. When the intruder 
approaches further, the TA may change to RA that includes 
the indication how to avoid the intruder. 
The indications for avoidance are given'in vertical direction. 
They are "climb", "descent" etc. In this paper only RAs are 
discussed. . 
The outline of vertical algorithms 
Suppose a case that two aircraft encounter. Figure 1 shows 
the situation. A is the own aircraft. The intruder is B. R is 
defined as position vector from A to B. VA is the velocity of 
aircraft A and VB aircraft B. To predict the risk, both aircraft 
are supposed to continue straight path flight. 
They improved the total performance so much, but still 
many problems were reported. Then, final revisions are 
proceeding. on 6th SSR Improvements and coifision 
The risk of this encounter is evaluated with the Z which is 
the time to CPA, R,, which is the predicted range to CPA, 
Avoidance Systems Panel (SICASP), held in 1997, revisions 
toward such problems were recommended to the upper 
committee of ICAO. However, ACAS performance depends 
on operational environments and the new version is not yet 
operated. The panel recommended for countries to In this figure, if two aircraft A and B keep the straight path, 
and predicted altitude within critical time intervals. Bearing 
data are not used for the calculation due to its large 
measurement error. 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
Updated August 3 1,1999 
539 
of Aircraft B 
Fig. 1 Horizontal Relation of Two Aircraft 
Aircraft Curren
hA 
relative position of intruder is shown in shaded form. The 
relative path is also straight line. This vector is expressed as 
VB-VA. Z is defined as following equation: 
Predicted Predicted Altitude Difference 
Altitude  ’ E d y b  redicted ~ 
titude Aircraft B 
R cos # R cos # R ( l -  sin ’ #) 
R ( I - ( R m , ,  / R ) 2 )  
= -  - 7 = -  - 
V ,  -V,  R J C O S ~  R 
(1) R - R &  / R  = -  = -  
R d 
where @ is the angle between vector R and vector VA-VB. 
From this equation, Z is not uniquely decided from R 
and R , but 7 is expressed as a function of R,, when R 
and R are given. If D m  is given and O<Rmin<Dm, 
minimum and maximum Z are obtained. Z, and 2- 
are expressed with following equations: 
R z, =- -  
R 
(3) 17 - 0,: / R r .  = -  
R mm 
When R,, is larger thanD,, the encounter is not risky. 
When it is a risky encounter,*Z is within (2- ,Z- ) . If 
Z, is small, the risk is large, so Z, is used for the risk 
evaluation as worst case. 
As shown in figure 2,  from current altitude 
difference. h, - h, and altitude rate difference h, - h, , 
the altitude differences after Z seconds is predicted. 
(h ,  - h ,  I,, = h ,  - h, + (h ,  - h, IT” (4) 
I 
Fig.:! Vertical Relation of Two Aircraft 
The smaller altitude difference (h,  - h,  ) selec, is used for 
risk evaluation. If the differences have opposite sign then 
the predicted altitude is supposed to be zero. 
In addition to the predicted time and predicted altitude 
difference, the combination of current altitude difference 
h, - h, and predicted difference (h, - hB ) /( h, - hB ) 
are used for risk detection. 
RA generation 
RA is generated by comparing Z , current altitude 
difference and predicted altitude difference etc. to the 
thresholds shown in table 0. 
Range test - First 2- is obtained from R and R using 
equation (3). When-Z,, is smaller than T, (18s to 35s) 
the range test is passed. Then altitude test is performed. 
Altitude test - If predicted altitude is (1) smaller than the 
threshold Z,, or ( 2 )  time to co-altitude 
( h ,  - h ,  ) I( I ; ,  - h ,  ) is smaller than T, , the altitude test 
is passed. This case, some kind of RA is issued. 
RA selection - Next, model calculation is performed to select 
sense. Here, sense is the direction, with which own aircraft 
pass the intruding aircraft. There are two senses, upward and 
downward. For example, if advisory advise the ACAS 
aircraft to fly above the intruder, the sense is upward. Then 
ACAS select the RA which gives minimum safety vertical 
separation A,. 
Display to pilot - When the intruder pass the tests, RA is 
displayed to pilot before 18s to 35s to CPA time. It is 
displayed on the IVSI (Instantaneous Vertical Speed 
Indicator), and guide pilot to set the vertical speed evading 
red zone on the IVSI. 
540 
Table 1: ACAS algorithms parameters (Version 7.0 : revised version) 
., 
3. RISK RATIO 
The definition of risk ratio 
The risk ratio is defined as follows: 
Collision with ACAS (6) Risk ratio = 
Collision without ACAS 
This ratio means the reduction rate of the collision risk. 
Since the frequency of collision is very small, the equation is 
not used directly. So that following quantitative definition is 
used instead of the equation. 
ACAS risk rtio 
- Airmiss with ACAS - 
Airmiss without ACAS 
- (Re solved airmiss ) + (Induces airmiss ) 
= (unresolved risk ratio ) -I- (induced risk ratio ) (7) 
- 
Airmiss without ACAS 
Here, ainniss is defined as an encounter that horizontal 
distance is less than 200 m and vertical distance is less than 
100 ft (ICAO definition). 
Definition of encounters 
To obtain the risk ratio, the following concept is presented. 
Suppose a sample space Q .  Encounters are defined that 
two aircraft are passing each other as shown in figure 3. 
This is not always the case of airmiss. includes RA 
cases and n o n - u  cases. CPA is calculated for each 
encounters. The altitude difference and distance at CPA are 
obtained for each encounter. If profiles of two aircraft are 
given, these two values are obtained. 
Next, ACAS is supposed to be installed to own aircraft. In 
some scenarios, both aircraft are supposed to install ACAS. 
If pilot model is unique, the maneuver is unique. The 
position relation of ACAS maneuver case is different from 
the position that was obtained without maneuver. One 
combination of closest distance and altitude for both 
maneuver and non-maneuver case is obtained. Risk ratio is 
calculated through the classification of these combinations. 
Avoidance Maneuver 
J!G 
Closest PO& 
Approach 
Fig.3 Encounter Simulation 
Risk ratio and lost alert rate 
In sample space a ,  the event that the closest distance is 
smaller than 200 m is defined as B, . The event that the 
altitude difference is less than 100 ft is defined as B, . The 
event RA is defined as r, . D, is cases which distance is 
less than 200m after ACAS maneuver and D, is the case 
which altitude difference is less than lOOft after ACAS 
maneuver. AA is the encounters which are airmiss, and A, 
54 1 
is the encounters which are not resolved. A A  and A B  are 
shown as follows: 
AA =.B, C) B, ( 8 )  
" A, = D, n D, (9) 
+.-' . - 
Suppose the risk ratio is Y , then Y is shown as follows: 
y=- P ( A A )  
P(AB 1 
- P(T, n DH n D,,)  + P(FRA D ,  n D ,  1 (10) - 
P ( r ,  n B ,  n B,,)  + P(TR4 n B ,  n B , . )  
where P(.) is the probability of the event. *NOW, r, . is 
used for the normalization. Suppose the rate of airmiss is far 
smaller than the rate of RA, then Taylor expansion is 
performed based on P(rm n B, n B,). The equation 
is shown as follows: 
First part of the equation (1 1)  is the ratio of airmiss that RA 
is generated and unresolved. The second part is the ratio of 
a i r m i s s  that RA occurred and RA not occurred. In other 
words, the later part is the lost alert probability compared to 
RA probability. The risk ratio is shown as the summation of 
two parts. Since the lost alert probability yNo, is thought 
to be small enough, only YR1 is discussed. 
Decomposition to vertical risk ratio and horizontal risk 
ratio 
The risk ratio of RA case is shown as follows: 
wRA n D, n D,, 1 
W R A  n B,  n Bv>i 
YRA = 
- P ( r ,  n D, n D,) P(rM n B ,  n 0,) 
P(T, n B ,  no,) P(rRA n B ,  n B , )  
- P(D, I r, n D,) P(D, I r, n B H )  
P(B, I r, n D,) P(B, I r, n B,) 
= Y1Y2 (12) 
- 
- 
where y1 and y2 are shown in following equations. 
where Y, is the ratio that minimum range is less than 200 m 
without ACAS maneuver and with ACAS maneuver among 
the encounters that the altitude difference at CPA is less than 
100 ft. Y 2  is the ratio of minimum altitude difference is 
less than 100 ft without ACAS and with ACAS among the 
encounters that the range at CPA is less than 200 m. The 
risk ratio can be decomposed into horizontal element Y, 
and vertical element Y 2 .  
Decomposition to resolved risk ratio and induced risk ratio 
- 
Y 2  is decomposed to the two exclusive part B ,  . and B, . 
+ P(D, n E, I r, n B,)] (15) 
Since current ACAS indicate only vertical advisories, only 
vertical avoidance is discussed in this paper. In other words, 
it is supposed that ACAS aircraft does not move 
horizontally. In this case, B,  = D ,  and y1 = 1. 
Selecting only yRA n B, , risk ratio is expressed simply as 
follows: .. 
(16) P(D,  n B,) + P(D,  n E,) 
P(B ,  1 Y 2  = 
In this equation, the first term of right part is unresolved risk 
ratio and second term is induced risk ratio, and agrees to 
ICAO definition. If B, = D, is supposed, the risk ratio 
is obtained from Y, nB, which is RA encounter with 
minimum distance less than 200 m. B, , B, and D, are 
obtained for each encounters and risk ratio is calculated only 
by classifying them. In this paper, this equation (16) is used. 
- 
4. PROFILE MODELS 
Encounter Model 
Profiles of aircraft are necessary to be expressed with 
continuous functions. First, radar data are used to obtain 
encounters. Sampling rate of radar data is sparse and the 
precision of horizontal position is not good. For these 
542 
reasons, the radar profile data can not be used directly. 
For this reason, 1) time and each coordinates (x,y,z) are 
paired separately. 2) Smoothed spline is used instead of 
point to point spline interpolation. 3) For this spline 
function, natural spline functions of order 3 is used, and 
optimized. Since vertical error and horizontal error are 
different, the smoothness of each spline functions is 
different. 
In ordinary amount of data, the frequency of RA is very low, 
and the encounters with the range less than 200 m and 
altitude difference less than 100 ft are quite rare. For this 
reason, the encounter should be modeled admitting some 
kind of incorrectness. In the other hand, vertical profile 
should be as realistic as possible. In addition, the encounter 
should express the situation, which can occur actually. 
Encounter sample must satisfy both the conditions, but it is 
impossible to prepare enough amounts of actual data. For 
this reason, encounters are generated from actual profile but 
non-actual situation. 
First, tracks are extracted from actual radar data, which has 
tracks longer than 150 seconds. By sliding pick-up-interval 
another track is made. The data obtained is sampled every 
10 seconds. These data are interpolated with spline 
functions to be described in next section. From these 
functions, position and velocity are obtained. Through this 
procedure, the group of profiles is obtained. 
Next, 2 profiles are picked up from the group. It is possible 
to extract profiles from different group of aircraft in IFR, or 
aircraft in VFR. Then this combination is used for 
encounter generation. This profile contains altitude error, so 
that it is apparent profiles. True profiles are obtained from 
corrections of altitude errors. When the combination is 
made, combinations of the same aircraft are excluded. 
Combinations of aircraft of same direction are also 
excluded. 
To the encounters, ACAS algorithms are applied, and the 
minimum range and the altitude difference of with-ACAS- 
case and without-ACAS-case are obtained. 
Vertical Profiles 
Used data- The data sequence obtained from radar is 
recorded in longer intervals and quantified in 100 ft. Since 
ACAS use the position and altitude data every one second 
and some aircraft use ADC data which gives fine altitude 
output to ACAS, we need fine altitude data in fine sampling 
rate in simulation. In encounters, values of function are 
directly used for own altitude. Quantified altitude is used 
for intruders. 
Coeficients of izatural spline interpolation- To smooth the 
data sequences, the natural spline function of order 3 is used. 
It is known that the spline function of order 2(m - 1) 
which minimize the integral Z is proved to be natural spline 
functions of order 2(m - 1) [6] .  
I = gp~s'"'(t))'dr+~ui(s(ti)-~i)2 (17) 
i=l 
where s(.) is spline smoothed functions. g is the weighting 
coefficients and is given from trade-off of smoothness and 
data coincidence. Suppose m=2 , which means the order is 
3. U i  = 1 is supposed for all i. Then smoothed function 
s(.) is shown as follows: 
I 1  
s(t)  = h, + hot + c c; (t - t i  j: 
i=l 
Supposing t ,  = 0, then h, is initial altitude and hois the 
initial altitude rate. ci is spline coefficients. (a), is 
defined as truncated power function. 
Natural spline function is the one that derivatives of both 
sides of the used interval equal to 0. Derivatives over order 
2 are 0 at the data points. In each interval, 2nd order 
derivatives are linear and 3rd order derivatives are step 
functions. When a true function is smooth which means 
higher derivatives are small, the approximation is good. If 
the true function has large values in higher derivatives, the 
approximation is not good. So if the aircraft change the rate 
rapidly, the approximation may be bad. The approximated 
function has the low pass filter property. 
Equation (17) has two terms. The first integral is the square 
of high order accelerations. Second integral is the degree of 
the difference between measured data yi and smoothed 
value. 
The property of profile model and optimization of g 
If the property of group of true functions is known, g is 
optimized for the group. g is estimated from general 
profiles. 
If we take the piecewise profiles of large size aircraft, they 
are classified as follows. 
(1) Level flight at cruising altitude 
(2) Simple climb or descent while departure approach and 
(3) Transition phase of level-to-climbinddescent or vice 
change of cruising level. 
versa. 
In addition, climbing/descent rate and altitude drift comes 
from wind strength, fuselage, weight, pilot flight techniques 
543 
etc. Pilot works as if the feedback loops to keep the altitude. 
If aircraft operates under VFR (Visual Flight Rules), vertical 
profiles are classified in nearly same way. 
Most of climb and decent rate are less than 3000 ft/m, 
except fighter case. The acceleration is less than 0.25 G. 
The encounter with ACAS operation usually accompanies 
the vertical change, so that the case (3) should be I 
consist of unaccelerated flight at the current rate for 
Tp + T, , followed by a constant acceleration (ig) in 
the vertical plane to achieve the selected altitude rate 
(i, ) and thereafter unaccelerated motion at this rate. 
Tp is pilot reaction time and T, is the system delay. 
approximated properly. To evaluate the third case, altitude 
rate is supposed 0 ft/m at the beginning. With 0.25 G 
acceleration, the rate is changed to some rate between 1000 
Wm and 3000 ft/m. This is supposed as true functions. and g 
is optimized through this model [5 ] .  
With this calculations for vertical profiles, if sampling 
intervals T = 10s , the optimum value of g is about 100. If 
T = 4s, the optimum value of g is about 30. If altitude is 
uniformly distributed, the quantified error is 28.9 ft. The 
error of spline function is 2 third of it [ 5 ] .  
Maneuver model 
To calculate the risk ratio, it is necessary to obtain variety of 
possible encounters. Actual reasons of near-mid-air 
collisions are extremely complicated. These are not 
discussed here, but from any reasons, collision comes from 
actual flight path. So encounters are generated from timing 
shift and position shift of actual profiles. From these 
combinations, the ACAS algorithms are applied and RA 
encounters are extracted. In this simulation, both ACAS 
case and other-is-non-ACAS case are included. Maneuver 
is also counted in the simulation. 
For the encounter model, pilcdaircraft maneuver is modeled 
based on the ICAO standard model. Aircraft response is as 
follows. 
a) For preventive RAs, the altitude rate of own aircraft will 
b)For corrective RAs, the trajectory of own aircraft will 
remain within the limits specified by the RA. 
Calculations for sunmation 
With generations of encounter with the method described in 
former sections, simulation results are summed up according 
to the following items. 
W Minimum distance at CPA, R,, . 
Apparent altitude difference at CPA without ACAS, 
ho. 
W 
W 
Altitude difference at CPA with ACAS maneuver, h, . 
Maximum altitude deviation from the original level, 
h* * 
If there is one RA, it has 4 values described above, and is 
classified to the one of the following items. 
Resolved airmiss: Encounter was ai rmiss in original 
profile and resolved with maneuver indicated with 
ACAS. 
Unresolved a i r m i s s  : Encounter was airmiss but is not 
resolved with maneuver indicated with ACAS. 
Induced airmiss : Encounter was not originally airmiss 
but maneuver induced an airmiss with maneuver 
indicated with ACAS. 
Others : Encounter was not airmiss, and maneuver does 
not changed it to airmiss. 
With simulation, many encounters are generated. On each 
encounter, ACAS algorithms are applied, and are checked if 
RA is generated. If altitude error is large and apparent 
altitude difference is large, it is not airmiss. So that, on each 
RA cases, each expectation will be obtained from the 
W 
Senario Generatinn 
Control of 
Common Area 
>Memorv 
Aircraft movement k. r'-c I Aircraft/ATCRBS#l I >Execution Contro 
I \  I I 
Ground Modes Sensor Analitical Program 
II I 
Parent Process Child Proceses 
Fig.4 Simulation Configuration 
544 
altitude error distributions. 
5. SIMULATION METHOD AND RESULT 
Simulation inethod 
I case I resolve I unresolved 1 induced I 
Simulation program is composed with ACAS analytical ' 
tools, scenario generation part, aircraft/ACAS algorithms 
etc. Figure 4 shows the concept of the simulation. In this 
paper, simulation of two aircraft, which includes data link 
function, is executed. In simulation one aircraft correspond 
to one process. Inter process communication is used for the 
simulation of data link. 
ACAS maneuver 
IFRNFR 
Some results of siinulrrtions 
96.5 3.4 10.3 
In simulation, three cases are obtained. These results are 
shown in table 2. 
In IFWIFR cases, this is the most common encounters, the 
airmisses are resolved in 97 % cases. In this case data link 
functions are supposed. IFR tracks are extracted from radar 
data. Induced airmiss rate is about 1 %. 
In I M F R  cases, pilots are expected to follow the ACAS 
indications. This simulation is the risk estimation, when 
pilot does not follow them while coordination with data link 
continues. From the simulation, resolved risk of non- 
followed case is 96 %. In this case, airmiss are resolved 
well, but induced airmiss is estimated large proportion. Risk 
ratio is about 12 %. 
In IFRNFR case, which does not accompany data link, most 
of VFR aircraft fly at lower altitude, so the encounters occur 
at lower altitudes. For this reason, VFR tracks are extracted 
from radar data separately. From the simulations, risk ratio 
is about 14 %. 
Table 2: Simulation results (altitude error = 0 ft) 
IIFR/IFR I 97.4 % 1 2.6 % 1 1.0% I 
Both maneuver 1 
I M F R  1 95.7 14.3 I 7.9 
6 .  CONCLUSION 
The risk ratio is decomposed using probability theory. Since 
the risk ratio was not discussed in combination with 
horizontal risk, it may be used for analysis of the horizontal 
ACAS, ACAS 111 or ACAS IV, possible future ACAS. The 
simulation results are obtained based on the ICAO ACAS 
algorithms. It is possible to add the mode-S sensor to the 
ACAS encounters. If it is used, simulation with modes 
ground control to ACAS will be possible. 
REFERENCES 
"Minimum Operational Performance Standards for 
TCAS Airborne Equipment", RTCA/DO-185, 1983 
Koukuu-shinnkou-zaidan: "Annual report on ACAS 
operational evaluation", March 1998, (Written in 
Japanese) 
"New TCAS Software To Reduce Evasive Maneuvers", 
Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 27, 1998. 
ICAO:"SICASP6 report" Montreal, Feb., 1997 
Shirakawa, M.: "Estimating altitude profile using 
natural spline function", Electronics and 
Communications in Japan, Vol. 77, No. 5, May 1994 
Schoenberg I.J.:"Spline functions and the problem of 
graduation", J. of Mathematics, Vol. 52, pp.947-950 
(1 964) 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Masayuki Shirakawa was born 
September 27, 1947. He received 
the B.S. degree in 1971 from the 
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Tokyo, Japan. 
Since 1971, he has been with the 
Development division, The 
Electronic Navigation Research 
Institute, Ministry of Transport, 
Tokyo, Japan. He has been engaged 
1 n Tokyo, Japan, on 
** L 4 .f* 
_ _  
in research on Airborne Collision Avoidance System, 
Doppler Weather radar system, and Enhanced Vision 
System. 
Yasuto Sumiya was born in Sapporo, 
Japan. He received the B.S. degree in 
1993 from the The University of 
Hokkaido, Japan. Since 1993, he has 
been with the Development division, 
The Electronic Navigation Research 
Institute, Ministry of Transport, 
Tokyo, Japan. He has been engaged in 
research on Airborne Collision 
Avoidance System and Enhanced Vision System. 
Shigeru Ozeki was born in 
Takmatsu, Japan. He received the 
B.S. and M.S. degrees from the 
University of Electro- 
Communications, Tokyo, all in 
electrical engineering, in 1981 and 
1983, respectively. He is with the 
Electronic Navigation Research 
Institute, Ministry of Transport, 
Tokyo, Japan. He is a member of the 
Institute of Electronics and Communication Engineers of 
Japan. He has been engaged in research on Airborne 
Collision Avoidance*System. 
545 
