A Helicopter Powertrain 
Diagnostics and Prognostics 
Demonstration 
by 
William Hardman, Andrew Hess, 
and Jonathan Sheaffer 
Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division 
Propulsion and Power Dept. 
Patuxent River. MD 
ABSTRACT 
The SH-60 Helicopter Integrated Diagnostic System (HIDS) 
program was initiated as a proof-of-concept effort to 
develop, demonstrate, and integrate available and advanced 
mechanical diagnostic technologies for propulsion and 
power drive system monitoring. Included in these 
technologies were various rule based and model based 
analysis techniques which were applied to demonstrate and 
validate various levels of diagnostic and prognostic 
capabilities. These will be discussed. Since spalling of the 
SB 2205 roller bearing integral inner race is the most 
common dynamic component cause for gearbox removal in 
the SH-60, it was tested as part of the HIDS effort. Using 
this as a case example, diagnostic methods are used to 
identify the fault, and means of applying prognostics are 
discussed. Other more recent examples of “seeded faults” 
will also be discussed as case studies demonstrating various 
degrees of diagnostic and prognostic capabilities. Relative 
rating of the performance of the different analysis 
techniques evaluated will also be discussed. As used in this 
paper, prognostics is the capability to provide early 
detection of the precursor and/or incipient fault condition to 
a component or sub-element failure condition; and to have 
the technology and means to manage and predict the 
progression of this fault condition to component failure. 
This prognostic philosophy will be further embellished; 
using examples from the HlDS past and current “seeded 
fault” data base to define accomplishments and discuss 
additional demonstration requirements. Finally, a full 
description, major accomplishments, status and planned 
efforts for the current Helicopter Transmission Test Facility 
(HTTF) will be presented. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Helicopter Integrated Diagnostic System (HIDS) 
program developed and tested a prototype automated system 
to diagnose aircraft health and track life usage of parts (Ref. 
1 - 4). HIDS was conceived to fulfill the Navy requirement, 
as identified in a Mission Needs Statement from the Joint 
Atlantic and Pacific Fleet Commanders, for a reliable state- 
of-the-art diagnostic capability on-board rotary wing 
aircraft. Such a system is expected to enhance safety, 
increase aircraft availability, improve maintenance 
efficiency, and significantly reduce life cycle cost through 
its ability to accurately track parts life and predict 
impending failure of both structural and dynamic drive 
system components. Resulting system information can be 
used to direct on-condition maintenance actions, shorten 
troubleshooting time, andor alert the pilot to conditions 
affecting flight safety. 
A vendor selection competition was conducted and 
Technology Integration (later procured by BF Goodrich 
Aerospace) was selected to provide two systems for this 
non-production technology integration demonstration. The 
program approach was two fold, first to integrate available 
low risk monitoring technologies into a single 
comprehensive onboard system for flight evaluation and 
“showcase“ demonstration at Naval Air Warfare Center 
Aircraft Division (NAWCAD), Patuxent River, MD. 
Second, to use the unique drive train (SH-60 setup of T700 
engines, main transmission, gearboxes, and shafting driven 
at full power) test cell facility at NAWCAD, Trenton, NJ to 
document and evaluate the systems capability to detect 
component faults through very intensive seeded fault 
testing. This seeded fault testing focused mostly on but was 
not limited to gearbox vibration diagnostics because 
gearbox vibration monitoring was the least understood and 
hardest to validate of the helicopter monitoring functions. 
The SH-60 HIDS provides engine monitoring (a new set of 
algorithms were procured from General Electric Aircraft 
Engines), vibration monitoring of all gearboxes, shafting 
and hanger bearings, oil monitoring, and inflight rotor track 
and balance capability. The HlDS also has flight regime 
recognition algorithms so that, though not part of this 
program, it would be relatively easy to integrate airframe 
structural life monitoring capabilities. The test cell HIDS 
configuration also included advanced oil debris monitoring 
and engine electrostatic exhaust debris capabilities. 
The diagnostic portion of HIDS targeted the detection and 
classification of mechanical component faults in the engine 
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright 
355 
and drive train primarily because these systems are 
responsible for the majority of Navy helicopter Class A 
mishaps (loss of aircraft and/or personnel). The key 
capabilities of HIDS included: 
0 Condition monitoring of gears, bearings and shafts by 
0 Automation of existing shaft balancing procedures 
Automatic engine health checks (continually provides 
pilot with engine power available conditions) 
0 Parts life usage tracking 
0 Automated on-board Rotor Track and Balance 
0 User fiiendly ground station 
vibration analysis 
Operational flight testing of HIDS began at Naval Air 
Station (NAS) Patuxent River in early 1995 on the SH-60 
platfonn. For safety reasons, faulty parts are being tested 
and characterized with a second system at the NAWCAD 
HTTF. Together, the ground test facility and the SH-60 
flight test aircraft provide a unique aircraft mechanical 
systems diagnostic laboratory to test current and emerging 
techniques and technologies, including several Small 
Business Innovative Research (SBIR) diagnostic technology 
efforts. The HIDS program served as the Navy's 
cornerstone effort to develop, evaluate, and demonstrate 
helicopter integrated diagnostic capabilities and provided 
high quality technical data and support to the H-53 
Integrated Mechanical Diagnostic Health and Usage 
Monitoring System (IMD HUMS) and V-22 Vibration 
Structural Life and Engine Diagnostics (VSLED) programs. 
DATA COLLECTION A D ANALYSIS 
The data acquisition system developed by BF Goodrich 
records digitized vibration and tachometer data for up to 32 
channels in parallel. Gear, shaft, bearing and data quality 
analyses are performed and displayed using the MATLAB 
computation and visualization environment. Each test cell 
run lasts roughly one hour with six acquisitions being taken 
at input torque ranging from 25 to 110 percent. 
All vibration data was analyzed automatically using the BF 
Goodrich AutoHUMS and TrendHUMS diagnostic routines. 
AutoHUMS saves all of the diagnostic algorithm results into 
an indicator database that can be trended over time with 
TrendHUMS. The diagnostic system reports numerous 
health indicators fiom gear, shaft and bearing analyses. The 
bearing algorithms'include indicators based on raw and 
enveloped vibration data. The system also performs a real 
time data quality check on all raw data. 
DIAGNOSTIC NDICATORS 
summarizes some of the more prominent indicators, based 
on their responsiveness to the various seeded and naturally 
occuring faults. 
SEEDED FAULTS AND DIAGNOSTICS 
- CASE EXAMPLES 
Numerous seeded fault tests were conducted as part of the 
HIDS program, specifically targeted to address the major 
reliability and safety areas, and have been fully described 
(Ref. 1). Significant fault propagation tests were 
successfully conducted where a small EDM notch was used 
as a stress riser in the root of the tooth. Cracks were grown 
from the notch until root-bending fatigue occurred in the 
tooth. A complete data set, from crack initiation to failure, 
was acquired for these tests. The fault propagation tests are 
prominent because they provide an understanding of failure 
progression dynamics, and eliminate the discrete step 
characteristics of other seeded fault tests. 
Gearmesh Anomaly 
The €€I'TF officially commenced testing during the summer 
of 1999 after being transferred to Pax River from Trenton, 
NJ. The test article was a Coast Guard HH-60J main 
transmission input module emanating high vibrations at half 
of the gear mesh frequency. The Navy has encountered a 
few incidents of half-mesh input modules, where every 
other tooth of a semi-hunting mesh is highly loaded. Since 
both the pinion and gear have even numbers of teeth, wear 
occurs at a much faster rate. Moreover, aircraft with these 
half-mesh input modules have a history of rejecting engines 
because of power turbine shaft wear and resultant cockpit 
torque indication errors. The Coast Guard rejected one 
engine on the subject aircraft because of the torque 
indication problem. The cause of half-mesh anomaly is 
believed to be gear profile errors introduced in the 
machining process. 
The objectives of the test were to exercise the input module 
in a highly controlled and instrumented environment to: a) 
develop a reliable method for the Coast Guard to identify 
half mesh modules using their field vibration equipment, b) 
determine if Navy tests could be conducted at lower torque 
than the current 75% requirement, making the test 
compatible with shipboard operations, c) test a novel fix, 
indexing the pinion by one tooth thereby changing mating 
teeth in mesh, and d) return the asset to service if within 
acceptable vibration limits. 
A number of diagnostic algorithms and associated indicators 
were employed throughout the demonstration program to 
determine the health of gears, bearings and shafts. Table 1 
356 
Table 1 Summary of Prominent Indicators 
Indicator Description Detection Rated Value 
1/2 Shaft Order Amplitude measurement of Tooth profile error Excellent gearmesh 
signal average 1/2x anomaly indicator 
fundamental shaft frequency 
the signal average imbalance indicator 
1 st Shaft Order Amplitude measurement of Shaft imbalance Excel lent shaft 
fundamental shift frequency 
2nd Shaft Order Amplitude measurement of Shaft misalignment Excellent Misalignment, 
signal average 2x and eccentricity Good back-up to 1 st 
fundamental shaft frequency Shaft Order imbalance, 
Fair gear fault indicator, 
Residual RMS Root Mean Square of the Sensor specific gear Good late responding 
Residual Kurtosis & 6th Moment Measures localized Sensor specific gear Excellent early 
residual signal average faults indicator 
anomalies of the residual faults responding indicators 
signal average 
Energy Operator Kurtosis & 6th Measures localized Energy Operator Good late responding 
Moment anomalies in the distribution analysis indicators 
of adjacent points in a signal 
Sideband Modulation Measures the combined Gear eccentricity, Good late responding 
energy of the sideband misalignment, and indicator 
frequencies looseness 
Inner Race Energy The measure of the total Bearing faults Excellent bearing fault 
Outer Race Energy energy present in the indicators 
Roller Energy enveloped vibration signal 
Cage Energy which is associated with the 
inner and outer race, roller 
and cage of a specific 
bearing 
energy present in the faults indicator 
enveloped vibration signal 
which is associated with the 
interaction of the rolling 
elements and the cage of a 
specific bearing 
with the predominant tones bearing faults Good bearing fault 
of a signal indicator 
with a signal after removing Good bearing fault 
Roller/Cage Interaction Energy The measure of the total Bearing roller/cage Good bearing fault 
Tone Energy The energy level associated Sensor specific Fair gear fault indicator, 
Base Energy The energy level associated Bearing wear Fair gear fault indicator, 
the predominant tones - indicator 
Enveloped Skewness Measures the lack of Sensor specific Excellent bearing & gear - .  
symmetry in the amplitude bearing faults fault indicator 
distribution of the enveloped 
vibration signal 
Enveloped Kurtosis & 6th Moment Measures the 'peakiness' of Sensor specific 
the amplitude distribution of bearing faults indicator 
the enveloped vibration 
Excellent bearing fault 
357 
Figure 1 Coast Guard Input Module with every other 
tooth wear pattern and spalled tooth. 
All of the objectives of the test were successfully 
accomplished, with the exception that the material 
condition of the test article precluded a return to service. 
Prior to initial test run, inspection of the mating gears via 
the input module inspection port revealed wear patterns 
and spalling, confirming high loading of every other tooth 
in the gear mesh (see Figure 1). The degree of spalling 
was unexpected, requiring the asset to be overhauled. 
However, the pinion was still indexed to determine 
whether vibrations at the half-mesh frequency could be 
brought to within acceptable limits. As exhibited in 
Figure 2, the vibration was reduced well below the Navy 
limit of 0.15 IPS, and would have allowed the asset to be 
returned to service. Reliable limits were developed for 
Coast Guard field vibration equipment by comparing 
measurements from several vibration monitoring systems. 
The chart also shows that a low 40% torque, such as required 
for single-engine flat-pitch operation, provides similar 
detection capability as for higher torques. With the real time 
monitoring capabilities of IMD HUMS about to enter the fleet, 
detection of aircraft system faults such as this half-mesh 
anomaly are automated and performed every flight, lowering 
operational costs and increasing safety. 
DIAGNOSTICS vs. PROGNOSTICS 
Diagnostics has traditionally been defined as the ability to 
detect and sometimes isolate a faulted component and/or 
failure condition. As a working definition for this paper: 
prognostics is the capability to provide early detection and 
isolation of the precursor and/or incipient fault condition to a 
component or sub-element failure condition: and to have the 
technology and means to manage and predict the progression 
of this fault condition to component failure. The detected, 
incipient fault condition is monitored, tracked, and safely 
managed from a small fault as it progresses to a larger fault, 
until it warrants some maintenance action and/or replacement. 
Through this early detection and monitoring management of 
incipient fault progression, the health of the component is 
known at any point in time and the future failure event can be 
safely predicted in time to prevent it. 
Though it is often dficult to separate diagnostic and 
prognostic performance in a seeded fault program such as this, 
one of the by-products of this testing was the demonstration of 
the potential and performance of prognostics. 
The prognostics problem can be thought of as being broken 
down into two related but distinct technical discipline areas: 
first, the sensors and technologies needed to find and “see” the 
- 
Half Mesh Vibration 
0.300 
U) 0.200 
n - 0.100 
0.000 
40 50 75 
Torque, % 
Figure 2 Half Mesh Test Results 
358 
early incipient fault prior to actual component failure, and 
second, the technologies and techniques needed to 
accurately predict useful remaining life at any current 
point in time. 
The prediction of accurate useful life remaining is further 
broken down into major enabling areas. Statistical 
techniques can be used to establish the degree of 
confidence in any life remaining prediction. Related 
statistical techniques are also used for boundary life 
remaining predictions. Modeling techniques can be 
employed to develop a degree of understanding of 
individual component and/or sub-element failure 
progression characteristics. Validating these models 
would require the generation of enough examples of 
actual failure events to characterize specific fault to 
failure progression rates. Various components and 
different failure modes of the same component element 
may have very different fault to failure progression rates. 
A significant degree of component failure prediction and 
prognostics was demonstrated during the seeded fault 
tests by applying many of the same algorithms and 
techniques used for vibration based mechanical 
diagnostics. Often the extrapolation of vibration 
frequency data, statistical parameters and/or trending of 
diagnostic indices is the technique used to enable failure 
prediction. It is of course key to have sensors, algorithms, 
and diagnostics indicators (or indices) that are sensitive 
and accurate enough to “see” the precursor or incipient 
“small” component fault. It is equally important to have a 
reliable experience database of similar types of “faults” so 
that the failure progression rate is well understood. 
The experience database knowledge and the 
understanding of various types of failure progressions will 
both enable the intelligent setting of alarm thresholds for 
diagnostics and provide the initial basis for the prediction 
of useful life remaining predictions. It is envisioned that 
in most cases, the alarm thresholds for safety-of-flight 
(cockpit warning) will be significantly higher than for 
maintenance. Establishing these alarm thresholds is a very 
necessary step in implementing future failure event 
prediction and enabling prognostics. Without having the 
benefit of an extensive experience database of actual 
component failures with fault progression data and/or a 
comprehensive “seeded fault” trials as the SH-60 HlDS 
program, establishing these alarm thresholds approaches 
the realm of “magic”. 
There are other important elements needed in the 
“diagnostic tool kit” or “bag of tricks” before prognostics 
can be successfully implemented. One of these can be 
called “Model Based” diagnostics or prognostics. Another 
can be grouped as a series of approaches and techniques 
to handle data scatter and manage false alarms. Model 
based techniques require a detailed and accurate 
understanding of the underlying physics of the system to 
model how a specific component, system, or machine, 
operates in normal and degraded conditions. Using real or 
calculated parameters against this accurate model enables the 
determination of relative “health” of the component monitored 
at any point in time. Some of the approaches applied to deal 
with inherent data scatter and to manage false alarms include 
fizzy logic and neural network techniques; data fusion; and 
multiple indications (driven by either sensor or algorithm 
indices) required prior to alarm. At times, and with varying 
degrees of application and success, all of these approaches and 
techniques were tried during this program. The recently 
introduced concept of applying a “Reasoner“ to various levels 
of the diagnosticlprognostic decision process should also 
greatly improve accuracy. 
Prognostic Data Development 
Many factors are required to enable accurate prognosis of 
materiel condition. One factor that is of paramount 
importance, and that was addressed under the HlDS program, 
is reliable, repeatable, high-quality failure progression data. 
Comprehensive seeded fault testing accomplished during the 
HlDS program generated some of this data, which provides 
insight into failure modes and the characteristics that 
accompany component failure, without jeopardizing safety. 
Common practice when fielding health-monitoring systems 
has been to collect failure data on an opportunistic basis from 
fielded systems. The drawbacks to this approach are obvious. 
Safety is only increased incrementally based on data from 
actual mishaps, and fault data takes many years to accumulate, 
and is of a limited scope due to limitations of on-board 
systems. Tests conducted in HTTF are conceived and 
conducted to short-circuit this cycle, thereby enabling 
increased safety with reduced false alarm calls earlier than 
would otherwise be achieved. The up-front investment to 
conduct testing will be saved many times over by increasing 
system effectiveness, thereby preventing mishaps. 
Figure 3 Fleet Rejected Main Transmission Module 
Input Pinion with Spalled Integral Raceway of Bearing 
SB 2205 
359 
Figure 4 Location of Bearing SB 2205 in the SH-60 Main Transmission Module 
DRIVE SYSTEM ACCELEROMETER LOCATIONS 
SH-60 HlDS TESTING SHEET 2 
STBD RING 
PORTRING 
(underneath) 
:T NP TACH 
Figure 5 SH-60 Main Transmission Module Sensor Locations 
360 
DIAGNOSTIC/PROGNOSTIC CASE EXAMPLE -
MAIN BEVEL INPUT PINION INTEGRAL INNER 
RACE 
Fault Description: The SH-60 main transmission module 
input pinion (P/N 70351-38104-102) is a complex part 
consisting of the female spline for the quill shaft, 2 1 tooth 
spiral bevel pinion and integral roller bearing inner 
raceway, Figure 3. Roller bearing SB 2205 reacts the 
radial load from the spiral bevel pinion and has 30 rolling 
elements with a roller diameter of 0.630 inches and a 
pitch diameter of 7.476 inches. This fault is particularly 
challenging since it is located deep inside the gearbox, 
Figure 4, suggesting it would be difficult to detect. Figure 
5 illustrates the SH-60 drive system and the respective 
vibration sensor locations. 
The starboard main sensor condition indicator toggles into 
alarm when the fault is implanted and reverts back to 
okay when the fault is removed. The port main sensor 
indicator is also sensitive to this fault because the sensor 
is located on the same structural housing member, and is 
rotated about 90 degrees around the housing from the 
starboard main sensor. The port indictor serves as 
confiiation of the starboard condition indicator. 
Statistical parameters, such as enveloped kurtosis, were 
the main indicators used to evaluate bearing condition for 
this fault. One of the keys to obtaining meaningful results 
with this technique is to envelope an appropriate 
frequency range. The frequency range used in this 
analysis was determined analytically as well as 
experientially. 
The statistical parameters used are sensor specific 
indicators as opposed to component specific. That is, they 
do not discriminate between bearings. One can however, 
determine the location of the fault to be on the starboard 
side as levels of the starboard main sensor are greater than 
that of the port main. 
The purpose of bearing diagnostics as implemented in the 
HlDS program is to identify faults in the early stages of 
development. The fleet rejected bearing fault under test 
was in an advanced stage, with the spall covering 
approximately 113 the circumference of the part. Since 
most of the bearing health indicators are designed to 
detect localized faults, they did not respond to this 
distributed fault. 
A useful approach implemented by the HlDS program is 
the simultaneous acquisition and analysis of a component 
signature by two different sensors. This is a data quality 
and analysis confidence measure aimed at improved 
diagnostics and reduced false alerts. Prior to the subject 
test, sensor starboard main was considered the primary 
sensor and starboard input the secondary. The starboard 
input sensor was not sensitive to this fault. Analysis to 
locate a sensitive secondary sensor identified the port main 
accelerometer as providing excellent results. While the port 
main and starboard input are a similar distance from the fault, 
the port main is on the same housing as the fault and has a 
better sensor orientation for this particular shaft. These efforts 
show the utility of redundant sensor analysis. It also exhibits 
the value of the parallel acquisition and storage of raw 
vibration data for all channels for re-processing purposes. One 
can then identify which accelerometer sensors and orientations 
are most appropriate for specific faults thereby optimizing a 
final, productionized version of the diagnostic system. 
Prognostics could effectively be applied to the failure of this 
component. As the most common dynamic component cause 
for gearbox removal in the H-60 community, the failure mode 
is well recognized. The SB 2205 fault progresses in a 
repeatable manner from a small, localized spall into a larger 
one that will eventually encompass a good portion of the inner 
race diameter. At this point. the chip detector will provide an 
indication of a failure somewhere in the gearbox with no 
indication of fault location or severity. On the other hand, the 
model based bearing indicators identify the presence of the 
fault early in this process. Specific indications from the inner 
race defect indicator will be observed. As the fault becomes 
progressively larger, the statistical indicators are among the 
dominant indicators that identify the degraded condition. By 
carefully tracking the progression of this fault via magnitude 
of response and migration across indicators, maintenance and 
mission planning can be conducted in an effective manner, 
and unscheduled downtime can be effectively reduced. 
Prognostics can enable effective management of fleet assets 
based on the current tempo of operations. If the availability of 
a particular asset is not critical and a component with a well 
understood failure mode, such as SB 2205, is identified as 
degrading over time, maintenance can be scheduled in a 
timely manner so as to minimize secondary damage, thereby 
reducing repair complexity and cost. This particular 
component of the main transmission is readily accessible by 
pulling the input module. Given early detection capability, it is 
feasible to change the way maintenance is performed by 
repairing the gearbox on the aircraft, thereby precluding 
pulling and replacing the main rotor head and main 
transmission and performing the ensuing rotor track and 
balance evolutions. However, if aircraft availability is of 
paramount importance, the failure progression can be closely 
monitored to ensure aircraft safety while keeping a critical 
asset in service until such time as maintenance can be 
performed. 
Further development and validation of advanced model-based 
analysis, data fusion, and other techniques is needed to reduce 
and/or eliminate false alarms and to completely implement a 
fully comprehensive prognostic capability. 
36 1 
HELICOPTER T ANSMISSION TEST FACILITY 
HTTF DESCRIPTION 
The test cell uses aircraft engines to provide power to all 
of the aircraft drive systems except the rotors. Power is 
absorbed through both the main rotor mast and tail rotor 
shaft by water brake dynamometers. The main rotor shaft 
is loaded in bending, tension and torque to simulate flight 
conditions. There is a speed-increasing gearbox between 
the main rotor mast and the water brake, which increases 
the main rotor speed by a factor of 32. This gearbox 
allows water brakes to extract up to 8,000 shaft 
horsepower (SHP) and will soon be upgraded to handle 
up to 18,500 SHP. The complete aircraft lubrication 
system is used with the oil cooler, oil cooler blower and 
blower drive shaft part of the system assembly. The tail 
drive system is installed and power is extracted fi-om the 
tail at operating speed. The tail water brake can extract up 
to 700 SHP. This capability provides for helicopter 
system level testing, uniquely enabling the detection and 
isolation of dynamic interface problems. Operational 
simulations include engine transients, topping, start up 
and cool down, clutch engagements, dual engine 
operation, over running clutch operation, one engine 
inoperative, rotor brake operation, and full accessories 
loading. 
The tail drive system installation allows balance and 
alignment surveys on the blower, tail drive shafts and 
disconnect coupling. Aircraft viscous damper bearing 
assemblies support the installation. The length of the test 
cell limits the number of tail drive shafts, so two of the 
aircraft shafts are not installed. The test cell also supports 
the aircraft accessories. Generators and hydraulic pumps 
are mounted on the accessory gearboxes and loaded to 
simulate aircraft operation. This is a significant capability, 
especially when diagnostics using vibration acquisition is 
the test objective. Vibration signatures collected fi-om the 
HTTF include frequency content from all dynamic 
components of the loaded power drive system. The 
complex signal is representative of the aircraft 
environment. 
Since this cell has the ability to operate all the aircraft 
mechanical systems together, the diagnostic system can 
record all component "signatures" to a database. This 
database can then be interrogated to determine system 
health, and system performance rather than a diagnostic 
evaluation of a single component or fault. This is a 
significant improvement over single component 
regenerative rigs that tend to have two gearboxes that 
generate the same frequencies (and cross talk) bolted to a 
single stand and none of the adjacent mechanical systems. 
HTTF ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
HTTF has served as an indispensable fleet support asset, and 
has made significant contributions to a number of key US 
Navy rotary wing platforms. These contributions are 
summarized below by platform. 
H-60 
HIDS Extensive Seeded Fault Testing 
0 Qualified Improved Durability Gearbox 
0 Improved Durability Gearbox Sump cracking 
T-700 Flameout Testing 
0 T-700 Alternate Fuel Testing 
0 Second Source Qualification Testing 
Developed Detection Methods for Fleet Trans-mission 
0 700 Hour Simulated Mission Endurance Test 
Problems 
H-3 
0 Upgraded Main Transmission Qualification 
0 Engine Flameout/Clutch Spitout Investigation 
Emergency Lube Flow Verification 
0 Disconnect Coupling Failure Test 
0 Torque Tube Gimbal Mount Modification 
0 Qualified Second Source Components 
0 Redesign of A-Frame Oil Cooler Support 
H- I 
0 Bevel Gear Failure Investigation 
Upgraded Transmission Qualification 
0 400 Hour Simulated Mission Endurance Test 
H-46 
H-46 Aft and Mix Transmission Upgrade Qualification 
HTTF STATUS 
The HTTF, which was originally located at NAWCAD 
Trenton, NJ, last operated on July 31, 1997, and was shut 
down as a result of the Base Realignment and Closure 
(BRAC) action of 1993, which closed Trenton in 1998. The 
cell, which was confgured to accommodate an H-60 aircraft 
drive system, was dis-assembled, and subsequently shipped 
along with other Trenton test cells and equipment, for 
incorporation into the Propulsion System Evaluation Facility 
(PSEF) at NAWCAD, Patuxent River, MD. 
362 
The Helicopter Transmission Test Facility has been 
reassembled to the Trenton H-60 configuration and 
officially commenced testing during the summer of 1999. 
Testing will continue, using seeded faults in an H-60 main 
transmission. This work will support the fleet wide 
introduction of the IMD HUMS into the H-60 and H-53 
aircraft. Additional 'piggy-back' testing of various sensor 
technologies in support of the H-53, H-60, H-1, JSF, and 
other programs, as well as qualification testing for CIP 
and alternate source parts is also planned. 
lubricating system flow path. The system is a combination of 
sensors allowing for the detection of multiple size particles, 
varying from 5 to 2000 mm in size. Algorithms used in the 
system discern air bubbles from wear particles and trend the 
amount of debris generation along with the particulate size. 
The concept has been proven in a water lab and computer oil- 
flow simulation model. IDI's oil debris monitoring system 
will be tested in the HTTF for further validation and 
verification before being flight-tested for incorporation in the 
SH-60R. 
Several new technologies have been procured to enhance 
our capabilities to evaluate diagnostic and prognostic' 
algorithms and methodologies. Some of these 
technologies are being developed under Small Business 
Innovative Research (SBIR) programs to evaluate 
potentially beneficial and promising techniques. These 
new technologies will be used as advanced test cell 
instrumentation. They will also be evaluated on their own 
merit. 
Oil System 
Pall Corporation is demonstrating their latest oil filter 
debris monitoring system on the engines and gearboxes of 
the HTTF. The system includes a filter bowl differential 
pressure sensor and a removable filter sheet that will trap 
oil debris. The differential pressure sensor can be used to 
measure the change in pressure drop, or delta p, across the 
filter element over time. A change in delta p is a prime 
indication of oil condition and degradation. Initial testing 
will establish nominal oil degradation rates and filter 
performance. Some oil contamination tests are also 
planned to demonstrate the system's ability to detect 
abrupt changes in oil quality. 
The removable filter sheet acts as a first line filter to 
capture relatively large particles prior to the normal 3- 
micron filter element. These particles are used to perform 
a wear particle analysis, which is used to describe the 
health and condition of the gear and bearing system more 
precisely than conventional spectroscopic analyses. The 
particles can be measured using x-ray fluorescence (XRF) 
spectroscopy to determine sample content and 
concentration in parts-per-million (ppm), while 
microscopic analysis of particle geometry is used to 
determine the failure mode(s) present. The data from 
these tests will be used to evaluate the usellness of 'delta 
p' monitoring. wear particle analysis, and/or XRF as 
diagnostic and prognostic tools, to assess power train 
health and manage on-condition maintenance for aircraft 
propulsion systems. 
Innovative Dynamics, Inc. is developing a real time oil 
debris monitoring system for use in the gearbox 
Epoch Engineering is demonstrating their Robust Laser 
Interferometer (RLI) on the engines, gearboxes. and other 
dynamic components of the H-60 drive system. The RLI 
system uses the phase shift of a laser beam reflected off a 
component to determine the vibrations at that point. Previous 
testing with the RLI has shown that the vibration signatures of 
internal gears, bearings, and vanes can be measured at the 
outside of the component, through the mechanical connection 
of cases, struts, supply tubes and actuator arms. The laser 
beam is reflected off a small area, and unlike conventional 
accelerometers, the laser's response is exceptionally accurate 
because there is no sensor or bracket mass to affect the 
measurement. Therefore, the laser is able to measure 
vibrations accurately over the conventional accelerometer 
spectrum and beyond to very high frequencies. This new 
information could prove useful in the detection and prevention 
of propulsion system failures. The continued testing of the 
RLI will provide data that will be used to evaluate the 
suitability of a laser-based sensor system for use on naval 
aircraft. 
Hood Technology Inc. is currently working on a system to 
detect low cycle fatigue in gas turbine engines. The system 
uses multiple sensors to monitor rotor tip clearance as well as 
blade passage. A tachometer is used to monitor disk location 
and rotational velocity. Each blade is tracked to monitor for 
the onset of elastic and plastic deformation. Hub cracks are 
associated with a change of arrival time of the blades, while 
asymmetric lengthening of the blades is an indication of 
plastic deformation leading toward disk burst. The system is 
currently being tested in the US Navy Patuxent River spin pit 
facility and working toward military and commercial 
certification. 
Neural Network and Data Fusion 
Orincon classical and neural network diagnostic algorithms 
operating in the RIPPENO, (Real-time Interactive 
Programming and Processing Environment) s o h a r e  package 
will be evaluated in near-real-time mode using the SH-60 
drive system configuration in the HTTF with various seeded 
faults. The software package is a graphical based environment 
that allows you to quickly and easily create information 
processing systems which can be encoded into a variety of 
363 
computer platforms. In addition, Orincon data fusion 
techniques will be demonstrated with the objective of 
maximizing fault detection ability while reducing 
incidence of false alarms. 
knowledge of the fault’s signature so a fleet occurring 
catastrophic failure can be avoided. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Mirltivarinte Analysis 
Hotelling’s T2 Multivariate Analysis is based upon the 
underlying correlation of the individual indicators used to 
build the composite T2 indicator. The greater the change 
in correlation in the presence of a fault, the more robust 
the component condition call. The effectiveness of the 
condition call is dramatically increased when used with 
statistical methods to select the indicators used. The 
indicator has been shown to change by orders of 
magnitude in the presence of a fault, over current multiple 
indicator hard-threshold based methods. Hotelling’s T2 
Analysis shows promise with a more robust classification 
of faults and a large reduction in false alarm calls. Future 
work in this area will be to explore alternative methods 
which better estimate in-control parameters, firther 
decreasing false alarm rates while preserving the 
responsiveness of the T2 analysis to faults. 
HTTF FUTURE FFORTS 
Currently the US Navy has a library of fault tests run in 
the HTTF. The library’s database consists of artificially 
induced and naturally occurring faults. Continued seeded 
fault testing is planned to expand the library‘s database, as 
well as advance current diagnosticlprognostic techniques 
and evaluate new technologies. The database contains 
fault propagation data, from fault initiation to near failure 
conditions. To evaluate the sensitivity of diagnostic 
techniques to fault progression; components with varying 
degrees of degredation will be tested. Following a 
successful diagnosis of a most severe case, a fault 
propagation test is completed. These tests will also be 
used in an attempt to characterize failure progression 
rates. 
The planetary drive system is the next major component 
group to be tested. The planned fault run is to insert a 
planet gear with 113 of a tooth removed. If diagnosed 
correctly, a failure progression test using an EDM notch 
for crack initiation will follow. Other gears in the 
planetary drive system will be tested with the sun gear 
being the next major component of interest. 
In order to obtain naturally occurring faults the Navy is 
working closely with Storage, Analysis, Failure 
Evaluation and Reclamation (SAFR), an organization that 
tracks and collects faults found in fleet aircraft. The Navy 
has a list with SAFR to collect drivetrain components 
prone to operational or premature failure. These 
components will be tested in the HTTF in order to gain 
Fault propagation tests provide an understanding of failure 
progression dynamics, and eliminate the discrete step 
characteristics of other seeded fault tests. Reliable, repeatable, 
high-quality failure progression data obtained from these tests 
is of paramount importance. enabling increased safety with 
reduced false alarm calls earlier than could otherwise be 
achieved. 
Prognostics can enable effective management of fleet assets 
based on the current tempo of operations. If the availability of 
a particular asset is not critical and a component with a well 
understood failure mode is identified as degrading over time, 
maintenance can be scheduled in a timely manner so as to 
minimize secondary damage, thereby reducing repair 
complexity and cost. However, if aircraft availability is of 
paramount importance, the failure progression can be closely 
monitored to ensure aircraft safety while keeping a critical 
asset in service until such time as maintenance can be 
performed. 
The HTTF has served as an indispensable fleet support asset, 
and has made significant contributions to a number of key US 
Navy rotary wing platforms. 
Further development and validation of advanced model-based 
analysis, data fusion, and other techniques is needed to reduce 
andor eliminate false alarms and to completely implement a 
fully comprehensive prognostic capability. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Hardman, B., Hess, A., and Neubert, C., “SH-60 
Helicopter Integrated Diagnostic System (HIDS) Program 
Experience and Results of Seeded Fault Testing” American 
Helicopter Society 54” Annual Forum, Washington, DC, May 
20-22, 1998. 
[2] Hardman, B., Hess, A., and Sheaffer, J., “SH-60 
Helicopter Integrated Diagnostic System (HIDS) Program - 
Diagnostic and Prognostic Development Experience” IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, Snowmass, Colorado, March 1999. 
[3] Hardman, B., Hess, A., Chin, H., and Gill, J., “The US 
Navy’s Helicopter Integrated Diagnostic System (HJDS) 
Program: Power Drivetrain Crack Detection Diagnostics and 
Prognostics, Life Usage Monitoring, and Damage Tolerance; 
Techniques, Methodologies and Experiences“ NATO RTO 
meeting, Corfu, Greece, April 21-22, 1999. 
[4] Hard", B., Hess, A., McGonigle, M., and Sheaffer, 
J., "An Update Status for the SH-60 Helicopter Integrated 
Diagnostic System (HIDS) Program - Diagnostic and 
Prognostic Experience" American Helicopter Society 55" 
Annual Forum, Montreal, Canada, May 25-27,1999. 
365 
