An Open-Standard Smart Sensor Architecture and 
System for Industrial Automation12 
Wayne G. Baer, Richard W. Lally 
Oceana Sensor Technologies 
1632 Corporate Landing Parkway 
Virginia Beach, VA 23454 
wbaer@oceanasensor.com 
757-426-3678 
Abstract- An enabling sensor technology for Prognostic 
and Health Management (PHM) is the open-standard smart 
sensor architecture. Historically, closed or proprietary 
sensor buses were used to collect distributed analog sensor 
data to a central point for digitization. Such a system would 
satisfy its initial constraints, but suffer when the need for 
future expansion or flexibility was required. Digital sensor 
buses addressed technical performance issues, but also fell 
short of an open-standard that would enable any sensor to 
work on any bus. This work of establishing an open- 
standard smart sensor architecture and then implementing a 
sensor system for PHM will be described. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. MOTIVATION 
3. SYSTEM APPROACH 
4. POWER CONSTRAINTS 
5. OPENSTANDARD 
6. ECONOMIC LEVERAGE 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The majority of sensors in use today are comprised of a 
transducing element and typically some type of signal 
conditioning. They produce an electrical signal, like an 
analog voltage, that is proportional to the physical parameter 
that is being measured. The sensor information is sent to 
another system that either stores the information for 
processing later, or is acquired into larger systems. They are 
inexpensive to use, easy to adapt, and have universal output 
that is standardized. A move to digital sensors is now being 
developed. The motivation behind the digital movement 
will be examined. 
In addition, sensor systems need to be networked in order 
for complex decision making processes to exist. Cost 
drivers for sensor manufacturers include integrating higher 
level functions for value-added features, which can be cost 
prohibitive covering the myriad network configurations. 
The IEEE-1451 Standard entitled “Smart Transducer 
Interface for Sensors & Actuators” is providing a 
universally-accepted interface between sensors and sensor 
buses/control networks. The goal is to isolate the choice of 
transducer from the choice of network, and provide a means 
for interoperability. This has effectively eliminated the 
manufacturer burden of supporting a large cross product of 
sensors versus networks, and permits future expansion and 
flexibility. 
2. MOTIVATION 
The motivating force behind the digital trend in sensor 
systems is Moore’s Law. Gordon Moore, co-founder of 
Intel, has theorized that the number of transistors per chip 
doubles every 18 months. Corresponding to the increase in 
transistors per chip, is the reduction in cost, Figure 1. 
However, feature size must continue to be reduced, but since 
this reduction is insufficient in and of itself, chip size must 
continue to increase. Together, these two trends have not 
only maintained Moore’s Law, but have accounted for the 
cost per device element decreasing by several orders of 
magnitude. Compared to other commodities in the world, 
semiconductor chips are cheap, and continue to get cheaper 
every year. 
Technology Drivers 
Table 1 summarizes the additional programs needed to 
maintain Moore’s Law. [5] Note the increase in 
complexity, yields, and chip size that are required. Even if 
Moore’s Law is not followed, the semiconductor industry 
has transformed itself over the last decade to provide 
unparalleled functionality and performance to the sensor 
industry. It is important to recognize and capitalize on this 
trend, both as sensor manufacturers and sensor users. 
No longer are expensive resources needed, or desired, in- 
house to capture this fundamental trend. Libraries of circuit 
cell designs now constitute third-party intellectual property 
(IP) that is offered for custom circuitry for sensor designs. 
Flexibility and optimization are easily designed into smart 
sensing systems with these off-the-shelf IP’s that integrate 
’ 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
Updated October 26, 1999 
123 
into host platforms. Fabrication of these designs can then be 
competitively produced at an astonishingly wide variety of 
domestic and foreign facilities. 
Table 1. Programs to Maintain Moore's Law. 
[Wafer diameter, 
I"2,-"- . . t ~ ~ ~ ~ - ~ ~ l  Facility automation, 5 
JLine yield, % good 140 F-k-Fl 
Todays driving force behind the large volume sensor 
markets are complex electro-mechanical platforms. 
Industries like transportation, biomedicine, industrial and 
Transistor Count (K) 
1 >/ 
1o.ooo.OOo 
1,000,000 
/ 100,000 Pentit" II Processor / 
Pentium Pro Processor 
10,000 
1 .ooo 
100 
10 
1 
process control, environmental control, and others, place a 
high value on functionality and integration. Simultaneously, 
the cost for these devices must remain very competitive. The 
majority of sensor applications consider cost as an important 
issue, and remains high on the list of priorities where smart 
sensors are concerned. One tradeoff is the additional 
functionality derived from an on-board processor, allowing 
the sensor to not only sense, but to react and take action 
based on certain parameters or operating conditions. [5] 
3. SYSTEM APPROACH 
When taking the smart sensor approach, system designers 
are alleviated from many tasks required to implement 
sensors. A high level coordination between sensor nodes 
and control equipment is all that is required. The onerous 
integration of many levels of analog signals, expensive 
cabling, unreliable connectors, and software becomes a thing 
of the past. The economics of using and integrating smart 
sensors is not hard to quantify. In fact, this high level of 
integration has a profound effect on the end users that 
operate and maintain equipment that has been updated with 
smart sensors. For example, traditional walk-around units 
for equipment vibration monitoring can be replaced with 
retrofit devices that can easily be networked into the existing 
facilities infrastructure. 
'71 '76 '81 '86 '91 '96 
Figure 1 Moore's First Law and Update. [313 
Pentiunin Tradenwk Intel Corp. 
124 
Digital Digital 
Digital Digital Digital 
Controller 
Controller Conkoiler contfoller Controller 
Figure 2. Partitioning of a Smart Sensor Microsystem. In (a) is a simple transducer 
hard-wired to a control block. In (b) is a signal conditioned sensor (with electronics) 
In (c) and (d) are evolutions towards a smart sensor, (e) shows a fully integrated 
smart sensor operating as a stand-alone, sensor node in a distributed sensing system. 
Not only does this approach save on time to collect raw 
data, but permits much higher sampling cycles on the order 
of minutes. In addition, these higher sampling cycles can 
show vibration trends before they reach damage-inducing 
levels. [6]  Keep in mind that this smart sensor approach is 
applicable to many other system applications beyond 
vibration gathering and analysis. 
Design Objectives 
The system design has several objectives to achieve. They 
include wireless operations, easy installation, and plug and 
play capability. This translates into design goals of low- 
power operations, small form factor to minimize physical 
area and volume, and use of the Standard Transducer 
Interface Module (STIM) for processor interface. 
The advanced sensor system design for PHM permits many 
other important functions to be incorporated including the 
following. Smart Sensor System- Power On Self Test 
(POST), digital calibration and compensation, noise 
immunity, power generation and power management 
schemes, algorithm execution, high dynamic range and 
bandwidth ADC, high temperature transducer electronics, 
adaptive processing and signal conditioning, data reduction 
and archive, telemetry, and wireless sensor networks. 
Plug and Play 
Very few sensors are used in a stand-alone fashion today. 
Distributed sensing systems typically form the front end for 
higher processes and control systems. In these applications, 
the need for higher levels of integration become necessary 
and sensor functionality and reliability become important 
issues. The ability to easily interoperate various sensor 
types from diverse manufacturers across any network is the 
goal of this open standard approach. 
Cross platform interoperability is also important for plug 
and play devices. Having a standardized bus is sufficient for 
operations, but including host-client software, advanced 
programmers interface (MI)  and the proper operating 
system (OK) including middle-ware is also key. Supporting 
functionality such as the user interface, data analysis and 
management, neural nets, expert systems, fuzzy logic, is an 
advanced object oriented O/S. New O/S capabilities 
requires functionality in Active-X, CORBA, DCOM, Java, 
and others that are just emerging, including client specific 
callable routines (drivers) written in their own code such as 
C. Many of these issues in Industrial Automation software 
including OLE for Process Control (OPC) are still being 
debated. Ultimately, the end user doesn't care to see these 
embedded protocols, but will directly benefit from their plug 
and play capabilities. 
Integrated systems have innate capability for digital I/O. 
Building on this capability is the bus architecture that many 
sensor manufacturers have tried to implement. Some 
examples of buses that have been implemented, sensor 
specific and digital, are Fieldbus, Profibus, CAN, I'C, and 
others. In addition, some manufacturers have decided on 
embedding proprietary buses into their product. In the 
middle of the sensor manufacturers and the system 
integrators (end users) are standards organizations 
attempting to set universally-acceptable open protocols for 
everyone to agree upon. They include the EIA, SAE, IEEE, 
ISO, and others. [7] 
125 
Network 
Capable 
Application 
Processor 
STIM: 
Standard 
Transducer 
Interface 
Module 
1451.2 Interface: 
DCLK + 
DIN 
DOUT + 
NIOE + 
NTRIG ---+ 
NTRACK+ 
NIO-INT + 
+5v - 
C O M M O N  
. 
. Access . . Point . 
................................................ 
Figure 3. IEEE 1451.2 Architecture and Interface (left), and implementation with network connection. 
Figure 4. Implementation of a wireless smart sensor architecture. 
The advent and development of these buses, shown in consideration is the reduction in bandwidth and the 
Figure 2, pushes the resident processing capability further supporting bushetwork size and infrastructure. For 
down the system architecture. [ l ]  This enables many example, airbag sensors represent one of the largest volume 
important capabilities such as on-board digitization of the smart sensor markets today, with 10’s of millions being used 
sensor signal, local processing, self-testing, and even annually. 
memory functions. [ 1 ,SI Sensors now have the capability of 
being smart. Locally processing the sensor information to 
yield higher order results has a tremendous impact on 
downstream bus considerations. The most important 
126 
4. POWER CONSTRAINTS 
1 
Pentium IIIB- 5.06 0.98 .212 
500E 
Analysis 
A comparison of the total energy requirements for 
processing various Fast Fourier Transform (FlT) sizes at the 
Intelligent Component Health Monitor (ICHM) versus the 
energy needed for transmitting data to the System Health 
Monitor (SHM) using a typical radio network technology is 
made. [13] The data transmit rate is based on a 2 Mbit/sec 
transfer bandwidth and an average of five hops (ICHM- 
ICHM) to route data from an individual ICHM to the SHM. 
Five hops are interpreted as one data transmit cycle and 4 
subsequent data receive and retransmit cycles. The analysis 
also assumes 500 mW (milliwatts) power consumption by 
an ICHM when transmitting and 250 mW receiving. These 
inputs were derived primarily from available data for 
commercially available wireless network transceivers. These 
parameters are viewed as representative for an analysis of 
this type based on this concept of operations. 
System power consumption is critical to the operating 
concept when operating on battery power. This system 
concept relies on low duty cycle sampling of approximately 
once per day, and very low quiescent power drain, in order 
to meet our installed lifecycle goal of several years. Each 
partition of the system permits careful selection and 
optimization of the key areas including sensors, signal 
conditioning, analog to digital converter (ADC), filters, 
memory, processor, and RF communications. At full duty 
cycle, the processor and RF communications comprise over 
75% of the total power sink, with the processor more than 
double that of the wireless communications. It becomes 
obvious that the processor is the most likely starting point 
for power reduction analysis. 
Several key figures of merit (FOM) have been identified as 
essential for selection of the processor and other major 
power consumers on board. They include an efficiency 
rating of milliWatt/MIPS (Million Instructions Per Second), 
an economic rating of $/MIP, and a technology (footprint) 
rating of die area (mm’)/MIPS. Another FOM for floating 
point efficiency (i.e. mW/FLOPS (Floating Point Operations 
Per Second)) is being considered to qualify the data 
reduction process. However, certain processors do not 
support these operations in hardware, so a compatible 
software floating point routine complicates this analysis. 
Each one of these figures of merit has been formatted to 
provide consistency across the comparisons: lower FOM’s 
are desirable, and higher FOM’s are not. The compilation 
of this data is ongoing, and is not sufficiently advanced for 
publication. Typical FOM examples from different 
manufacturers are shown below in Table 2. 
Table 2. Key Figures of Merit (FOM) for typical processors. 
I mW/MIPS I $/MIPS I Die area 1 
I peripheral) I price) I /MIPS 
68HC711D3 I 43 I 2.34 I 12 
StrongArmTM I 1.6 I 0.047 I 
32ouvc5402 I 0.54 I 0.092 I 
The traditional approach to data acquisition has been to send 
raw data to a central processor for data reduction. In this 
wireless system approach, one has to consider the “cost” of 
the wireless RF link in terms of power consumption, time, 
and available bandwidth. Simulation and analysis has 
shown the RF link can not support broadband raw data 
transmission. In addition, the cost of embedding a processor 
locally at the sensor level to reduce the data provides an 
order of magnitude power savings over the traditional 
approach. 
The processor power requirements are based upon worst 
case power consumption by each processor class evaluated 
(a total of 12 different DSP processors was considered) and 
assumes that the processor is clocked at the highest available 
speed for the class. The highest bandwidth available will 
normally correspond to the worst case power consumption. 
The number of clock cycles to compute the FFTs is based 
upon available data for a 256 point FFT. Larger sizes are 
extrapolated from this data by applying a ratio of actual 
value to expected value and using this ratio to approximate 
the number of clock cycles required for each FFT size. The 
FFT algorithm requires on the order of N*LOG(N) 
operations to compute. To establish how efficiently each 
processor computes an FIT, the ratio of actual operations 
needed to compute a 256 point FFT to the number of 
operations that would be expected based upon the FFT’s 
N*LOG(N) relationship was computed. This results in a 
multiplier to roughly approximate the FFT computational 
efficiency of the various processors evaluated which can be 
expressed as: 
Rae = N256 / (256 *LOg(256)) 
where: 
Rae is the ratio of actual to expected operations 
N256 is the number of actual operations reported 
for a 256 point FFT 
For each subsequent FFT size evaluated, 
computations is approximately by: 
the number of 
where: 
N is the approximate number of computations 
Ns is the FFT size 
Rae is the actual to expected ratio from the above 
expression. 
127 
The amount of time required to perform the FlT 
computation is estimated by using the processor clock speed 
and the associated number of clock cycles required to 
perform the FTT. The power required to run the processor is 
then multiplied by the time required to perform each FFT 
computation to arrive at a relative total energy (Watt- 
microseconds) value for each processor and FFT size. 
Based on this projection of processor total energy combined 
with system estimates, it is easy to correlate battery life 
based on the standard millihp-hours (mAh) FOM that are 
typically quoted by battery manufacturers. 
To compare the required processing energy to the relative 
energy required to transmit the data, the energy required to 
transmit, receive and retransmit the data was calculated 
based upon a 500 mW power consumption with a duration 
based on the time required to transmit the data at the 
evaluated on a case by case basis to determine the best 
approach. 
1cOwwo 
10 
FFT Ske 
2Mbit/sec data rate. This was done for both 16 bit and 24 bit 
input sample sizes for comparison of different input sample 
lengths. 
Figure S. Total Energy Consumption Comparison for 
Various Processors, Native Format. 
For integer Drocessor twes, the number of comtmtations is 
(Gm3 
- .  
based upon performing calculations in the native data 
format. For large FFT sizes, software floating point or other 
approaches to deal with numencal range considerations 
would probably be needed and as such the number of integer 
computations reported is less than for the floating point 
counterparts. Thus, we have repeated the analysis assuming 
eight integer instructions for each floating point instruction 
to account for numerical range considerations needed for 
larger FFT sizes. Figure 5 shows the results for FFT’s 
computed in the native data format while Figure 6 shows the 
analysis for software floating point. 
‘ D x T ~ ( I  
I nsPsll0Df , 
W b P W  t 
9 
e 
w 
f 
’- 
’ -m~P?lom 
; 1MJ 
,~~,  --.I-?a~s3H)Cdx - - Trpn8INlfGBb 
IJ 
The results shown in ten to 100 FITS can be accommodated, FFT SIZB 
the crossover point occurs whereby the energy required to 
process the data is equivalent to that required for 
transmitting the data back to the SHM level. We have 
assumed that if the processing is performed at the ICHM, the 
power required to transmit the “answer” to the SHM is 
negligible. The Motorola 68356 chip used in our 
Figure 6. Total Energy Consumption Comparison for 
Various Processors, Floating Point Format. 
development benchtop systems has a 56002 DSP core which 5 .  OPEN STANDARD 
falls in the middle Of-the pack (DSP-5600W of the 12 These vibration shown in Figure 3, as well as a processors considered in the analysis. number of other sensor types, used for monitoring critical 
The results indicate that approximately an order of 
magnitude or more energy is required using current 
technology to transmit data to the SHM for processing than 
is required to process an FFT locally on the ICHM. Based 
on these results, we recommend proceeding with the 
development of an ICHM module which can run diagnostic 
algorithms. The power requirements for performing simple 
diagnostic evaluations, such as peak threshold detection in a 
particular frequency band, are dominated by the power 
requirements for performing FFI’s. When more complex 
diagnostic operations are implemented, the efficiency of 
each approach in terms of power consumption should be 
operating parameters in a PHM environment are being 
integrated into an intelligent networked sensor architecture. 
This architecture is being developed with an opportunity to 
establish an open standard interface between digital 
sensor(s)/actuator(s) and a network microprocessor. 
IEEE1451.2 describes a standard interface that allows for a 
multi-sensor (and actuator) digital architecture with 
distributed intelligence. The standard describes a critical 
piece of architecture called the Transducer Electronic Data 
Sheet (TEDS). This provides the format for all information 
necessary to automate the connectivity of the digital sensor 
and/or actuator; a personality data sheet if you will. [9,10] 
Other uses for TEDS can be implemented including 
128 
OST 
AD1 
Gravhill 
Moore 
Figure 7. Open Systems Interoperability. 
configuration control, calibration and compensation 
coefficients, factory serial number, lot number, etc. 
Utilizing TEDS for asset management and tracking is also 
under consideration. 
To compliment this embedded smart systems approach, 
retrofit and installation are given high priority. Shown in 
Figure 4 are Oceana Sensor Technologies wireless solutions 
to quick and easy integration. One of the largest hurdles to 
overcome is the cost and complexity of installation. With 
wireless sensors used in OEM or retrofit applications, these 
costs are minimized. The future of “peel and stick” sensor 
clusters is not too far from becoming a commercial reality. 
Several types of packaging are offered to end users and 
OEM for design into new equipment as well as retrofit onto 
existing equipment. The customer can then focus his 
attention to implementing flexible, autonomous networks of 
smart sensor systems as shown in Figures 7 and 8. [ 111 The 
bottom line for this technology is adding value for the 
customer and end user while making the implementation of 
it transparent and seamless. 
6. ECONOMIC LEVERAGE 
The realization of Total Ownership Costs (TOC) and Life 
Cycle Cost (LCC) Management by Industrial and Military 
sectors are the economic driving factors for this technology. 
Ultimately, the automation of machine maintenance alerts 
will provide the tools to reduce Operating and Support 
(O&S) Costs and reduce or eliminate unscheduled 
downtime. Other disciplines in this TOC toolkit include 
Prognostics and Health Management (PHM), Reliability 
Centered Maintenance (RCM), Condition Based 
Maintenance (CBM), Classification and Algorithm 
Development, and a host of others. 
INTERNET Q INTERNET Q 
Enterprise 01 D Enterprise 
i i  ‘....T........: 
Factory Factory 
Line Line 
Machine Machine 
Actuator Actuator 
PLC 
Figure 8. PHM for Industrial Network Hierarchy. Left side shows an application-specific gateway at each level, Right side 
becomes application-independent gateway with open systems standards implemented. 
1 ’9 
The ability of a going concern to off-load its maintenance 
burden to the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) is 
providing the needed pull from the consumer side. The 
OEM’s are responding with providing contracts for 
guaranteed uptime, or selling the amount of life an asset will 
provide for the customer. Savvy businessmen that have 
recognized their core competencies will gladly contract with 
the OEM for Life Cycle Support, thereby unburdening their 
organizational resources from maintenance, training, and 
unscheduled downtime. (ie. United Airlines (UAL) has 
recognized their business is to fly passengers from Point A 
to Point B, and contract an OEM engine builder to supply 
gas turbine engine power on an annual basis) 
There are other economic benefits from using a wireless 
distributed smart sensor network that are not readily 
apparent. The increased reliability of a system without wires 
and connectors are dividends realized later in the lifecycle. 
In Aerospace sectors, the weight savings of the wires and 
connectors has a very significant impact. In one study, an 
H-53 (Sikorsky helicopter) could save over 30 pounds and 
22% in installation costs by utilizing a wireless sensor 
system for health monitoring. [12] These weight savings 
translate into lower fuel consumption over the airframes’ 
lifetime, or conversely more mission capability, while 
retaining or enhancing the health monitoring systems. 
Conclusion 
As this decade comes to a close, integrated sensing systems 
will have the potential to revolutionize many segments of 
society, including industrial process control, biomedical and 
health care, advanced automotive and transportation 
systems, and many other areas yet undefined. Important 
trends in the semiconductor industry have had a profound 
impact to the sensor industry. 
Smart sensor systems and sub-systems have been 
implemented just to monitor the health of smaller 
components embedded in complex systems and then fuse the 
information gathered by these independent nodes. An 
architecture has been defined to enable plug and play 
capability, and also provide an open standard to the sensor 
interface. The implementation of a smart sensor architecture 
with a wireless communications protocol and network 
interface has been described. Several economic driving 
factors have been identified and examples given. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge Professor Kensall D. Wise of 
the University of Michigan for his discussions and 
contributions on Smart Sensors and Systems. We also 
acknowledge Dr. William J. Scheuren of DAFS’A, the 
Office of Naval Research, and the Joint Strike Fighter 
Program Office for technical guidance and funding support. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  K.D. Wise, N. Najafi, “The Coming Opportunities in 
Microsensor Systems,” (Invited) Digest IEEE bi t .  Con$ 
Solid-state Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’ 9 I ) ,  San 
Francisco, CA, pp. 2-7, June 1991. 
[2] Special Issue: Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, and 
Microsystems (MEMS), Proceedings of the IEEE, K.D. 
Wise-editor, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998. 
[3] G. Moore, “An Update on Moore’s Law”, (Keynote 
Address) Intel Developers Forum, San Francisco, CA, 
September 30, 1997. 
[4] E.S. Meieran, “21st Century Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Capabilities,” Intel Technology Joumal, 4’ 
Quarter 1998. 
[5] G.W. Nickerson, R.W. Lally, “An Intelligent Bearing 
Health Monitor System” 1997 AMSE Iiztenzational 
Mechanical Engineering Congress, Dallas TX, Nov. 1997. 
[6] J.C. Robinson, J.M. Rybak, E.R. Saller, “Using 
Accelerometers to Monitor Complex Machinery Vibration,” 
Sensors Mag., June 1997. 
[7] N. Najafi, K.W. Clayton, W.G. Baer, K. Najafi, K.D. 
Wise, “An Architecture and Interface for VLSI Sensors,” 
Digest IEEE Solid-state Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 
Hilton Head, pp. 76-79, June 1988. 
[8] S.B. Crary, W.G. Baer, J.C. Cowles, K.D. Wise, “Digital 
Compensation of High-Performance Silicon Pressure 
Transducers,” Sensors and Actuators, a, pp. 70-72, 
February 1990. 
[9] S.P. Woods, “The IEEE-P1451 transducer to 
microprocessor interface,” Sensors Mag., pp. 43-48, June 
1996. 
[ 101 R.W. Lally, W.G. Baer,“24-bit Digital Accelerometer”, 
Proceedings from NOISECON’97, Penn State University, 
University Park, PA, June, 1997. 
[ 111 www.hpie.coni 
[12] W.G. Baer (PI), er al., “Wireless Intelligent Health and 
Usage Monitoring System (WIHUMS)”, JAHUMS Phase I 
Final Report, Naval Surface Warfare Center-Carderock 
Division, pp. 6, September 8, 1998. 
[ 131 J. Clift “ICHM Power Consumption Tradeoff 
Analysis”, CBM-JC-008, Aug. 26, 1997, BBN, Cambridge, 
MA. 
[14] StrongArmTM and Pentium IIIB are registered 
trademarks of Intel. 
130 
Wayne Baer (right side) 
is a technologist in 
sensor development 
methodology-technology 
and microelectronics. 
He has developed arid 
led developnzent of 
sensors, microelectronics 
and sensor systems at 
Ford Motor Company, Con& Glass Works, Kelsey-Hayes 
R&D, University of Michigan-CISC, and Oceana Sensor 
Techologies. He is presently the Technical Director of 
Oceana Sensor Technologies, where the sensor 
technologies, microelectronics, operating systems, 
databases, processors, and wireless RF cominunications for  
the ICHWM (Intelligent Component Health Monitor) system 
were developed and supported. He was previously the 
Silicon Group Manager at the University of Michigan’s 
Center for Integrated Sensors and Circuits (UM-CISC). III  
1996 he received the Ex~elEeiice in Staff Service Award froin 
the University of Michigan. He has authored papers, 
presented technical research, and spoken internationally 
about his specialties. He is a member of IEEE-EDS. 
Richard Lully (le) side of photograph) has 19 years of 
experience at the PCB Group of companies in the 
development and application of sensors for  structural 
acoustics and CBM applications. Transduction principles, 
sensor integration, calibration and application engineering 
of smart sensor networks are his specialties. Mr. Lnlly 
established Oceana Sensor Technologies, Inc. (A PCB 
Group Company) in 1995 focusing on developing high 
qualiry, low cost, embeddable sensor technology for  CBM 
applications. He has authored papers, presented tutorials 
and spoken inteniationally about his specialties. 
131 
