Mars Network Operations Concept 
Neal R. Kuo 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
Neal.Kuo @ iDl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-8307 
Abstract - NASA has initiated at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory the design of a Communications and Navigation 
Network at Mars. It will consist of a constellation of low- 
altitude orbiting satellites and one or more areostationary 
(of synchronous orbit around Mars) satellites, as shown in 
Figure 1. The key Mars Network operations concept is to 
provide standard services and pave a way for 
interoperability of fitture Mars Missions. It is envisioned 
that the Mars Network will provide four types of services: 
telemetry and command data relay, position determination, 
time synchronization, and proximity link telecom 
pe$ormance data service. Both scheduled and demand 
access paradigms were considered as options for the user to 
access these services. The adoption of the Consultative 
Committee for Space Data System (CCSDS) Proximity Link 
(proximity-I) protocol ensures the interoperability at the 
data link layer. The CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP) 
ensures the interoperability at the message and file transfer 
layer. One important feature of the Mars Network operation 
is that the orbiting satellites of the Mars Network are 
indistinguishable from the user’s point of view. A user’s 
data transfer transaction started with one satellite can be 
continued with another satellite. This “cloud” topology 
greatly simplijies the users operations. We also introduce 
the concept offile based operation. The file based operation 
for Mars Network promotes autonomous network operations 
and provides better data accountability. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
2.  NETWORK TOPOLOGY, CONNECTION, AND END-TO- 
END DATA FLOW 
3. SERVICE CATEGORY 
4. SERVICE ACCESS METHODS 
6.  CONCLUSIONS 
5. FILE BASED OPERATIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Mars Network is a study task initiated at the 
Telecommunications and Mission Operations Directorate 
(TMOD) of JPL. The primary objective of the Mars 
Network is to provide services to the Mars missions in order 
to support scientific and exploration needs such as Mars 
global reconnaissance, surface exploration, sample return 
missions, robotic outposts, and eventual human 
explorations. In general, the Mars Network provides 
communications and navigation services at Mars with 
Increased connectivity, 
Increased data rate, 
Precise navigation. 
Figure 2 shows the comparative coverage of the planned 
Mars assets [61. 
Figure 1 Mars Network 
209 
Representative comm return for +- 15 deg latitude Avg Comm 
Mars'Ol : 
Mars Express: 
Co"/Nav 
Microsats: 
- Equatorial(1): 
- Polar(1): 
MARSAT: 
Return 
80 Mb/sol 
ass 
50 Mb/.Ol 
(daytime) 
Lander has 3kb/s (60 mb/sol) direct-to-Earth link 
450 M b h l  
80 Mb/sol 
100,000 Mb/sol 
4 1 Martian Day 
(sol) 
Figure 2 Comparative Coverage of the Planned Mars Assets 
The ~ l a n  is to launch a DrototvDe communications satellite 
2. NETWORK TOPOLOGY, CONNECTIONS, AND at thi end of 2002, which w i l f h v e  at Mars in 2003. This fist  satellite will be in near-equatorial orbit at 
approximately 800 km altitude to serve the landed elements END-TO-END DATA FLOW 
biiween +-35 degree latitude. In 2005, two more satellites, 
one equatorial and one polar, will join the first one to form a 
constellation. Eventuallv. it is Dlanned to have 4 to 6 low- Network ToPolORY 
altitude orbiting micro-iatellites' (Microsat) present. In later 
years, one or more larger Mars areostationary relay satellites 
(MARSat) are planned to be at the synchronous orbit to 
form a complete Mars Network. 
With this gradual buildup, the term "Mars Network" refers 
to the single MicroSat spacecraft of the 2003 era and a 
constellation of multiple MicroSats of 2005 and later. It 
extends to include the MARSats in the future years. 
Each MicroSat will carry one Ultra High Frequency (UHF) 
transceiver as the only payload. The traditional NASA 
mission operations process is well established to deliver the 
Microsat to its operational orbit, to maintain its health and 
safety, to keep track of the operational characteristics and 
expendables, and to perform payload operations. There is 
very little station keeping to be performed during a 
Microsat's life time (3 to 5 years in operational orbit). The 
command and control of the constellation is done by 
individual MicroSat command and control from the control 
center on Earth. 
The communications between the Mars Network and the 
Earth is through NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN). A 
DSN 34-meter subnet that consists of antenna at three sites 
globally providing continuous coverage will be dedicated to 
support the Mars communications need. 
- -  
The Mars Network topology from the user's point of view is 
shown in Figure 3. 
W 
Figure 3 Mars Network Topology 
The intemal Deep Space Network including Mars Network 
should be transparent to the user. The user on Mars connects 
to the Mars Network via the proximity link. The user should 
not be concerned with which MicroSat it connects to. If a 
user's telemetry dataset requires multiple proximity link 
sessions to complete, the sessions can be with different 
MicroSats. The user telemetry data received at the Mars 
Network will eventually be forwarded to the DSN stations, 
merged, and stored at the TMOD server for delivery to the 
user. 
Users on Earth, with different arrangements, could access 
the Mars Network through TMOD in three ways: (1) 
21 0 
through a special gateway to the DSN stations, (2) through 
a dedicated secure communications line to JPL inside the 
firewall, (3) through internet access outside the firewall. The 
differences are in the type of services available and the 
latency. 
Network Coniiections 
Figure 4 shows a connection map. The dashed lines are 
radio links. The radio links are not permanent links. They 
are possible connections. The user elements on Mars that 
are outside of +-35 degree latitude can not access the 
equatorial MicroSats. The proximity link and the deep space 
link to any particular MicroSat does not have to be 
simultaneous. The merit for MicroSat to MicroSat cross 
link will be evaluated in the future. 
As a store-and-forward communications node, the Mars 
Network will perform the following functions. . Link protocols conversion . Routing . Flow Control . Data Priority Handling . Custody Transfer 
End-to-end Data Flow 
The Mars Network will support user’s end-to-end data 
system with user selected data format. The prevailing data 
format in use today for the telemetry data is the CCSDS 
telemetry packet. If the user flight element sends telemetry 
packets to the Mars Network, it will be delivered to the 
user’s control center on Earth in telemetry packets. The user 
can also interface with the Mars Network in file or other 
user defined data unit. 
The earth-bound telemetry, including science and 
engineering data, are transmitted from the user to the Mars 
Network over the proximity link. They are multiplexed with 
telemetry data from other users and transmitted to the Deep 
Space Network (DSN) ground stations over the Mars-to- 
Earth space link. The peak data rate of the proximity link 
using current UHF design is 256Kbps. The data rate for the 
Mars-Earth space link is a function of the radio frequency, 
antenna size, and the Earth-Mars geometry (range and 
angle). For a rough estimate, using the DSN’s 34-meter 
Beam Wave Guide antenna and 80 cm diameter HGA X- 
band antenna on the Microsat, the data rate ranges from 5 
kbps at 2.5 AU to 150 kbps at 0.6 AU. (It is conceivable that 
with multiple hops relay satellites properly placed between 
Mars and Earth[lO], the data rate can be maintained at a 
constant 0.6 AU range although the propagation delay can 
not be reduced.) 
Protocol Suites 
Mars In-situ Communications. Mars Network will support 
the following protocol suite for the proximity link at Mars. . Physical Layer: UHF [2] 
Link Layer: CCSDS Proximity-1[2] . Transport Layer: CCSDS Packet 
. (optional)[4,5] Data Delivery Layer: CFDP (optional)[3] 
Figure 4 Mars Network Connections 
21 1 
MARS Elements 
Protocols 
.Physical: UHF 
*Link: CCSDS Proximity-1 Transfer Frame (using FDMA) 
*Data Delivery: CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP) 
*Transport: CCSDS packet Ground Elements 
Figure 5 End-to-end Data Flow 
CCSDS Proximity link protocol defines the Physical and 
Link Layer standard. The link layer protocol also specifies 
the link establishment, data transfer, and link termination 
procedures. It allows any user data to be transferred using 
the Proximity-1 transfer frame. Therefore, if the user puts 
the CCSDS packet inside the Proximity-1 transfer frame, 
the Mars Network will receive the CCSDS packet. If the 
sender puts the CFDP Protocol Data Unit (PDU) inside the 
transfer frame, the receiver will receive the CFDP PDU. 
Mars-Earth Communications. For the long haul 
communications between the Mars and the Earth, the 
following CCSDS standard protocol suite will be 
implemented. 
m . . 
Data Delivery Layer: CFDP[3] 
Physical Layer: X-band and/or Ka-band 
Link Layer: CCSDS Transfer Frame[4,5] 
Transport Layer: CCSDS TMiTC packet[4,5] 
3. SERVICE CATEGORY 
The TMOD Services Catalog [I] defines standard mission 
operations services available to customers of TMOD. From 
the TMOD Service Catalog, customers can make selection 
for their needed services to support their missions 
operations without the expenditure of non-recurrent 
engineering. The Mars Network, as part of TMOD, will 
provide four types of standard services to the user as 
described below. 
Communications and Data Relay Service 
In addition to being a space-born store-and-forward 
communications node, the Mars Network provides telemetry 
and command data relay services that extends the current 
TMOD services to the Mars environment. 
Relays user telemetry data from the user element on Mars to 
the user on Earth. Mars Network provides data priority 
handling and custody transfer function. Data priority is a 
parameter of the telemetry data quality of service. The 
priority within a mission allows the expedited delivery of 
urgent data over other telemetry data. The priority among 
multiple missions allows the efficient use of the bandwidth. 
Custody transfer guarantees the data received by the Mars 
Network will be eventually delivered to the Earth. 
Therefore, the user element does not have to hold on to the 
data once it is acknowledged by the Mars Network. 
Relays user command datafiom the user on the ground 
(Earth) to the user element on Mars. Mars Network can 
perform controlled command delivery. The command 
delivery to the surface element can be specified by time or 
event. This allows the de-coupling of when the command is 
needed by the user element and when it needs to be uplinked 
to the Mars Network. 
Relay user data among user elements on Mars. This service 
can be used when both the source and destination are in 
view simultaneously or when they are in view at different 
time. Mars Network will only provide the data routing 
function similar to UDP. 
Navigation Service 
Mars Network provides the following navigation services: 
Surface asset positioning (landershovers); Mars orbiting 
asset state determination (positions and velocities); 
Positioning for precision landing / atmospheric exploration. 
In- Situ Radio Frequency Tracking. The first generation of 
Mars Network UHF transceiver will perform 1 and 2- way 
UHF-Band Doppler and Range and 1 and 2-way Open Loop 
Carrier Recording. The next generation of the UHF 
transceiver will be capable of Radio Direction Finding 
(RDF). 
Traditional Earth Based Navigation. Mars Network 
collects radio frequency tracking observations, package in 
Network Observables Message (NOM) and send to Earth 
for user state determination by ground controllers. Solutions 
are distributed via a standard User State Message (USM). 
Network Determined Navigation. User states are determined 
autonomously by the Mars Network and distributed via a 
standard User State Message (USM). 
User Determined Navigation. User determines own state 
based on own measurements using the Mars Network as a 
21 2 
transponder or with standard Network Observables 
Messages (NOM) and Network Almanac Messages (NAM). 
The format and contents of the NOM, USM, and NAM are 
being specified and will be proposed to the CCSDS for 
international standard recommendation. 
Timing Service 
The current TMOD standard timing service is an after-the- 
fact time correlation function, which correlate the spacecraft 
clock time (a clock counter that has an arbitrary epoch 
chosen by the mission) to the UTC time. This time 
correlation product is used by the user’s control center to 
process their telemetry data and to generate timed 
commands. Mars Network extends the timing service to 
include the time distribution. This is used by the user’s 
flight system to actively update the on-board clock to the 
Mars Network clock. 
Time correlation. This is a three-point process. The user 
spacecraft clock time is correlated to the Mars Network 
spacecraft clock time, which is in turn correlated to the 
UTC time on Earth. 
Time synchronization. In-situ time synchronization via 
distribution of Mars Network time. A standard format and 
epoch of the time information needs to be established. 
Proximity Link Telecom Peiformance Data Service 
The Mars Network will collect the proximity link 
performance data and provide them to the user. The link 
performance data is per link connection basis. 
4. SERVICE ACCESS METHODS 
User’s flight element accesses the Mars Network through 
the connection of the proximity link at Mars. The CCSDS 
proximity.1 protocol [2] Medium Access Control (MAC) 
defines the link establishment, maintenance, and termination 
procedures. MAC caller uses a hailing frequency (437.1 
MHz) to address a responder. The hailing includes the data 
rate and working frequencies to use. We explore two access 
methods, scheduled and on-demand, using the MAC 
procedures. To maintain the compatibility with existing 
Mars surface elements that did not implement the MAC, it 
is also possible to access the Mars Network service without 
using MAC. This is described as a special case of the 
scheduled access below. 
Scheduled Operation 
The Mars Network link connection can be scheduled in 
advance. The user requests the services needed through 
TMOD. The Mars Surveyor Operations Project (MSOP) at 
JPL serves as TMOD’s agent to operate the Mars Network 
and handle the service requests. MSOP schedules the 
connection based on the view periods and resource 
availability. The user is notified of the planned link schedule 
giving sufficient time for the user to send to its flight 
element if necessary. 
In the case where the user’s flight element does not 
understand MAC, it will have to be commanded to establish 
the link connection with the Mars Network. The start time, 
link duration, RF frequency, data rate, etc. are uplinked to 
the flight element by the user. The same information is also 
up loaded to the scheduled Microsat. The user’s flight 
element and the MicroSat will turn on the radio at the 
scheduled time and use the pre-assigned attribute to 
communicate with each other. 
With the MAC, the proximity link is established by the 
“hailing” method. In this case, the user flight element does 
not have to be configured and scheduled ahead of time. The 
link schedule and attribute are up linked to the MicroSat 
only. The MicroSat hails the user flight element to establish 
the link. The hailing establishes the operations frequency, 
data rate, and the quality of service. The MicroSat is also 
responsible for maintaining the communication and 
terminating the connection. To use this link establishment 
method, the user’s flight element is required to be in low 
power listening mode to listen for the hailing call. 
On-demand Operation 
On-demand means the link access is not pre-scheduled. The 
concept is similar to picking up the telephone handset 
whenever a telephone call is to be made. For the initial 
phase, however, the “on-demand‘’ method that can be 
supported by the Mars Network is the round-robin polling. 
The Microsat, as a caller, which it comes into view of the 
surface element, will hail the surface element on the hailing 
frequency. If the MicroSat has data for the hailed element, it 
will demand a link connection in the call. If the surface 
element has data to send, the surface element will demand 
access in the call response. To refuse a link, the surface 
element can either respond to the Microsat’s call with 
refusal or let the call time out. 
If more than one surface elements is in view of the MicroSat 
at the same time, the MicroSat will hail each one in a round- 
robin fashion. 
For the 2003 missions, there will be only a handful of 
elements on the Mars surface and the on-demand operation 
can be accomplished without complexity. However, a more 
sophisticated algorithm is being developed to handle a more 
complex situation for the future on-demand operations. 
5. FILE BASED OPERATIONS 
With the advancement of flight computers, operating 
systems, and mass storage for the flight system, the 
management of flight data can be vastly simplified if they 
are treated as files, thus reducing the size of the operations 
team and its cost. In a similar fashion, sequences and flight 
software loads can be uplinked and managed as files to 
ensure reliable delivery and to remove the labor intensive 
memory management task from the operations team. 
The emerging CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP) [3] 
will provide reliable file transfer through multiple relay 
hops with discontinuous sessions, and enables file-based 
operations. The file-based operations captures the data and 
manages them using a file management system. The use of a 
file management system provides a ready mechanism for 
tracking file transfer progress and completeness. 
CFDP is a file transfer and/or message delivery protocol 
designed for the space link environment. CFDP provides the 
capability to move files, manipulate files, and deliver 
messages. 
21 3 
Moving files is a point-to-point process that transports a file 
from one file storage to another file storage. The metadata 
associated with a file is also transported in the move file 
transaction. The file manipulation process of CFDP 
performs the load file, replace file, patch file, and append 
file functions according to the directives contained within 
the transaction’s metadata. Message delivery is an 
application-to-application function. An application message 
when included within the metadata, is delivered to the 
destined application at the time and condition specified in 
relation to the file transfer. These three elements: moving 
files, manipulate files, and deliver messages, play important 
roles in supporting flight operation. 
CFDP minimizes handshaking required to start, continue, 
and complete file transfer. The protocol uses byte offset to 
identify data location within the file, thus it is insensitive to 
the data duplication and data transfer order. Each data 
transfer units has a unique transaction ID which is used to 
associate the file transfer attributes (source/destination, etc.). 
The CFDP supports hop to hop custody transfer. It also 
supports incomplete file delivery and incremental file 
delivery. Using CFDP, File transfers can span multiple 
contacts and multiple stations (MicroSats/ground stations). 
It provides efficient operation over simplex, half duplex, 
and full duplex links. 
User Data Management and Delivery 
User retum data are managed onboard Mars Network as 
files. The Mars Network creates one or more subdirectories 
for each user. If the original user data is the CCSDS packets, 
the packets of one proximity link session are grouped and 
stored as a file in the sub-directory for that user. If the 
original data is a file and is transferred to the Mars Network 
using CFDP, the Mars Network is served as a reliable agent 
and performs the custody transfer function. It forwards the 
partial or complete file received to the DSN stations. 
Multiple partial files forwarded by multiple MicroSats will 
be merged into one complete file at TMOD ground data 
system (GDS) before it is delivered to the user. 
For a non-NASA user, the file received at the TMOD GDS 
will be delivered to the user from a file server. If a file 
contains CCSDS source packets, TMOD will provide 
software tools for the user to retrieve packets from the 
packet file. For a NASA user, the packet extraction will be 
done by TMOD and the packets will be stored in the 
Telemetry Data System (TDS) for retrieval (Figure 6). 
User forward data are transferred to the Mars Network using 
CFDP. The forward data can be a flat file or a Command 
Packet File. A Command Packet File contains the binary 
commands for the user’s flight element and transport 
instructions of these commands. Mars Network will deliver 
the user commands according to the transport instruction. 
The syntax and semantics of the Command Packet File is a 
TMOD standard. 
The user can also use the Mars Network as a reliable agent 
for the CFDP file transfer. In this case, the file is forwarded 
as a flat file as soon as a proximity link is established 
(Figure 7). 
Using the on board file management system, the operations 
team has more flexibility and control of the on board data. 
The descriptive file name gives the operations team a quick 
notion of what’s in the file. They can selectively retrieve a 
cluster of files, a particular file, or a partial file. The on 
board file directory also provides information about the 
usage of the storage area and allows the operations team to 
update its knowledge about the actual memory state. 
Surface 
Element 1 
Figure 6 Earth-bound Data Transfer using CFDP 
21 4 
MarsNet 
Surface U Element 2 
Figure 7 Mars-bound Data Transfer using CFDP 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Interoperability and standard access are our main drives in 
developing this operations concept. Extending the TMOD 
services to Mars is a new paradigm at NASA. It is a 
challenge to design a service mission while the user’s 
specific requirements are not completely understood and the 
usage of the services are not fully planned in advance. We 
approach this problem by focus on the service definition and 
service operations 
Use of files to capture, manage, and transport data provides 
an easy mechanism for tracking file transfers and their 
completeness (data accountability). Files provide 
manageable data units for on-demand as well scheduled data 
transfers. Custody transfer (hop-by-hop reliability) allows 
the efficient use of on-board memory. Automatic store-and- 
forward reduces ground operations involvement. CFDP 
Protocol enables the file based operation and increases the 
S/C operability and interoperability. 
Mars,’ as our next frontier in space exploration, will be 
subject to increasing activities in the next Millenium. 
Between 2003 and 2010, at least 18 distinct robotic 
exploration elements are slated for possible deployment at 
Mars. Many small landers, rovers, penetrators, and robotic 
probes will roam the Mars surface. These elements have 
limited power and mass. Using the Mars Network will 
increase the communications rate, contact time, and contact 
frequency, thereby enhancing the mission goals. 
Mars Network will also work in concert to provide in situ 
navigation [7]. Using combined 2-way ranging, three 
MicroSats will be able to provide position knowledge with 
an uncertainty about 1 km at 125 km above the surface, and 
within 10 to 100 meters on the surface; compared to using 
DSN tracking alone, the position knowledge uncertainty is 
15 km at 125 km above the surface, and 75 km on the 
surface. It is possible to use the Mars Network to assist 
precision landing and accurate position determination. This 
navigation capability will enable a whole new level of 
autonomous robotic, and eventually safe human exploration. 
The standard service approach of the Mars Network 
operation provides a gateway to Mars and beyond. 
Acknowledgement: Research in this paper was performed in 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with National Aeronautic and 
Space Administration. The authors would like to 
acknowledge the efforts of Chaw Hung, Gary Spradlin, and 
Greg Kazz in the preparation of this manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 Telecommunications and Mission Operations 
Directorate (TMOD) Services Catalog V6.0 September 3, 
1998 
[2] CCSDS 21 1.0-R-1: Proximity-1 Space Link Protocol. 
Red Book. Issue 1. May 1999. 
[3] CCSDS 727.0-R-3: CCSDS File Delivery Protocol 
(CFDP). Red Book. Issue 3. May 1999. 
[4] CCSDS-102-0-B-4: Packet Telemetry, Blue Book Issue 
4, Nov. 1995 
[5] CCSDS 202.0-B-2: Telecommand Part 2 -- Data 
Routing Service. Blue Book. Issue 2. November 1992. 
(Reconfiied June 1998.) 
[6] She1 Rosell, “Mars Communication and Navigation 
Network,” TMOD System Engineering Meeting, March 24, 
I999 
[7] Douglas S .  Abraham, Charles D. Edwards, and Sheldon 
N. Rosell, “Mars Network Gateway to Mars and Beyond,” 
TMOD Technology and Science Program News, July 1999, 
issue 10. 
21 5 
[8] R.C.Hastrup, R.J. Cesarone, J. M. Srinivasan and D. D. 
Morabito, “Mars Comm/Nav MicroSat Network,” 13‘” 
A I M U S U  Conference on Small Satellites, August 26, 1999 
[9] Neal R. Kuo and Edward Greenberg, “On-Board File 
Management and Its Application in Flight Operations,” 
SpaceOps 98, Tokoyo, Japan, June 1998 
[ 101 J. C. Breidenthal, “Multi-Hop Communication in Deep 
Space,” 2000 IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2000 
Neal R. Kuo is an end-to-end iizformatioii 
system and mission operations system 
engineer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
He received his BA degree in Mathematics 
from Fu-Jen University in Taiwan and his 
MS degree from UCLA in 1976. 
21 6 
