Enhancement and Assessment of a Transient Event 
Characterization Algorithm' 
Alan B. Ritter Theodore J. Slusarchyk James J. Lisowski 
SciTec, Inc 
100 Wall Street 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
609-921-3892 
anttcr@scitec.com tis@scitec.com jlisowda @ scitcc.com 
Captain Brian Hibbeln 
National Air Intelligence Center 
4180 Watson Way 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 45433 
937-257-2575 
Abstract 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Emerging technologies enable the acquisition of high rate 
temporal data over wide areas with moderate spatial 
resolution from remote sensors, either ground, air or space 
bome. These technologies are appropriate for collecting 
data on a wide range of brief events, including high 
explosive detonations, short-burn rocket motors, and muzzle 
flashes, The limiting factor in the interpretation of data 
acquired from such a system deployed to monitor battlefield 
activity is that the system may become overburdened by the 
number of events occurring in a rather short time period. 
Techniques to rapidly detect, identify and characterize these 
events are required prior to contemplation of such system 
deployments. An algorithm developed for performing 
Transient Event Characterization (TEC) from a passive 
remote sensor was presented in TEC99. 
This paper will expand the concepts of event discrimination 
as well as identifying sources of uncertainty. Physical 
characteristics of an unknown event can be used to 
discriminate between event classes (e.g. artillery, 
detonations, rocket boosters, and others), further 
discrimination can then be performed within each class. 
Regardless of class the event yield must be estimated, which 
requires some form of passive ranging in order to estimate 
the altitude of the event and thereby the line-of-sight 
atmospheric attenuation. This paper presents event class 
discrimination based on event waveform characteristics with 
applications to modeled data as well as a band optimization 
study for passive ranging. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. TARGET DESCRIPTION 
3. METHODOLOGY 
4. RESULTS 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
6. REFERENCES 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
After motivating the principles of an autonomous, rapid 
event classification and discrimination at the 1999 IEEE 
session in [ 11, referred to from now on as TEC99, our focus 
has moved to improving and adding capabilities to such 
algorithms. TEC99 focused on detonations, both at and 
above ground level. This year's target discussion focuses 
on artillery events and short-bum rocket motors. Since the 
algorithm now accepts more classes of events it is necessary 
to have a classifier to sort amongst them. The classifier is 
motivated and discussed. An estimate of the yield of any 
event relies on an accurate removal of the line-of-sight 
atmospheric attenuation. With that in mind the target 
altitude becomes a very important quantity as it determines 
the end of that line-of-sight. The event altitude can be 
estimated using a simple passive ranging technique, 
discussed here. Results of the application of these 
algorithms to modeled data are shown. In the case of the 
Copyright: 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
343 
passive ranging technique, a band survey has been 
performed to show the utility of the technique. 
2. TARGET DESCRIPTION 
2.1 Overview of Targets 
Transient events are generally considered to have a duration 
of less than 10 seconds. The duration is identified as 
starting at the point where the signal rises above the 
background level and ending when the signal returns to the 
background level. Ordnance classes that exhibit transients 
include artillery, high explosive (HE) detonations, short- 
burn rocket motors (SBRM), and some aircraft signals. It is 
understood that some of these types of events will exceed 10 
seconds. 
An artillery muzzle flash is the fastest of the transient 
events, its duration rarely exceeding 0.2 seconds. An in- 
depth description of artillery is presented in Section 2.2. 
e 
y 
1 .o 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
2 3 4 5 
WAVELENGTH (vm) 
Figure 1. Spectral signatures of a particulate laden 
(Aluminized) and clean (Non-aluminized) explosive. 
1 .o * 
!$ 0.8 
W + 
0.6 
k 
E 2 0.4 
0.2 
a 
0 
2 
0 1 2 3 4 
TIME (seconds) 
Figure 2. Aluminized and non-aluminized transients 
1 .o * c - 
0.8 
W 
I- 
5 0.6 
e 
\ 0.4 a 
E 0.2 
0 z 
0 .o 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
TIME (seconds) 
Figure 3. An example of short-bum rocket motor 
transient 
Detonations can be of varying duration depending on charge 
size, charge type, and altitude. Generally there are two 
types of HE detonations, those with high and low particulate 
levels. High particulate level ordnance uses high soot 
content HEs, e.g. TNT, mixed many times with powdered 
aluminum. Such particulates give rise to a continuum- 
dominated spectral signature, as illustrated in Figure 1, that 
has a duration of several seconds. The most notable 
example of this type of ordnance is iron bombs, which are 
usually deployed at or near ground level. Low particulate 
level ordnance uses clean burning HE, e.g. RDX. Clean 
burning HE gives rise to spectral signatures that are 
dominated by molecular emission from combustion 
products as illustrated in Figure 1. Transients resulting from 
clean burning HE, while lasting several seconds like their 
high soot cousins, can be discriminated from them based on 
the higher rate of decay of the transient as shown in Figure 
2. Ordnance that uses clean buming explosives has a wide 
range of applications and can be deployed at any altitude. A 
more detailed discussion of the phenomenology of high 
1 .o * 
t 
0.8 
W 
I- 
0.6 
n 
W 
0.4 
4 a z 0.2 
B 
0.0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
TIME (seconds) 
Figure 4. An overlay of all the ordnance transients 
344 
explosive detonations can be found in our 1999 E E E  paper 
[l]. Short bum rocket motors have durations of several 
seconds, much like HE detonations, but have much different 
characteristic waveforms. The transient of a nominal 
SBRM begins with a sharp rise, is then constant during the 
motor’s lifetime and abruptly ends at motor cutoff, as 
depicted in Figure 3. While the general shape is constant, 
the SBRM signature lifetime is a telltale indicator of 
ordnance type. Figure 4 presents an overlay of all the 
signatures described above. 
2.2 Phenomenology of Artillery 
The artillery muzzle flash is the result of igniting the charge 
in any long or short barreled gun. There are three 
parameters that influence the signal generated in a muzzle 
flash, the chamber, the barrel, and the exit region. The 
chamber or shell is where the charge is packed and ignited. 
The important factors that have an effect on the signal from 
the chamber are the propellant composition and mass, 
projectile mass and the chamber volume. After propellant 
ignition, the rapid increase in chamber pressure forces the 
projectile through the barrel. The interior ballistics (friction, 
rifling, etc) of the barrel determine the conditions as the 
projectile exits. The exit conditions that contribute to the 
signal are the total energy, gas and projectile velocities, 
pressure, temperature and the content of H20, COz, CO and 
OH. 
Action at the exit region is divided into four phases, the 
muzzle exit, the vacuum core, the mach disk and the 
afterburning or secondary flash region. During the muzzle 
exit phase the projectile leaves the barrel and a primary 
flash is created. This primary flash occurs for a few 
milliseconds and will be unobserved by all but the fastest 
sampling rate instruments. The second phase or vacuum 
core occurs as the gases are exiting the barrel, at which 
point they are no longer restricted by the confines of the 
barrel and go through an isentropic expansion. A normal 
shock forms beyond the end of the barrel to adjust the 
a 1  I q ,  . , ~ ,  , , , , , , , , , ” ,  1 
0.0 
B 
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
TIME (seconds) 
Figure 5. An example of an artillery signature 
Figure 6. Event processing by General Discrimination 
Algorithm (GDA). 
properties of the flow. This is the third phase or mach disk 
of the exit region. After the isentropic expansion, air is 
entrained into the gas mixture resulting in combustion and 
in the final phase of the muzzle flash, the afterburning 
region or secondary flash. This phase creates the signal 
most commonly observed as a “muzzle flash”. Figure 5 
shows a typical artillery signature. The peak intensity and 
duration will depend on the observation waveband and the 
gun size. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Transient Event Characterization Algorithm Overview 
The Transient Event Characterization or TEC algorithm has 
been designed to rapidly discriminate short duration events, 
defined as transients. The general discrimination algorithm 
uses a tiered method of discrimination that begins by sorting 
unknown transients into broad ordnance classes and then 
proceeds to discriminate the sorted transients in each 
specific class as illustrated in Figure 6. Many classes of 
targets can be discriminated. TEC99 introduced the broad 
discrimination capability of such an algorithm as it applied 
to targets like artillery, detonations, aircraft and SBRM. It 
then concentrated on ordnance type discrimination within 
the detonation class. This year’s paper introduces the new 
broad classes of artillery, and SBRMs, for class sorting. 
The algorithm discussed here places an unknown transient 
into one or more of four categories: artillery, detonations, 
SBRMs and other. Further discrimination relies on 
information from the specific ordnance class identifiers. 
The detonation discrimination algorithm consists of three 
parts, initial filters, a temporal match filter, and a final 
evaluation. This algorithm was described in detail 
previously [I]. The concepts presented in the initial filters 
are being expanded and are now applied as the general 
345 
discrimination algorithm. The class specific discrimination 
of artillery and SBRMs goes beyond the scope of this paper. 
This generalized discrimination algorithm is broadly 
applicable to transients gathered from ground- , air- , and 
space-based observers as depicted in Figure 7. 
3 O k m  
Figure 7. Viewing geometries from various platforms 
3.2 Discrimination and Classification 
Discrimination of events can be performed through the 
exploitation of the physical features of the event. In this 
section a number of features used for discrimination will be 
described. The algorithm considers specific characteristics 
of three sections of the event, the onset, terminus, and 
midsection as well as characteristics of the entire transient. 
Time zero is easily defined for modeled data as the first 
non-zero point, for acquired data the first point will need to 
be identified. 
The event onset is defined as the first half second of the 
transient, the focus of the onset is on the initial rise of the 
signal. The slope and a fit to a rising exponential are 
examined in order to judge the sharpness of the event 
initiation. Such judgements are key in discriminating 
between artillery and SBRMs which have a fast initiation 
and detonations that are slower. The initial slope is 
measured from time zero to the peak signal in the onset 
region. An exponential function fit to the onset region 
augments the information provided by the slope and 
corroborates the discrimination between detonations and 
(artillery and SBRMs) by describing the curvature of the 
onset. An exponential fit was discussed in TEC99. It was 
applied to the transient after its peak in order to discriminate 
between aluminized and non-aluminized explosives based 
on the time constant. When applied to the onset region, the 
time constant quantitatively examines the curvature of the 
onset with a x2 fit. The exponential is fit over the same 
region as the slope. 
The event terminus is defined as the region after the peak 
until the event reaches the noise level. Once again the 
discrimination uses information provided by an exponential 
time constant. While the time constant of the event 
terminus has been previously exploited to discriminate 
between aluminized and non-aluminized explosives, as 
indicated above, exploitation of a larger bandwidth of the 
time constant than previously used allows discrimination 
between artillery, SBRMs, and detonations. 
The event midsection begins at one-half second, the end of 
the onset, and extends to the peak in the last second. In 
some cases it will not exist. The slope of the midsection 
discriminates between SBFWs, whose slope is close to zero, 
and detonations, which have a negative slope. 
In addition to the discriminatory capabilities of the 
characteristics from the different regions, there are 
properties of the entire signal that are equally useful. The 
most obvious property is the duration of the signal. The 
signal duration is the best discriminator of artillery muzzle 
flash events due to their short lifetime. The other 
characteristic that is exploited is a linear fit to the entire 
transient. This slope is a better discriminator for detonation 
events than the midsection slope. 
In many cases, specific characteristics are able to 
discriminate between the various event classes. However 
there are many cases in which a single characteristic is not 
enough to decide the event class. In those cases, use of 
more than one characteristic may be necessary. For 
example, if the midsection slope does not definitively point 
to detonation or SBRM, the overall slope can be used to 
make an augmented decision. It may also be the case that 
signals from different event classes can not be 
discriminated. In such a case, our algorithm labels that 
event as all applicable event class types as mentioned above. 
Results of application of these characteristics to modeled 
transients will be presented and discussed in section 4.1. 
After discrimination into class, the individual class 
discriminator needs to know the event intensity at source in 
order to identify the ordnance type and the yield. The 
source signal can be determined by removing the 
atmospheric attenuation along the line-of-sight. In a remote 
sensing application, the altitude of the target is unknown 
leaving the end of line-of-sight a nebulous quantity. The 
altitude of the target can be determined using the simple 
passive ranging technique of comparing two spectral bands 
which have differing atmospheric attenuation profiles as a 
function of altitude. This technique is summarized in the 
next section. 
3.3 Multi-Spectral Ratio Altitude Estimation 
The best altitude estimate from a two-band ratio would 
compare two bands with high signal-to-noise, the former 
having a drastic change in atmospheric attenuation over the 
altitude range and the latter having little or none. This 
arrangement would present the most sensitivity as a function 
of altitude as well as the most accuracy from the high 
signal-to-noise of the bands. While it is hoped that such a 
ratio would produce an accurate altitude estimate, its most 
valuable contribution comes from determining whether or 
not an event is at ground elevation. Such an estimate is 
invaluable when discriminating between ordnance types. 
The discussion here focuses on band selection based on 
transmission through the atmosphere, the signal-to-noise 
issue will not be addressed. 
nets 
The algorithm used to estimate the altitude of an event 
compares the transient’s multi-spectral ratio at the peak with 
an expectation function. Calculating the multi-spectral ratio 
along the line-of-sight derives the expectation function. At 
a given altitude, the apparent peak intensity for a given 
target is first calculated in each band using MODTRAN 
Total Dets ARTL SBRM Other 
inon 950 4s 23 6 
reaction, making it shorter, or with SBRM if one adds 
detonations sequentially in time instead of concurrently. 
This latter example would be expected in a carpet bombing 
scenario. Results for other events indicate, as expected, that 
many false alarms can be mistaken for real events. Though 
the vast majority are rejected about 25 percent are sorted 
into an event category instead of being rejected. It should 
be noted that false alarm rejection has not been a major 
focus but at some point must be in order to optimize such an 
algorithm. 
4.2 Multi-Spectral Altitude Estimation 
transmission predictions, spectral filter functions and a 
source spectrum, like those in Figure 1, and then compared 
to give the ratio. The event altitude is extracted by simply 
finding the altitude that corresponds to the intersection of 
the data ratio with the expectation function. 
For this paper a study was performed to assess the 
usefulness of O.lum bands from 2.5um to 4.5um for the 
multi-spectral ratio. The study was conducted using an 
observer looking through local zenith angles, LZA, of 30, 
45, 60, and 75 degrees using three MODTRAN standard - - 
atmospheres. The atmospheres selected were mid-latitude 
summer with mid-latitude winter humidity, mid-latitude 
summer and tropical, representing dry, moderate, and wet 
climates, respectively. The ratios were calculated for paths 
An assessment of the utility of the multi-spectral ratio is 
shown in section 4.2, surveying O.lum bands from 2.5 to 
4.5um. 
4. RESULTS 
4.1 Discrimination and Classijication Algorithm 
Detonation, artillery, and SBRM transients were simulated 
using a variety of SciTec proprietary modeling codes. 
These modeling codes have been or are in the process of 
being validated against data. In order to produce a 
statistically significant number of examples to test the 
algorithm, the transients were degraded in several ways. 
Noise was added to remove the sharp definition of 
amplitude features displayed in the above figures. In 
addition, the transients were temporally degraded to remove 
definition in time. False alarm and noise-based signatures, 
discussed here under the umbrella label of “other” are 
transient signatures found in real world observations which 
can approximate “real” events. These signals are modeled 
as spurious spikes, noise waves, saw-tooth- and square- 
waves, and long-bum rocket motor signatures. Such 
signatures are important because they will cause a false- 
positive, a false alarm. 
~ ~~ 
Table I Summary of GDA Results on Multiple Targets 
I I I I I 
Results shown in Table I indicate that the sorting classifier 
is working very well on modeled data. This is not 
unexpected as the length of the signatures in time is a very 
good discriminator of these targets almost by itself. 
Sorting detonations sometimes runs into conflict with 
artillery if one damps the afterburning portion of the 
starting at 100 km and terminating at altitudes from 0 io 15 
km in 1 km increments with the addition of 0.5 km. 
The results from these scenarios generates a large data base 
of information. In order to present the finding from the 
band study the results were compressed in two ways. First, 
a ranking system was created to score the different band 
ratios. The ranking algorithm assesses two aspects of the 
multi-spectral ratio, the sensitive altitude range and the 
change in the ratio between these bounds. The goal of the 
scoring system is to filter out many poor band ratios which 
do not need to be examined, thus creating a list of candidate 
bands for further analysis, also creating a highlight list 
shown here in Tables I1 and 111. The performance score of a 
band ratio begins with the definition of the “sensitive” 
altitude range. The smaller altitude increment is defined as 
sensitive if the band ratio changes five percent of its total 
change from 0 to 15km. The altitude range was separated 
into 10 bins of 1.5 km each, covering the range from 0 to 15 
km. If the altitude increment is sensitive it receives a score 
of 1, create a scoring range from 0 to 10. The change is the 
ratio is also scored over the sensitive altitude range. After 
inspecting the data, a half point is awarded for every 50 
percent change in the band ratio, up to a maximum of 10. 
The scoring is only calculated for ratios that increase in 
proportion to the altitude, excluding redundant inverse ratios 
from consideration. The two scores were multiplied 
together, giving a total possible score of 100. The database 
was further compressed for presentation in Tables I1 and 111 
by averaging the scores from the different LZAs and 
atmospheres. Although this homogenizes the results the 
capabilities of the particular bands are still ranked correctly. 
The results in Table I1 and 111 show the passive ranging 
performance for aluminized and non-aluminized targets, 
examples of which were shown in Figure 1. The tables 
present the bands compared in the ratio as the top and 
347 
Table 11 Aluminized Target Band Survey 
Filter Filter 
2.6 3.4 
2.7 3.4 
2.8 3.4 I 3.2 I 4.1 I 13.1 
I 2.6 I 3.5 I 2.6 I 4.2 I 10.8 I 
2.5 
I 2.7 I 3.3 I 2.5 I 4.2 I 10.7 I 
3.4 I 3.0 I 4.2 I 12.6 
2.5 
2.5 
bottom bands and then the average rating of the band ratio, 
altitude, and total. The survey shows that the best bands for 
passive ranging for both targets compare bands from 2.5 to 
2.8pm with 3.2 to 3.5ym, a comparison of a heavily 
absorbing water region with a region just to the red, 
respectively. This idea has merit comparing all bands at all 
altitudes and shows strict performance of sets of bands 
3.2 3.5 4.4 15.4 
4.1 2.2 6.8 15.1 
regardless of the transmission as a function of altitude. 
Transmission as a function of altitude will hamper the 
performance of the 2.7ym region for targets at or near mean 
sea level, 0.0 km MSL. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
This paper continues to build the concepts necessary to 
perform autonomous event classification and discrimination 
using TEC99 as a foundation. New targets added here 
encompass the broad classes of artillery and short-burn 
rocket motors. In order to discriminate between these broad 
classes the general discrimination algorithm concept was 
presented which expands on the discrimination capabilities 
inherent in our detonation algorithm. Exploiting these “old” 
physical features as well as new ones we are able to 
discriminate between the three ordnance classes and a false- 
alarm or “other” class. The performance of the general 
discrimination algorithm is very good against modeled data. 
Each of the ordnance class level discriminators needs to 
know the intensity of the target at source in order to decide 
ordnance yield and exact type. In a remote sensing 
application determining the altitude where the line-of-sight 
ends requires some form of passive ranging. This paper has 
presented the concept of the multispectral ratio, comparing 
two bands with differing transmission profiles as a function 
of altitude. To further illuminate this concept a band study 
was performed and preliminary results shown which give a 
gross sense of the performance for a preliminary set of 
O.lum bands. Results show that a comparison of O.lum 
bands near 2.7um with those near 3.3um provides the best 
performance for both aluminized and non-aluminized 
targets. While these bands are certainly optimal for targets 
at altitudes greater than 1.5km above sea level, the 
transmission losses in the 2.7um region will certainly take a 
toll near mean sea level. 
Water bands are most useful for passive ranging due to their 
drastic changes in transmission as on nears the earth. 
Altitude estimation using water bands has a sensitive range 
from sea level to 6.0km, beyond which the water 
concentration plummets. Regardless of the utility of such 
bands the quantitative accuracy of altitude estimates relies 
on obtaining accurate atmospheric profiles, due to the 
extreme variability in the water column. While atmospheric 
profiles are not universally available for all locales, the 
availability of sounding products from N O M  stations, 
GOES and MEOSAT satellites, and other sources does not 
rule out the use of water bands for passive ranging. 
Future research and development will be focused on 
extending this type of transient discriminator to new broad 
classes of targets as well as defining concepts for the 
individual class discriminators. 
6. REFERENCES 
A.B. Ritter, A.Y. Weisberg, T.J. Slusarchyk, 
J.J. Lisowski, B.A. Hibbeln, “Transient Event 
Characterization,” 1999 IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, March 6-13, 1999 
7. BIOGRAPHY 
Captain Brian A. Hibbeln, USAF, 
graduated from the USAF Academy 
with a bachelor of Physics and was 
named the outstanding cadet in 
Physics research in May of 1991. He 
was selected to attend the Air Force 
Institute of Technology at Wright- 
Patterson Air Force Base where he 
earned his MS in Space Physics in 
December of 1992. His thesis work 
led to a patent for a high-voltage, high-current 
semiconductor switch for space and pulsed power 
applications. He served at the National Air Intelligence 
Center as the Program Manager of an advanced space- 
based infrared satellite program until September of 1996. 
He currently supports the National Air lntelligence Center 
in Washington DC as a developer and manager of advanced 
B. Ritter studied Energy space based satellite sensors, ground systems, and 
Transfer Dynamics at adva,,ced processiltg algorithms. 
the University of Pennsylvania and 
received his Ph. D. in Physical 
Chemistry in 1994. As a Scientist at 
SciTec, Inc. in Princeton, NJ, he is 
developing an algorithm for  the 
identification of transient events 
acquired by state of the art remote 
sensors. He is also involved in 
quantitative studies of atmospheric variability and is 
constantly vigilant in the area of data quality assessment. 
Theodore J. Shsarchyk studied 
Aerospace Engineering at Syracuse 
University, receiving an B.S. in 1995 
and an M.S. in 1997. Currently as 
an Associate Scientist at SciTec, Inc. 
in Princeton, NJ, he is developing 
an algorithm for the identification of 
transient events from data acquired 
by state of the art remote sensors. 
Previously, he had been involved in 
the development of algorithms for  cloud typing and altitude 
determination of boosting missiles from a single sensor. 
James J. Lisowski is a Senior 
Scientist at SciTec. Inc.. and has 
been the principal analyst for  
exploitation of data collected with 
high altitude remote sensors, such 
as the Advanced Remote Earth 
Sensing (ARES) project since the 
mid-1980s. In recent years his 
focus has been on the 
interpretation and exploitation of 
transient event signature data and analyzing the nature and 
impact of clouds and terrain on the detection and analysis 
of events. Mr. Lisowski received his Bachelor’s degree in 
Physics from Rutgers College in 1985 and has been a 
member of the technical staff at SciTec since 1984. 
349 
