Modeling a Wireless Network for International 
Space Station 
Richard Alena 
NASA Ames Research Center 
MS 269-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035 
ndena ~mail.arc.n3~a...(1\. 
Ece Yaprak 
Wayne State University 
4855 4‘h Street, Detroit, MI 48202 
baprake eng.wa\-ne.edu 
Saad Lamouri 
CACI Products Company 
3333 N. Torrey Pines Ct, La Jolla, CA 92037 
saad @ mod\im.com 
650-604-0262 
College of Engineering 
Abstrucr - This paper describes the application of wireless 
local area network (LAN) simulation modeling methods 
to the hybrid LAN architecture designed for supporting 
crew-computing tools aboard the International Space 
Station (ISS). These crew-computing tools, such as 
wearable computers and portable advisory systems, will 
provide crew members with real-time vehicle and payload 
status information and access to digital technical and 
scientific libraries, significantly enhancing human 
capabilities in space. A wireless network, therefore, will 
provide wearable computers and remote instruments with 
the high performance computational power needed by 
next-generation “intelligent” software applications. 
Wireless network performance in such simulated 
environments is characterized by the sustainable 
throughput of data under different traffic conditions. This 
data will be used to help plan the addition of more access 
points supporting new modules and more nodes for 
increased network capacity as the ISS grows. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. WIRELESS NETWORK SIMULATION 
4. CONCLUSION 
2. NETWORK ARCIUTJZCTURE ON THE ISS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
NASA Ames Research Center’s Intelligent Mobile 
Technologies (IMT) project is developing and 
implementing information technologies to enhance the 
International Space Station (ISS) computational 
capabilities. The ISS will be the largest and most 
complex spacecraft ever operated with sophisticated 
space-based laboratories incorporating hundreds of 
experiments ranging from life sciences to structural 
mechanics. These experiments will be largely 
automated to minimize crew workload. To take 
advantage of the operational adaptability of the human 
element, the crew needs ready access to mission data. 
The current limitations of the on-board data system 
make it difficult for the crew to access avionics data. A 
mobile intranet based on open-system standards for 
software development, and data communications and 
networking can efficiently provide a universal 
monitoring interface. 
Portable Advisory Systems will provide unique 
capabilities for human interaction with data systems by 
focusing on next-generation hand-held and wearable 
computing devices that are closely coupled with ground 
facilities such as mission and payload control centers, 
science laboratories and universities allowing complex 
collaborative interactions that will rely on industry- 
standard data interchange protocols, computing 
resources and end-user applications. This will extend 
the on-board flight vehicle computing environment into 
cyberspace, allowing virtual yet secure interactions 
between flight crew members, ground controllers and 
principal investigators. Mobile handheld computers will 
allow a crew member to communicate with another 
crew member, monitor vehicle and payload status, and 
receive ground communications at any location while 
floating in a Station module, without any physical 
power or data connection to hinder movement or action. 
Wearable computing devices allow a crew member to 
perform vehicle maintenance activities and field 
exploration using techniques that do not interfere with 
vision or manual dexterity. 
223 
The primary benefit of mobile computing is improving 
human-computer interaction. Crew support applications 
for mobile computers help crew members accomplish 
their assigned tasks by acting as data display and 
manual input devices for onboard data systems. They 
could be used for note taking, messaging, activity 
scheduling, decision support, reference material access, 
on-board training, and recreational uses.' A distributed 
network architecture of notebook computers or pen- 
based hand-held data terminals, communicating through 
wireless networks to dedicated data servers are 
proposed for these applications. The on-board data 
systems would support these mobile devices by acting 
as file and communications servers for client 
applications. It is in this area where the full benefits of 
mobile computing technology can be greatest by 
increasing the efficiency of crew operations. 
Another benefit of mobile computing is the ability to 
access data from a variety of physical locations. This is 
the advantage provided by distributed computing. A 
given crew member could perform a wider range of 
tasks if they could be performed while mobile. 
The ISS consists of a series of modules connected by 
docking nodes that house laboratories and habitats. 
Each module contains a series of payload racks that 
contain experiments and the data systems needed to 
operate the experiment and collect the data. 
Additionally, the avionics system allows the Station to 
be reboosted into a higher orbit and controls the 
generation of power and life support. A data system for 
supporting vehicle and payload operations would have 
to allow connections to this wide variety of data 
sources. The network is the logical choice for this and 
the use of Internet prcitocols allows rapid development 
and deployment of custom application software. Some 
advantages of wireless network technology for the 
Space Station are: 
Wireless networks of mobile computers can be used 
aboard the ISS to enhance payload operations, allowing 
crew members to access payload status remotely, 
thereby supporting multiple payloads simultaneously. 
8 A wireless network can be upgraded by simply 
bringing up new components such as hand-held 
computers and servers. 
The wireless network can support remote sensors for 
microgravity and other environmental conditions that 
could be placed anywhere within the habitable volume. 
The network could support crew functions such as 
communication, inventory control and computer-based 
recreation. 
An immediate savings in cable weight and 
installation cost is realized using this technology. 
2. WIRELESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE O N  
THE ISS 
Wireless data links'can be organized into networks that 
provide connectivity of computer system resources 
between multiple users and devices. The evolution of 
wireless networking is based on current wired network 
methods such as the Ethernet and the Token Ring using 
extensions to existing network protocols. Current 
wireless products use either spread-spectrum radio or 
infra-red optical methods for data communication. 
They are available in a variety of interface formats that 
allow operation of the wireless data links with wired 
networks, resulting in a hybrid networking system. 
The payload support computing infrastructure aboard 
the ISS consists of a distributed system of servers and 
mobile client computers based on current laptop 
technology. These components are connected through 
wired and wireless segments of the hybrid Operational 
LAN. The components of a wireless LAN consist of a 
wireless network interface card (NIC) and a wireless 
local bridge (access point) to the wired segment. Most 
wireless NICs interface computers to the wireless 
network through the access point by implementing a 
carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance 
(CSMNCA) protocol, and modulating the data signal 
with a spreading sequence. The IEEE 802.11 standard 
defines the access protocol and modulation methods. 
Networks are often characterized by the area of 
coverage. A wide area network (WAN) uses long- 
range radio and telephone cables to maintain coverage 
over a city, state or country. A LAN usually covers a 
building or suite of rooms. Many LAN segments can 
operate together to cover a larger number of users, with 
concurrent network management and throughput 
advantages. A new type of network, the personal area 
network (PAN), uses wireless methods for limited 
coverage. PANs cover a smaller area than a LAN, 
typically only a room, and generally allow dynamic 
entry and exit of nodes from the network. Two types 
of architecture can be used for wireless PANs, the peer- 
to-peer model and the cliendserver model. 
The peer-to-peer model allows computer device nodes 
with fairly equal capabilities to interchange data with 
each other. Each node incorporates both client and 
server functions. There is no central node mediating 
the traffic or managing the network. A collection of 
nodes can setup an "ad-hoc'' network by using the same 
type of asynchronous network access used by the 
Ethernet. For example, a peer-to-peer PAN would 
allow distribution of attendee contact information and 
224 
presentation slides to any person with a mobile 
computer node who enters the meeting room. The 
presenter's computer would recognize the new 
participant in the PAN, and send the data to him if 
desired. 
The clientherver model allows connecting a wireless 
PAN to a wired LAN using a node designated as the 
"access point" to the wired LAN. The access point 
computer node must be capable of communicating over 
both the wired and wireless data links, acting as a 
network server. The access point allows a wireless 
client node to access computing resources and data on 
the entire LAN, significantly extending functionality. 
Clusters of peer-to-peer nodes could coexist within this 
cliendserver configuration resulting in a hybrid 
architecture. 
Multiple access points can be used to configure a 
"micro cellular" wireless architecture such as that 
shown in Figure 1. Access points integrate wireless 
PANS with wired Ethernet LANs by filtering packets 
from the LAN and forwarding the appropriate ones to 
the wireless PAN. The access point also listens to the 
wireless PAN and forwards appropriate traffic to the 
LAN. If a wireless node is unreachable, the access 
point can store the data and forward it to another access 
point. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I Micro Cell #1 I I  
I I Wireless Network 
Wire less Network Micro Cell #E 
PDA 
. .  
Figure 1. Wireless Network Micro Cellular Architecture 
Significant differences exist between wireless media 
and wired LANs: the bit error rate for wireless 
transmission is much higher than wired media, and a 
wireless transceiver is unable to determine if another 
node is transmitting since its own signal swamps out 
any remote transmission. Also the network 
configuration is dynamic, with nodes entering and 
leaving the PAN at any time. 
The Wireless Network Experiment (WNE) was one of 
the Experiments conducted by the Shuttle Mir Science 
Program to evaluate advanced technology for use on the 
International Space Station in 1996 which measured 
wireless network throughput as a handheld computer 
was moved from one location to the other. 
The WNE consisted of three computers. Three nodes 
allowed measurement of network throughput while two 
nodes were simultaneously sending and receiving data 
from the wireless network server (WNS). This 
configuration simulates a real computer network by 
forcing arbitration between nodes for network access. 
The experiment varied the distance between the three 
nodes while compiling real-time throughput data graphs 
for each physical location. The network radios were 
made by Proxim Corporation and are products that 
helped to define the 802.11 wireless network standard. 
A fundamental characteristic of wireless networks is 
that a given node can only "see" traffic specifically 
addressed to it. Therefore, to measure wireless network 
traffic accurately, a single node had to handle all the 
network traffic and simultaneously monitor it. This 
required use of the high-performance WNS workstation 
to store the data to be transferred on the network and 
also run the network monitor program. The variations 
of network throughput as a function of distance 
between nodes, and in the presence of various shielding 
structures and electromagnetic interference were 
measured both on the ground and in the spacecraft. 
3. WIRELESS NETWORK SIMULATION 
Network simulation provides a method of modeling a 
proposed network to determine its performance 
characteristics, conducting what-if-analyses, and 
planning for increased network capacity. In this paper, a 
network simulation package, COMNET I11 from CACI 
Products Company, was used [4] to model the operation 
of the OpsLAN aboard the ISS. This was done to 
provide information regarding network throughput 
limitations as the OpsLAN is expanded to multiple 
225 
cells. The COMNET simulation tool incorporates an 
IEEE 802.11 model that allows accurate determination 
of throughput for network configurations proposed for 
the ISS. Determining the bottlenecks for a given 
configuration allows reconfiguring the network to 
produce better overall throughput. The ISS LAN 
environment will consist of multiple wireless cells 
using access points to connect to wired segments and 
servers. A wireless backbone may solve the problems 
of interconnecting the cells between modules. All these 
network elements can be modeled prior to deployment 
resulting in optimal network design. 
A number of different hybrid wireless network 
configurations were modeled and compared. These 
included a 2- and 4-node wireless (IEEE 802.11) links 
with a 3-node Ethernet (IEEE 802.3) connection. The 
simulations were performed for different levels of 
traffic, including underutilized and saturated, to 
evaluate network performance under different 
conditions. In Fig. 2, a 4-node wireless with a 3-node 
ethernet is modeled and compared with a 2-node 
wireless with a 3-node ethemet. 
Different traffic conditions and file sizes (as seen in 
Fig. 3.) were simulated and reports were generated 
describing the performance of the modeled networks. 
Link utilization, and latency were some of the 
performance characteristics studied. 
Fig.2. Wireless and ethernet simulation model. 
Fig. 4 shows link utilization in terms of different traffic 
loading conditions for 2- and 4-wireless node models. 
For 2K and 20K message sizes, both models were 
underutilized. For the wireless 4-node model, link 
utilization declined as the link was saturated due to 
increased collisions. This data provides a new 
benchmark on which new simulations can be conducted 
to address the future communication scenarios on the 
ISS. 
226 
Fig.3. Traffic generation. 
90 
80 
s 'O
60 
.E - 50 
5 40 
.- s 30 
20 
10 
0 
m 
.- 
Y 
4 
2K 20K 200K 2M 
Message Size 
SCALABILITY 
- wireless-4node 
etherdnode 
wirelessPnode 
ether-2node 
Fig. 4. Link utilization in terms of message size for 2 and 4-wireless-node models. 
4. Conclusion 
A wireless LAN simulation model was developed. Our 
studies showed that for large file sizes, the link utilization 
between nodes, connected through a wireless network, 
decreases due to collisions while the communication between 
wireless nodes and ethemet node is not saturated. Results 
obtained from our simulation runs were similar to those 
obtained from the wireless network experiment, which was 
conducted by the Shuttle Mir Science Program, thereby 
attesting to the reliability and validity of our simulation 
results. Future work should concentrate on multi-cell wireless 
systems connected through Ethernet systems. 
Acknowledgement 
Authors would like to acknowledge CACI Products Company, 
of La Jolla, California for their generous permission to use the 
software. 
References 
[ 11 J. Geier, Wireless LAhk - Implementing Interoperable 
Networks, Macmillan Network Architecture Development 
Series, 1999. 
227 
[ 2 ]  T. W. Madron, LANs - Applications of IEEWANSI 802 
Standards, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1989. 
[3] P. T. Davis, C. R. McGuffin, Wireless Local Area Networks 
- Technology, Issues, and Strategies, McGraw-Hill, 1995. 
[4] COMNET III Reference Guide, CACI Products’ Company, 
1999. 
Richard Alena received his Master of Science 
degree in Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science from the University of 
California at Berkeley in 1980. Currently 
working as a computer scientist and engineer 
at NASA Ames Research Center, he previously 
developed high-tech products such as multiprocessor 
computer systems, implantable biosensors and computed 
tomography medical scanners fbr  industry. Rick now heads 
the Intelligent Mobile Technology project team developing 
innovative concepts and devices that enable people to 
interact with computers, instruments and spacecrafr in more 
effective and complex ways. hi 1995, he was the chief 
engineer of the Wireless Network Experiment that j lew a 
radio network aboard the Shuttle and Mir space station (see 
http://ic.arc.nasa.gov/ic/projects/WNE/). For the Haughton- 
Mars Science Expedition he has deployed the Mobile 
Exploration System in the Arctic jield environment, studying 
how digital technology can extend current capabilities for  
observation of geological and biological features. (see 
httr, :i/atct i c -mars. org ) 
Ece Yaprak received her BS in Electrical Engineering in 
1980 from the University of Michigan- 
Dearborn, MS @ Computer Engineering in 
1984 and Ph.D. in 1989 porn Wayne State 
University. Dr. Yaprak joined the Wayne 
State University in August 1993. Her 
specialty areas clre Computer Networking and 
Coiniiiiiiiicatioiis. Prior to joining WSU, she 
worked for  Western Michigaii University, General Electric, 
Ford Motor Company. During the last seven years she has 
held faculty fellowships at NASA Lewis Research Center, Jet 
Propulsion Laboratoiy of California Institute of Technology, 
NAVY/ASEE Summer Research Faculty Fellowship at the U. 
S. NAVY Space and Wa$are Systems Center (SPAWAR) and 
NASA Ames Research Center of Stailford University. 
Saad Lamouri works as a modeling and sirnulation 
consultant at CACI Products Company in La 
Jolla, California. He received a BS and MS in 
electrical engineering from San Diego State 
University. He may be reached at 
saad @ modsim.com. 
228 
