GMRAM: Giant Magneto-resistance 
Abstract- Giar Magm 
Random-Access Memory1.z 
Romney R. Katti and Hassan Kaakani 
Honeywell, Inc. 
Solid State Electronics Center 
12001 State Highway 55 
Plymouth, MN 55441 
kattir@ssec.honeywell.com kaakanih@ssec.honeywell.com 
612-954-2903 612-954-2187 
0-resistance Random-Access 
Memory (GMRAM) is anonvolatile random access memory 
that uses magnetic multi-layers made of thin layers of 
common ferromagnetic materials to write digital data and 
the giant magneto-resistance (GMR) effect to read stored 
data. The direction of magnetization in the storage layer of 
the magnetic multi-layer is used to store a bit of information. 
The GMR material is magneto-resistive and changes 
resistance when the magnetization of the layers is changed 
by a magnetic field. The GMR effect produces a signal that 
distinguishes between a “1” and “0.” GMRAM is a chip that 
integrates magnetic and semiconductor devices in an 
architecture. Attributes for GMRAM make it desirable as a 
nonvolatile memory. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. GMRAM TECHNOLOGY 
3. NONVOLATILE MEMORY COMPARI~ONS 
4. GMRAM ADVANTAGES AND APPLICATIONS 
5. GMR LATCH FOR EMBEDDED MEMORY 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
GMRAM is a nonvolatile random access memory that uses 
magnetic storage in a magnetic multi-layer to store binary 
information and the GMR effect to read stored data. The 
GMR effect is the pronounced and reversible change 
(increase) in electrical resistance that occurs in a magnetic 
multi-layer when the magnetization changes from parallel to 
antiparallel. Advances in deposition techniques have made it 
possible to deposit very thin and uniform multi-layer 
metallic films. Individual layers have thicknesses measured 
in the tens of nanometers. The GMR effect offers much 
larger signals than those produced by the anisotropic 
magnetoresistance (AMR) effect that has been applied by 
Honeywell since 1984. 
A GMRAM results from combining GMR storage elemer s 
with standard semiconductor devices. The magnetic devices 
are integrated with support circuits on a single silicon chip 
to duplicate the functions of a static semiconductor.RAM 
chip. The magnetic storage elements are formed from layers 
of Ni, Fe, CO, and Cu thin films where the intersection of the 
magnetic material (sense line) and metal layer (word line) 
form a memory bit. Due to the absence of diffused junctions 
in the storage element, GMRAM technology is inherently 
immune to radiation effects. When coupled with radiation 
immune under-layer circuits such as Honeywell’s silicon-on- 
insulator (SOI) fabrication process, GMRAM products are , 
immune to radiation effects. 
GMRAM has various modes of operation depending upon 
the specific type of magneto-resistive material used and the 
geometry of the cell. New advanced modes using giant 
magnetoresistance (GMR) materials result in improved 
speed and density over the initial AMR reverse read mode 
memories. 
The general attributes of GMRAM are: 
0 Nonvolatility 
0 Unlimited write-cycling 
0 No wear-out mechanisms 
0 Fast write 
0 Fast read 
0 Low write energy 
0 Nondestructive read. 
When combined with the high density of advanced GMR 
cells, these attributes lead to the “perfect memory” with 
speed, density and unlimited cycling of SRAM and DRAM 
and the nonvolatility of EEPROM, flash and other 
nonvolatile memories. 
2. GMRAM TECHNOLOGY 
A GMRAM uses giant magneto-resistance (GMR) multi- 
layers for the magneto-resistive material and CMOS for the 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 
Updated August 3 1,1999 
37 1 
on-chip circuitry. GMRAM memories are nonvolatile, are 
read non-destructively, and have no wear-out to read 
or write cycles. The memory arrays in GMRAM produce 
signals >1 mV, leading to a read access times < 250 ns. 
GMR materials offer higher signals (faster) and higher 
density (lower cost) than can be obtained with AMR 
materials. A primary factor determining read access time in 
AMR RAM is the signal-to-noise ratio. Because GMR 
elements offer higher signals, GMR elements provide higher 
signal-to-noise ratios than AMR elements. GMR Memory 
cells have now been developed at Honeywell to replace 
AMR cells in nonvolatile GMRAM. 
Figure 1. Magnetization and resistance states in a pseudo- 
spin-valve, and relationship to writing and reading fields. 
/ I 
CoFl iFe  
In GMRAM, storing data is accomplished by applying 
magnetic fields and thereby causing a magnetic material in a 
cell to be magnetized into either of two possible memory 
states. Recalling data is accomplished by sensing resistance 
changes in the cell when magnetic fields are applied. The 
magnetic fields are created by passing currents through strip 
lines (word lines) extemal to the magnetic structure, or 
through the magnetic structures themselves (sense lines). 
GMRAM cells are narrow elements etched into a multi-layer 
thin film stack of permalloy-copper-permalloy as shown in 
Figure 2. Data are stored by magnetizing the element. The 
total magnetic field from word and sense current causes the 
magnetization in the layers in the sense line to rotate thereby 
changing resistance. Reading is accomplished by noting the 
change in voltage across the sense line (resistance times 
sense current). This writing and reading mode is illustrated 
in Figure 3. 
Figure 2. Schematic layout of magnetoresistive bit structure. 
4- 
sense 
Current 
Permalloy 
Film 
There are various modes of operation for the GMR device. 
One of these modes is the Pseudo-Spin Valve (PSV) mode. 
The GMR cell is based upon multi-layer materials of 
different thicknesses. The magnetically softer readout layer 
is on top and the magnetically harder storage layer is on 
bottom. In the PSV mode of operation, consider starting 
from a state where the magnetization directions of both the 
readout and storage layers are parallel and along the long 
axis of the cell. As the field generated by the word line is 
swept in a direction opposing the magnetization of the cell, 
the thinner readout layer switches first. Once the thinner 
layer has switched, it tends to inhibit switching of the thicker 
or storage layer. This leads to higher write thresholds for the 
cell than would be expected for either a single layer film or a 
similar cell in which both magnetic layers switch together. 
The PSV mode is non-destructive readout (NDRO) and 
exhibits a high signal. The manner in which these cells can 
be read or written is shown in Figure 1. Honeywell has 
successfully integrated PSV cells with silicon circuitry. 
New GMR cells, which can store data at very high densities 
and yet give greatly improved signal levels, have been 
developed using PSV cells. A PSV is suitable at 0.5 micron 
widths down to at least 0.1 micron width per GMRAM cell 
(or memory bit). These cells are efficient and use nearly all 
the available intrinsic magneto-resistive signal of the cell, 
and are therefore much faster and denser than the original 
AMR cell concept. 
Figure 3. Selection of a specific bit in an array, in which the 
total magnetic field from both word and sense currents affect 
the selected bit as desired. Word or sense currents alone do 
not affect unselected bits. 
1 word I 
Data are stored in the magnetic layers through application of 
simultaneous currents (producing magnetic fields) in 
orthogonal word and sense lines. The direction of the 
magnetization in the storage layer of the PSV is used to 
store digital information, and depends on the polarity of the 
word current. Subsequently, when interrogated by a word 
and sense current, the resistance of the sense line is different 
depending on whether a one or a zero is stored. 
372 
Figure 4 shows a simplified diagram of the MR sensing 
circuit. This approach provides for true differential sensing. 
An accurate reference is used to provide common mode 
rejection of thermal and process effects. 
Figure 4. Magnetoresistive sensing circuit. 
Sense 
Current 
1 I 
3. NONVOLATILE MEMORY COMPARISONS 
GMRAM technology has characteristics that make it 
attractive when compared with competing technologies. A 
summary of these comparisons between memory 
technologies is given in Table 1. There are a number of solid 
state, nonvolatile, read/write memories which are already in 
production-including two hybrid memories which combine 
a volatile memory with a battery, for backup power, or a true 
nonvolatile memory for power down backup. Only the 
hybrid memories can match the speed of GMRAM, but 
because they are not monolithic integrated devices, they will 
not be cost competitive, in equivalent volumes, with 
GMRAM. Other nonvolatile memories are both slower than 
GMRAM and have limited cycling endurance. Specific 
characteristics of these nonvolatile memories are given in 
the following paragraphs. 
EEPROM 
The electrically erasable programmable read only memory 
(EEPROM) boasts fast, unlimited readout. However, the 
write cycle time is very slow (10 ms), requires high voltages, 
and can only be cycled lo5 times before the memory fails. 
While voltage boost circuitry can be included on the 
memory die so the EEPROM can operate from a single 
supply; this circuitry takes up die area, leading to higher 
cost. GMRAM offers unlimited write cycles, high-speed 
operation for both reading and writing, and single-supply 
operation without additional power supply circuitry. 
Flash EEPROM 
Like EEPROM, most flash EEPROM memories require high 
voltage for writing and has low cycling endurance, lo6 
cycles. At <lo0 ys, the write speed is considerable faster 
than EEPROM, but still is almost three orders of magnitude 
slower than DRAM and SRAM. 
FRAM 
In terms of write speed and cycling endurance, ferroelectric 
RAM (FRAM) offers considerable improvement over 
EEPROM and flash. FRAM has a cycling endurance of up 
to 10" and writes as quickly as 150 ns. In addition, voltage 
pumps are not required down to 2.7 V supplies. On the 
down side, FRAM has a destructive readout, so a write cycle 
is required with every read, data retention time degrades 
significantly at moderate temperatures, 70" to 85 "C, and the 
cycling endurance is inadequate for the high-speedhigh-rate 
capability. With a cycle endurance of only lo", a FRAM 
memory will wear out after only 42 hours when cycled 
continuously at 150 ns. 
Shadow RAM 
This type of nonvolatile memory combines both a volatile 
and nonvolatile memory together into a single memory. 
Using SRAM for normal storage and EEPROM or flash for 
SRAM backup on power down, these memories come close 
to the ideal of high speed, unlimited cycling, and 
nonvolatility. However, they require a battery or other 
special power considerations in order to carry out the 
transfer from SRAM on power down. This requirement, 
along with the need for actual storage capacity of twice the 
usable capacity (i.e., a 1M memory would require 1M of 
SRAM and 1M of EEPROM) prevents this memory from 
being cost competitive with a monolithic nonvolatile 
memory such as MRAM. 
Battery-Backed SRAM 
As with nonvolatile RAM, battery-backed SRAM has good 
performance, but suffers from higher cost and limited life 
because of the battery that is needed to retain the data in 
memory when the system power is off. The life of this 
backup battery will be affected by temperature, which puts 
restrictions on the use of this memory. 
Disk and Tape 
GMRAM and disk and tape read head technologies differ in 
that GMRAM is a random access memory, whereas disk and 
tape memories are serial access. GMRAM must have 
electronic access, and this requires on-chip circuitry with the 
memory elements for reading and writing. Disk memory can 
use mechanical access for addressing data, and a few 
relatively expensive read and write circuits that need not be 
integrated with the head. On the other hand, GMRAM is 
fully compatible in processing and current levels with large- 
scale integrated circuit technologies. 
4. GMRAM ADVANTAGES AND APPLICATIONS 
Unlimited cycling endurance and high-speed read and write 
are key advantages of GMRAM over most other nonvolatile 
technologies, as described earlier. Additionally, a low power 
requirement for writing combined with the intrinsically high- 
speed write capability of the magnetic storage element yields 
373 
a very low energy requirement for GMRAM operation. 
Also, GMR multilayers are intrinsically radiation immune 
and can also be used in high-temperature applications. These 
attributes allow GMRAM to fill all memory applications, 
both nonvolatile and high-speed main memory, as well as to 
fit well with low power andor battery-powered applications 
for which the low energy characteristic is particularly 
important. 
GMRAM has potential in all memory applications. These 
applications can be broken into two broad categories: dense 
memories and specialized memories. In addition to the 
application of GMRAM as a replacement for EEPROM and 
flash memories, especially for applications where radiation 
hardness is required, GMRAM can also be utilized as a gap 
memory when used with flash or EEPROM. 
One example is a buffer memory for flash memory systems. 
Flash is very limited in write speed, and because of the 
limited write life, must use replacement algorithms for 
frequently addressed words. By using a GMRAM buffer, the 
write speed could be greatly improved, especially in burst 
modes, and the most frequently used addresses could be 
replaced with GMRAM word addresses, thus extending the 
life of the memory system for a given application. Finally, 
the storing of use data for word addresses could be done in 
GMRAM, once again extending the life of the system. 
Clearly, flash memory is useful today without GMRAM, but 
there is potential for much improved performance and 
broader applicability if a GMFUM buffer were used in 
conjunction with flash. 
I 
GMR Resistors !jT Flip-Flop 
Figure 5. GMR latch cell layout. 
5 .  GMR LATCH FOR EMBEDDED MEMORY 
Honeywell has also developed a nonvolatile latch circuit that 
utilizes a GMR resistor. It can be programmed to a high or 
low resistance state with an on-chip current generated 
magnetic field. The resistance difference within the high and 
low resistance states can be translated to high/low logic 
states with the proper circuit interface. This operability 
offers low power and fast access time memory bits that are 
especially suited for embedded nonvolatile memory 
applications in Application Specific Integrated Circuits 
(ASICs) and custom circuit chips. A layout of a GMR latch 
cell is shown in Figure 5. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
GMRAM is a nonvolatile random access memory that uses 
magnetic multi-layers made of thin layers of common 
ferromagnetic materials to write digital data and the GMR 
effect to read stored data. The direction of magnetization in 
the storage layer of the magnetic multi-layer is used to store 
a bit of information. The GMR material is magneto-resistive 
and changes resistance when the magnetization of the layers 
is changed by a magnetic field. The GMR effect produces a 
signal that distinguishes between a “1” and “0.” GMRAM is 
a chip that integrates magnetic and semiconductor devices in 
a memory architecture. Attributes for GMRAM make it 
desirable as a nonvolatile memory. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Honeywell appreciates the sponsorship of the following 
government agencies for the development of GMRAM 
technology and products: Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), Defense Threat Reduction 
Agency (DTRA), and the U.S. Navy Trident program. 
REFERENCES 
[l] J. Gadbois, J.-G. Zhu, W. Vavra, and A. Hurst, “The 
Effect of End and Edge Shape on the Performance of 
Pseudo-Spin Valve Memories, ” IEEE Transactions on 
Magnetics, Vol. 34, No. 4, July, 1998, pp. 1066-1068. 
[2] J. Shi, T. Zhu, M. Durlam, E. Chen, S. Tehrani, Y. 
Zheng, and J. Zhu, “End Domain States and Magnetization 
Reversal in Submicron Magnetic Structures,” IEEE 
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 34, No. 4, July, 1998, pp. 
997-999. 
[3] E. Y. Chen, S. Tehrani, T. Zhu, M. Durlam, and H. 
Goronkin, “Submicron spin valve magnetoresistive random 
access memory cell,” J .  Appl. Phys., 81 (S), 15 April 1997. 
[4] S. Tehrani, J. M. Slaughter, E. Chen, M. Durlam, J. Shi, 
and M. DeHerrera, “Progress and Outlook for MRAM 
Technology,“ IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 35, 
No. 5, September, 1999, pp. 2814-2819. 
[SI H. Boeve, C. Bruynseraede, J. Das, K. Dessein, G. 
Borghs, J. De Boeck, R. Sousa, L. Melo, and P. Freitas, 
“Technology assessment for the implementation of 
magnetoresistive elements with semiconductor components 
in magnetic random access memory (MRAM) 
architectures,“ IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 35, 
No. 5, September, 1999, pp. 2820-2825. 
374 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Romney R. Katti earned the B.S. (Honors) degree from the 
California Institute of Technology in Engineering and 
Applied Science in 1982, the M.S. in Electrical Engineering 
from Stanford University in 1983, and the Ph.D. in 
Electrical and Computer Engineering from Camegie Mellon 
University in 1988. In 1988, he joined the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, and also was 
a lecturer in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the 
California Institute of Technology. In 1997, Dr. Katti joined 
MKE-Quantum Corporation, and, in 1999, joined 
Honeywell’s Solid State Electronics Center, where he is 
currently MRAM Device Manager. Dr. Katti is a member of 
the IEEE, IEEE Magnetics Society, American Physical 
Society, Tau Beta Pi, and Sigma Xi. 
Hassan Kaakani eamed the BSEE degree from Western 
Michigan University and an MBA from the College of St. 
Thomas in Minnesota. Mr. Kaakani joined Honeywell’s 
Solid State Electronics Center in 1984 and is currently 
Program and Business Development Manager for the 
GMRAM non-volatile memory development. He has over 
18 years of product development experience in the fields of 
electronic control systems and semiconductor products. He 
has managed major development programs at Honeywell 
including the Generic VHSIC Spacebome Computer 
(GVSC) chipset and the Advanced Spacebome Computer 
Module (ASCM) program. 
375 
Table 1. Chart summarizing key comparisons between memory technologies. Three GMRAM architectures are summarized, 
as defined by whether there are zero, two, or six transistors in the basic GMRAM memory cell. 
Non Destructive 
Read 
Time ( ns) 
Write Access 
Write Voltage (V) 
Write Energy ( nJ) 
Writemead 
Endurance 
Cell Size ( h') 
Additional Mask 
Layers Over 
Standard CMOS 
Radiation Hard 
Total Dose & SEU 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
50- 150 15-25 10-20 5 - 15 106-107 104-105 5 0 -  io0 30-70  
1.8 - 5 1.8 - 5 1.8 - 5 1.8-5 12-18  10-12  3.3-5 1.8-5 
1 - 5 0.5 - 1 0.5 - 1 SRAM 103-104 io'-io3 0.1 - 1 DRAM 
Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited Unlimited 10J-105 105-106 Unlimited 
12-21 120-200 3000-5000 120-200 30-80  4- 10 Not 8-12 
3 3 3 None 5 5 8 2 
scalable 
Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No 
376 
