In-line Oil Debris Monitor for 
Aircraft Engine Condition Assessment 
Authors: 
Jerry L. Miller, Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co., 400 Main Street, East Hartford, CT 06108, tel# (860) 565-4020’ 
Duka Kitaljevich, GasTOPS Ltd., 1011 Polytek Street, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1J 953, tel# (613) 744-3530 
Failure Mechanism 
Dimensional Discrepancies 
Overrolling of Debris 
Corrosion 
Other 
Fatigue 
Absrrucr-The development of an in-line, full flow oil 
debris sensor for aircraft engine condition assessment is 
described. First used on the F22 fighter, this sensor is the 
only “ all-metals” debris detector in production. The sensor 
is based on an inductive measurement technique which 
enables the system to detect, count and classify wear metal 
particles by size and type (ferromagnetic and non- 
ferromagnetic) above a minimum particle size threshold. In 
flight, the measured count values are compared to preset 
levels to provide prognostic health information on the oil- 
wetted components of the engine. This paper describes the 
sensor design requirements, principle of operation, 
electronic design and mechanical design features. The 
results of a test program established to correlate the oil 
borne debris measurements to component degradation 
characteristics and data from actual engine bearing failures, 
are also presented. 
Frequency 
Observed (%) 
29 
24 
35 
10 
2 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Aircraft gas turbine engines incorporate bearings, which 
operate under extremely severe conditions of load, shaft 
speed and oil temperature. Under these conditions, bearing 
damage can progress undetected until the bearing fails with 
possible secondary damage to other areas of the engine. 
The challenge of detecting bearing failures early in the 
failure progression to prevent costly in-flight shutdowns and 
secondary damage to the engine, is predicated on the 
utilization of “early detection methodologies”. The industry 
has much experience with vibration, oil analysis and oil 
debris monitoring techniques which attempt to address this 
requirement, however, occasional occurrences of related 
bearing failures indicate that these techniques have not 
proven to be entirely effective. 
This paper specifically addresses oil debris monitoring of 
aircraft jet, turbofan and turboprop engines which 
incorporate rolling element bearings, and in particular, the 
application of a new, in-line, full flow technology oil debris 
sensor, that detects and quantifies virtually 100% of the 
metallic particles above a minimum size threshold. This is a 
significant departure from the traditional application of oil 
debris monitoring which utilizes magnetic capture to isolate 
the metallic debris from the flow path. In conventional 
usage, these magnetic chip detectors, have poor capture 
efficiency, and thus, are often not effective at providing 
early detection of bearing damage. Moreover, they are not 
capable of detecting non-ferromagnetic metal debris and are 
prone to false alarms due to the build up of fine 
ferromagnetic debris or “fuzz”. 
The ODM oil debris monitor, first developed by GasTOPS 
for the F22 Advanced Tactical Fighter engine, the Pratt & 
Whitney F119, relies upon sensing the disturbances to an 
electromagnetic field created by passing metallic particles, 
either ferromagnetic or non-ferromagnetic. The debris is 
not captured by the sensor, thus it requires neither periodic 
inspection nor cleaning, and is entirely “remote” in 
operation. 
This paper reviews the common failure characteristics of 
rolling element bearings and the application of oil debris 
monitoring as an effective method of early failure detection. 
It presents experimental results that characterize bearing 
failures in relation to debris generation, particle size, rate 
and progression over time and how these data are used to 
identify initial failure and to establish maximum operational 
limits. In addition, this paper summarizes actual engine 
operating experiences that have been obtained from 
thousands of hours of operation using the ODM oil debris 
monitor. 
2. EFFECTIVE BEARING CONDITION MONITORING 
The starting point when considering techniques for early 
detection of rolling element bearing failures is to understand 
the underlying reasons for bearing failure. Since the design 
of bearings is such that contact stresses are maintained 
below the fatigue limit of the materials, bearing failure 
should, in theory, not occur. In reality, however, other 
factors in a real application suggest otherwise. The 
frequency of mechanical bearing failure is classified by 
cause in Table 1. 
Note that classical fatigue failure (cracks initiated at surface 
or sub-surface) constitutes only 2% of the total. Close to 
90% of the occurrences are due to either corrosion, 
’ Standard IEEE copyright which, for 2000, will be “0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00 0 2000 IEEE’. 
49 
overrolling of debris (solids contamination in the oil), or 
dimensional discrepancies (misalignment, or manufacturing 
error, etc.). It is also understood, that the occurrence of 
corrosion is more prevalent in machines that are subject to 
“stop-start’’ operating cycles, such as aircraft engines, while 
machines that are subjected to more frequent disassembly 
and certain maintenance activities are more susceptible to 
dimensional discrepancy and debris overrolling failures, 
respectively. In fact, the cause of the failure is not 
particularly significant if one considers that the mechanical 
failure of the rolling element bearing is ultimately 
associated with fatigue at the interface between the rolling 
elements and the race. The nature of the failure, regardless 
of the initiation mechanism, is a surface spall. Furthermore, 
once the spall appears on the bearing surface, the combined 
effects of stress fatigue and temperature inevitably result in 
the growth of the spall towards “catastrophic” failure, if the 
bearing remains in operation in an engine. 
In an aircraft engine the bearings serve the critical function 
of supporting and controlling the position of the shaft and 
associated rotor. In modern high performance engines, the 
clearance between the blades, the casing and stators is kept 
at a minimum under all operating conditions. 
Yt is also interesting to consider the special circumstance of 
the intershaft bearing design that is used on several modem 
aircraft engines. In such applications, tests have shown that 
due to the centrifugal force effects of the rotation of both the 
inner and outer bearing races, that some of the larger debris 
becomes trapped within the bearing housing, and is only 
expelled during low speed operation such as during start up 
or shut down. Tests have demonstrated that even for these 
designs detectable quantities of debris are still flushed out of 
the bearing cavity, even at spall initiation, albeit, in 
somewhat smaller quantities. 
4. OIL DEBRIS SENSOR 
‘]:he ODM oil debris monitor is designed to provide early 
detection of bearing damage. The ODM sensor, shown in 
Figures 1 and 2, is a throughflow device which installs 
anywhere between the bearing oil retum lines and the oil 
filter, allowing the entire oil flow to pass without restriction. 
‘The sensor functions by monitoring the disturbance to an 
It follows that the degradation of the contact surfaces within 
the bearing can eventually lead to degraded “shaft position 
control” which in turn, can cause secondary damage within 
the engine when blade contact takes place. Once a spall has 
been initiated, the primary factors which influence the time 
remaining to complete failure, are the speed of the bearing 
and its load. Depending upon the combined severity of 
speed (commonly represented by the expression dN, where 
d is the bearing diameter and N, the rotation speed) and 
load, the progression of damage to serious failure ranges 
from 10’s to 100’s of hours. The monitoring challenge 
presented is two fold. Firstly, to provide early detection it is 
necessary to be able to detect the initiation of the surface 
spall. Secondly, in order to prevent in-flight shutdowns and 
corollary secondary damage to engine, it is necessary to 
monitor and quantify the degree of damage as it progresses 
and compare this against predetermined operational limits. 
3. OIL DEBRIS MONITORING 
Oil debris monitoring applied to rolling element bearing 
failure detection is based upon the contention that a failing 
bearing generates metallic debris in sufficient “detectable” 
quantities and that the debris is washed into the lubricating 
oil system downstream of the bearings. Without exception, 
both the presence and detectability of debris is confirmed in 
operational engines by the fact that debris is always found to 
accumulate in the downstream strainers and filters of the 
lubrication system. In some circumstances, it is possible 
that some debris may not make its way all the way to the 
filter element due to the specific “flow traps” inherent in 
any lubrication system. In practice, however, it has been 
found that the quantity of “trapped’ debris is a very small 
fraction of the total debris that is found in the filter. 
Figure 1: ODM Sensor 
C O l L S Y  
Figure 2: Sensor Cross Section 
50 
altemating magnetic field caused by the passage of a 
metallic particle through the sensing coil assembly. The 
particle couples with the magnetic field to varying degrees 
as it traverses the sensing region, resulting in a characteristic 
output signature as shown in Figure 3. The amplitude and 
phase of the output signature is used to identify the size and 
nature of the particle. The amplitude of the signal is 
proportional to the mass of the particle for ferromagnetic 
metals and to the surface area of the particle for conductive 
non-ferromagnetic metals. The phase of the signal for non- 
ferromagnetic metals is opposite to that of ferromagnetic 
metals allowing a distinction to be made between the types 
of wear particle metal. Signal conditioning using a 
threshold algorithm is used to categorize the particles that 
pass on the basis of size. Multiple size categories can be 
configured which allows the tracking of the distribution of 
debris size. The minimum size particle detectable by the 
ODM is a function of the sensor bore size. The 1/2” ODM 
sensor used on the F119 engine is capable of detecting 
spherical ferromagnetic particles 125 microns in size. 
n Non-ferromagnetic 
Figure 3: Sensor Output Signal 
5.  EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the ODM oil debris 
monitor and to establish criterion for warning and alarm 
conditions based on the sensor output, a research and 
development program was undertaken [2]. The program 
involved the running of rolling element bearings to the point 
of failure in a test rig and monitoring the debris released 
from the bearings as the failures progress. 
A series of tests (over 40 in total) have been conducted in a 
test rig specially designed and instrumented to run bearings 
to failure in a controlled manner. A collection of 2 inch 
diameter bearing assemblies of ball and roller 
configurations, plus several larger diameter ball bearing 
assemblies (6 and 18 inch diameter) were tested to failure. 
The small scale test rig, shown in Figure 4, consists of a 
variable speed motor driving a shaft to the end of which is 
mounted the test bearing. The inner race of the bearing is 
pressed onto the shaft and the outer race is pressed into a 
bearing nest through which the load is applied. The bearing 
nest is supplied with oil by an independent lube system in 
which the oil debris sensor (ODM) is installed, immediately 
downstream of the bearing. Oil is pumped to the test 
bearing at approximately 1 gpm through a 3 micron filter to 
ensure the supply of clean oil to the bearing. Upstream of 
the pump a 20 micron screen traps debris for examination 
following the test. 
tC 
6 
Load Arm 
20 micron Screen 
Figure 4: Small Scale Bearing Test Rig 
The test program was designed to explore the effects of 
bearing speed, load and type on the manner in which the 
failure progresses. The bearing material was AIS1 52100 or 
M50 steel for both the rolling elements and races. Tests 
were conducted to cover a range of speed and load 
conditions for each bearing. Initially it was found that even 
with significant loads applied, the tests could run as long as 
a month before the bearing would fail. To accelerate the 
program, a fault was seeded in the bearing by either 
corroding a small portion of the race with a salt solution or 
by placing a 0.025 inch indent on the contact surface. In 
most cases, this caused the spalling to initiate in the 
damaged region and resulted in an average test time of 
approximately one week. 
In all cases, the bearings ran for a period of time during 
which no debris was released. Eventually a few particles 
were released indicating the initiation of the spall. 
Following the initial spall, there was additional debris 
detected until the shutdown level was reached. 
51 
As previously noted, the goal of the test program is to 
develop an understanding of the manner in which debris is 
released from rolling element bearings as they fail to 
attempt to establish limits based on the particle count data 
which can be used to identify when a bearing has entered 
the final stages of its life. This effort involves looking at 
several parameters derived from the raw particle count 
readings: 
Particle Generation Rate 
The raw readings represent, in fact, the rate of release of 
particles from the bearing. All of the test results show that 
no particles are detected until the first fatigue spall occurs. 
A typical output from the oil debris sensor is shown in 
Figure 5. This graph shows the rate of particles detected 
following the first spall. The rate of release was found to be 
proportional to both the load and speed of the test. These 
data show that a limit based upon rate could be set, 
however, the load and speed variations of a particular 
application would have to be carefully considered. 
1001 I 
I 
Hours Running 
Figure 6: Typical Count Rate - 2 inch Bearing Tests [ 2 ]  
Mass Removal 
For steel bearings, the oil debris sensor is essentially a mass 
sensor (of ferromagnetic debris). Thus, use of a sufficiently, 
fine size discrimination of debris permits an estimate of the 
mass of material released from the bearing to be made. 
Figure 7 shows the typical cumulative mass released from a 
bearing as a function of running hours. 
Hours Running 
Figure 5: Typical Count Rate - 2 inch Bearing Test [ 2 ]  
I 00  101 102 103 
Hours Running 
Figure 7: Typical Particle Mass - 2 inch Bearing Tests [ 2 ]  
Total Particle Count 
Integration of the raw readings results in a total of 
cumulative particle count as shown in Figure 6.  Based upon 
this cumulative particle count, a limit could be set at a total 
particle count which was found to indicate significant 
progression of the failure. Choice of this parameter 
removes the requirement to know the rate at which particles 
are removed; however, it imposes the requirement to 
establish a tolerable total quantity of released debris. 
Particle Distribution 
Frequently, discussion of inline wear debris monitoring 
leads to discussion of what size of debris needs to be 
detected. Figure 8 shows the size distribution of debris. 
The figure shows the fraction of the particles detected that 
were above a given size. Of note is the fact that all tests 
revealed a similar distribution (particle frequency inversely 
proportional to particle size) and that there were a 
significant number of what are considered in the industry to 
be very large particles (>250p). 
52 
100 
E 8 0  
60 
40 
20 
0 
5. 
C 
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
Particle Size Cm] 
Figure 8: Particle Size Distribution - All 2 inch Bearing 
Tests [2] 
Although the majority of data were obtained from the small 
scale bearings (2 inch), the results from larger bearing tests 
[3] were a close match in terms of debris generated, 
however, the quantities (rate, counts and mass) were 
significantly larger as shown in Figures 9 and 10. The size 
distribution of the debris for the larger bearing tests are also 
very similar to those measured in the small bearing tests. 
8 
~ >200 pm 
i l  
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Elapsed Time [%I 
Figure 9: Particle Count - 6 inch Bearing Test [3] 
75 80 85 90 95 100 
Elapsed Time (Oh) 
6. FAILURE CRITERION 
The results of the research program leads to three significant 
conclusions. Firstly, oil debris monitoring can be 
effectively applied to detect the on-set of damage on rolling 
element bearing. Secondly, that significant quantities of 
what are considered in the industry to be very large particles 
(>250 microns) are generated even at the initiation of 
bearing failure. And thirdly, total debris quantity (either 
particle counts or mass) is an effective measure of the 
degree of damage that has occurred on a bearing. 
The research also provides valuable insight into establishing 
alarm limits based on the specific rolling element bearings 
used in an engine. Based on the debris data, a methodology 
has been developed to estimate for most rolling element 
bearing types and size, the relationship between the detected 
debris and the size of the spa11 (on the bearing race). 
From the estimate of the damage to the bearing, it is then 
straightforward to establish alarm limits, which, once 
exceeded, suggest the risk of secondary damage to the 
engine. One approach that has shown promise is to 
establish the alarm level at the debris quantity equivalent to 
the damaged area that is just large enough to accommodate 
two rolling elements (balls or rollers). At this point, one can 
conservatively estimate that there is some risk of "loss of 
position of the shaft" and thus, potential for secondary 
damage. This methodology is subject to continuous 
improvement with the availability of new bearing failure 
data from both research and from the field. 
7. APPLICATION TO THE &CRAFT ENGINE 
The application of the ODM oil debris monitor to the 
aircraft jet, turbofan or turboprop engine includes the ODM 
sensor and signal processor. Typically an engine is fitted 
with a single ODM sensor mounted ahead of the oil filter in 
an oil line which carries the full combined flow from all 
bearing and gearbox sumps. It is also common practice to 
include multiple magnetic chip collectors as isolation aids in 
the individual sumps and/or lines located upstream of the 
ODM sensor as shown in the engine oil lubrication 
schematic in Figure 11. Since the capture efficiency of 
these magnetic collectors is relatively poor, only a very 
small proportion of the debris does not flow through the 
ODM sensor. With this configuration, alarm limits are 
established to identify the initiation of damage within the 
engine, which once exceeded, triggers an inspection to 
identify the source of the damage by examining the 
individual magnetic chip collectors. Knowing the debris 
source and debris quantity, it is then possible to identify the 
most appropriate action. 
Figure 10: Particle Count - 18 inch Bearing Test [3]  
53 
particle counting and limit monitoring functions. The 
digital processing is performed by an existing processor, 
given sufficient spare capacity, or by a dedicated DSP. 
A Reaswe 
.* 
7 
.............. 
........... .... 
ODM Se”80, 
i 
M*O”etlC 
Chip Collector. 
Figure 11: Typical Aircraft Engine Application 
The ODM signal processor is comprised of 3 major circuits 
including the field coil drive circuit, sensor output analog 
signal processing circuit and digital signal processing 
circuit. The drive and analog processing circuits are shown 
schematically in Figure 12. 
Sensor ? 
Each circuit incorporates extensive built-in self test 
functionality designed to identify oil debris monitor system 
faults and define the potential fault source(s). The ODM 
signal processor can be integrated in existing engine 
processors and requires less than 15 cm2 of board space and 
6W of power. 
The ODM oil debris monitor offers several significant 
advantages in the aircraft engine application over the 
standard magnetic chip detector application: 
W The ODM is a full flow device which provides high 
“capture” efficiency. Magnetic true-capture systems 
tend to “see” only a small percentage of the total debris. 
The ODM provides early reliable indication of initial 
bearing and gear damage which is capable of being 
remotely monitored through data trending. Magnetic 
devices provide only a discrete indication of debris 
buildup with no indication of the rate of accumulation. 
[J 
Figure 12: ODM Signal Processor Circuit 
The drive circuit is used to generate the alternating current 
for the field coils of the sensor. The analog signal U 
processing circuitry processes the output signal from the 
sensor to extract and amplify the signal resulting from the 
passage of a particle through the sensor. The output of this 
circuit is two phase shifted analog signals representing the 
ferromagnetic and non-ferromagnetic particle signatures. 
The digital processing circuitry performs A D  conversion, 
digital sampling, digital filtering, phase adjustment, signal 
recognition, particle type classification, particle sizing, 
U 
This makes it difficult to differentiate between a slow 
“normal” accumulation and a rapid failure situation. 
The use of an ODM eliminates the requirement for 
periodic inspections of the magnetic chip detectors. 
These inspections are performed only upon indication 
of abnormal debris by the ODM. 
The ODM itself requires no periodic maintenance or 
inspections thus reducing overall maintenance and 
precluding the incipient failure modes introduced by the 
inspections themselves. 
54 
0 The ODM has adjustable limits that are set in the 
monitoring system software and can be modified as 
additional failure signature knowledge is acquired. 
Magnetic chip detectors have unchangeable "limits" or 
buildup levels that are defined by the size of the gap 
which is bridged by the accumulated debris. 
The F119 engine ODM sensor installation is shown in 
Figure 13. The sensor is installed at the discharge of the oil 
pump downstream of the individual magnetic chip detectors. 
The sensor is mounted directly to the oil pump discharge 
port. Cabling integrated in the engine instrumentation 
harness runs from the sensor to the engine mounted CEDU 
(Comprehensive Engine Diagnostic Unit) which contains 
the ODM signal processor circuit. 
Figure 13: ODM Sensor Installation on the 
Pratt & Whitney F119 Engine 
8. ENGINE OPERATING EXPERIENCE 
With over 8000 hours of F119 engine operating experience 
on the ODM, significant results have already been achieved. 
Engine operating experience has conf'i'ied the results of the 
research program by providing the following relevant 
observations: 
0 The research program has shown that until a bearing 
begins to fail (initiation of spall), there is no significant 
accumulation of detected debris. F119 experience has 
confirmed this fact and has also shown that it is 
common for a new engine (or newly overhauled engine) 
to emit a small quantity of debris over the first few 
hours of operation. The rate of accumulation is usually 
very low and goes to near zero shortly after initial start- 
up. This debris is the result of engine build debris, or 
debris left over from a previous engine failure event 
and is usually insignificant relative to the alarm levels. 
Common practice is to ignore small amounts of debris 
accumulation for the first few hours of new/overhauled 
engine operation. Figure 14 shows the relative levels of 
debris accumulation for normal engine operation, a 
post-build situation, and a failure condition. 
0 The time from initial spall to significant damage varies 
significantly and is dependent upon engine type, 
specific bearing design and operating profile of the 
engine. An example of a particularly rapid bearing 
failure is shown in Figure 15. In this case a bearing 
with a known flaw was allowed to run while being 
monitored with the ODM. The initial spall progressed 
to the alarm limit value in about 3 hours of continuous 
engine operation and was allowed to continue for 5 
more hours before it was replaced. 
IE 
Y2m 
0 ; 150 
2 
?CO 
50 
0 
0 5 , 0 , ~ 2 0 z 5 ~ s 4 9 4 5 5 0  
OPERATING TIME SINCE REBUILDIOYERHAUL (Hrs ) 
Figure 14: Debris Measured from "Healthy" Engines 
versus an Engine with a Bearing Failure 
.................................................................... 
to EmiM Normal Engin, Trend 
............................................................ ...+ .................................................................. 
E l  I ......... ........................................................................ 
.............................................................................................. 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 
OPEFlATINGTIME (Hra.) 
Figure 15: Debris Measured During a F119 Engine 
Bearing Failure 
9. CONCLUSION 
During a typical failure of an aircraft gas turbine engine 
bearing, large numbers of metallic particles are released, 
starting with the first spall, and continuing as the bearing is 
kept in operation, and increasing in rate as the damage 
reaches an advanced state. GasTOPS has developed an in- 
line oil debris sensor for continuous monitoring of these 
types of engine bearing and gear failures. Experimental and 
actual engine operating data have substantiated the 
capability of the sensor to detect the initiation of bearing 
damage and to monitor the progression of damage towards 
55 
failure. Moreover, experience has shown that the metal degree in Mechanical Engineering from Carleton 
debris released during these failures exhibit repeatable University. 
characteristics, such as size distribution and cumulative 
number or mass of particles. These characteristics support 
the establishment of reliable alarm levels which would 
ensure positive detection of real failures while reducing the 
potential for false indications. 
The ODM system provides significant improvements over 
existing methods of debris monitoring, such as elimination 
of periodic inspections, real-time monitoring to detect 
impending failures, and long term trending to facilitate 
engine overhaul and maintenance planning. 
10. REFERENCE 
[l] From data obtained in conversation with engineers at 
FAG, Schweinfurt, FRG (1992) 
[2] G.S. Messinger, F.R. Dube and R.J. Thibedeau, 
“Rolling Element-Bearing Failure Detection with ODM On- 
Line Oil Debris Sensor”, National Research Council of 
Canada, Technical Report IMR-MCM-CTR-20, February 
1995. 
[3] Muir, D.M., Howe, B., “In-line Oil Debris Monitor 
(ODM) for the Advanced Tactical Fighter Engine”, SAE 
Paper 961308, May 1996. 
Jerry Miller is a Diagnostics & Health 
Management Systems Engineer at Pratt 
& Whitney. He has worked in the engine 
diagnostics and reliability arenas at Pratt 
& Whitney for over 16 years and has 
designed and developed engine 
diagnostic systems for the Military F22 
and JSF programs as well as for the 
Airbus A318 aircrafi. He has designed and led the 
development of an industry-first knowledge based expert 
engine troubleshooting system, as well as airbome engine 
vibration monitoring and trim balance systems for the F22 
aircraft. He is currently the systems diagnostics manager 
for the PW6000 and PW46.50 engine programs. He has a 
bachelor’s degree in Computer Systems from Florida 
Atlantic University. 
Duka Kitaljevich is the Manager of 
Business Development for the Machinery 
Protection Systems Division at 
GasTOPS. He has over 18 years 
experience with engine diagnostics 
measurement and instrumentation 
systems and in the last 8 years has 
focused on oil debris monitoring. In the past he has serve 
as a member of the ODM development team and later le 
the effort to tailor the product for application to a broa 
range of engines aizd equipment. He has a bachelor 
56 
