Satellite Wide-Area-Network 
for Telemedicine' 
- I  Harry W. Tyrer . . .L -H , - ~ 
C I  - . ' Computer Engineering and Computer Science Department 
305 Engineering Building West 
University of Missouri-Columbia 
Columbia, MO 6521 1 
t \redl @ rmsso tiii.edu 
573-882-6489 
Abstract-- Communications for Telemedicine requires 
substantial bandwidths to provide timely transmission of 
large data sets. To provide rural America with modem 
Telemedicine requires very high bandwidth resources that 
may take decades to appear. Satellites provide the natural 
choice for communication between the rural primary care 
centers and the tertiary care hospital. However there are 
problems if TCP, as required for Intemet access, is to be 
the protocol of choice. Analysis of multi-station satellite 
access clearly argues for distributed non-random methods 
and hence for appropriate handling of TCP data streams. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
INTRODUCTION - OVERVIEW 
MULTIMEDIA 
SATELLlTES 
RATIONALE 
GROUND STATION 
PROTOCOL REQUIREMENTS 
RANDOM OR DETERMINISTIC MULTI-ACCESS 
CONCLUSIONS 
1. hTRODUCTION -OVERVIEW 
We and others [1,2] argue that substantial increase in 
bandwidth (hundreds of Mbps from 56Kbps), required for 
rapid transmission of data intensive items such as medical 
images. will be decades before it is available to rural 
primary care institutions [l]. The main reasons include 
the historical rate of bandwidth improvement, the little to 
no incentive for terrestrial bandwidth providers to lower 
costs, and current lossless compression technology 
reduces bandwidth insufficiently since orders of 
magnitude are required. An alternative solution to 
landlines is the use of communication satellites. 
A satellite based network communication system can 
provide very high data rates (e.g. OC-3, 155Mbps and 
OC-12, 622Mbps). Each primary care center can 
communicate with a tertiary care center with these apparent 
high data rates. Primary care centers provide general medical 
care whereas tertiary care centers provide the medical 
expertise and specialization expected of a major medical 
center. The requirements are a ground station, a protocol (a 
modification of TCP) so the satellite appears as a very long 
high quality fiber, and an application suite to provide data 
voice and video [3]. The assessment of such a system will be 
primarily economic. However since the performance will be 
different than terrestrial lines, one also needs to consider the 
effects of long delays in synchronizing the information. The 
problem is accentuated when one considers the desire for 
video on demand, the poor service that the Intemet gives to 
provide such video on demand, and the bandwidth necessary 
to receive such video on demand. 
2. MULTIMEDIA 
In the waning years of the 20th century and the early years of 
the 21", communications engineers in medicine find 
themselves consolidating the gains made in imaging 
technologies in the past half centuj: Improvements in 
ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, x-ray 
mammography, computed tomography, to name a few 
imaging modalities, have been accelerated due to the low cost 
of high performance computing. They continue trading off 
acquisition, resolution and computation requirements. 
Originally these technologies developed as independent items 
of activity, but the explosion of networking technology in the 
last 15 years produced unprecedented and easy access to the 
images produced. 
These technologies in tertiary care medicine shared resources 
first as local area networks, then by wide area networks, and 
now have access through the Intemet. A tertiary care center 
such as a hospital with teaching resources has a high degree of 
expertise and a range of medical services that easily extend 
beyond its walls. Indeed such extended service capability may 
be essential for the economic survival of some teaching 
hospitals. 
' 0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.000 2000 IEEE 
141 
Hospital data encompasses the totality of voice, video and 
data. Each has its own requirements. Video is a stream of 
data: bit errors can be ignored as long as the transmission 
frame retains its integrity. Voice also requires a bit stream 
but the time delay is fixed and errors are tolerated as long 
as frame integrity remains. Data uses long frames for 
efficiency but bit errors may become frame errors [4]. 
MRI 
Such multimedia data can be handled by the 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), characterized by 
its small constant length packets. ATM can easily handle 
the bit streams and discards error packets, assuming that 
the receiving end will compensate for these errors. At a 
higher level, TCP-IP also provides for error protection but 
the receiver must assemble the final message. Hence the 
delay time may vary greatly and TCP-IP is not used for 
some requirements. In some cases ATM serves as a 
carrier layer or physical layer for TCP-IP, which then 
forms the higher level layers. 
1 perexam (MB) 
256x256 I 12 I 20 2 , 
The hospital environment is rich in images [ 5 ] .  Image file 
sizes arise from the square of the resolution (or the product of 
the resolution of each dimension), the number of bits required 
for each resolution element, and the number of images in a 
medical examination set. The file size in an image can be 
decreased by compression. The best that can be done with 
lossless compression is a two to three-fold reduction; in 
contrast, compression with loss produces a ten to twenty-fold 
reduction in file size. The choice for lossless systems and the 
guarantee that the decompressed image can be produced with 
no errors will have a basis other than scientific. In lossy 
systems the decompressed image will be inferior to the 
original image. 
Ultrasound 
Color Microscopy 
Compacted 
Angiography 
Using transmission standards, audio, video and data can be 
formatted for transmission. The following table summarizes 
transmission bit rates commonly used in present transmission 
infrastructure. The transmission rate is compatible with the 
bandwidth but there can be no “real time” effect. 
512 x 512 8 20 5 
512 x 512 24 20 16 
1024x 1024 8 100 100 
2048 x2048 12 1 10 
~~~~. 
TABLE 1 
Radiography 
4096x4096 
r- I Resolution I Intensity I Images I File size I 
12 4 100 
Conferencing: audio 
: video 
10-128 kbps 
64 kbps - 1.92 Mbps 
G .  72 x standard 
H. 261 
TABLE 2
1 Multimedia Stream I Bit Rates I DescriDtion 1 
Diagnostic: audio 1 32-768 kbps 1 CD quality audio 
: video I 3-15Mb~s  I MPEG-2 
Note the lower data rate in conferencing compared to the 
diagnostic requirements. What is not explicitly in the 
table is the compression, sometimes lossless, which is 
inherent in the coding standard. Since decompressed 
images may be inferior to the original image, in some 
applications such images ma.y be satisfactory, others not. 
3. RATIONALE 
A view of the Internet is a 3 level (or layer) 
implementation whose layers are the infrastructure (wire 
and cabling typically provided by Plain Old Telephone 
Services, POTS), the median-structure (systems, 
platforms and their interconnections), and the 
superstructure (applications). To improve or implement 
infrastructure requires healthy investments, typically billions 
of dollars. In contrast, applications (e.g. bandwidth 
compression) require several orders of magnitude less 
investment. They became the primary areas of endeavor of 
small groups. This section summarizes a previous paper 
describing the network structure model, and the reason why 
satellites may be the best solution for rural telemedecine in the 
America [2]. 
National network structure model 
A model of a wide area network‘s development and 
implementation resources can be viewed as a layered system 
beginning at the lowest level with infrastructure, next the 
median-structure followed by the superstructure. This helps to 
classify the resource commitment by government, academia 
142 
and business. This classification, interestingly, follows 
the well-known International Standards Organization 
Open Systems Interconnect ISO/OSI layers. Hence a 
wide-area-networks implementation can be mapped to its 
operational model. 
The model provides a view of the limitations of current 
systems; giving engineers designers and users points -of 
references to find alternatives. How can the high 
bandwidth required for reasonable exchange of 
telemedicine data - images, text video and voice - in the 
settings of rural America be provided? Is the technology 
available? If not, when will it be available? Finally, what 
can be done now to provide high-speed access? 
Superstructure- the superstructure level describes high 
level implementation and use. In terms of the layered 
architecture it would be the presentation and application 
layer. The superstructure level deals with browsers, 
compression systems, encryption systems, etc. 
Median-structure- The median structure provides station 
to station message passing and can be viewed as the 
network, transport and session layers of the ISO/OSI 
layered model. For the Internet this is the TCPDP layer. 
The median-structure level uses the resources of the 
digital-computing vendors. 
Infrastructure- the infrastructure provides the 
interconnection between the various networks. In the 
ISO/OSI layered architecture sense, it is analogous to the 
physical layer, and usually implemented by the 
communication and common carrier companies. 
Additionally this encompasses transmit and receive 
devices which would implement the data link layer and 
are usually supplied by computer vendors. Laying down 
of miles of copper or fiber optic cable requires massive 
investments (in the billions of dollars), and strict 
standardization allows all that satisfy the requirements to 
participate. 
While both the median structure and the superstructure 
can perform functions to reduce transmission costs, it is 
the telephone companies and cable companies in the 
infrastructure level who own the pipelines and control the 
price at which that data is pumped. As argued below the 
only way to get market forces working in telemedicine 
communications is to provide satellite transmission. 
When the last mile problem really means IO0 miles 
The last mile problem refers to the difficulty of getting 
access to the high band width infrastructure even though 
the physical location of the resource may be near. Users 
currently find themselves locked into the 56 kilobit per 
second maximum rate not because of technological 
difficulties but because the telephone companies or cable 
companies are unwilling to provide high band width data 
access at moderate costs. 
The east and west coasts of America have sufficient 
population density to support rapid changing and upgrading of 
networking infrastructure. However the population density 
rapidly dwindles as one goes in towards the center of this 
country. Consequently Midwestern and Western states have a 
rural area that is significantly under-served by the networking 
infrastructure in this country. While some states and 
communities have made effort to ameliorate some of this 
problem the reality is that the participants in the infrastructure 
have little incentive to provide high speed interconnects. 
Worse, historical evidence and bandwidth installation rates 
indicate that it will be decades before bandwidths to support 
OC3 and OC12 rates are available in rural settings. 
No incentive to reduce price- Currently there is little incentive 
to reduce the price of data transmission. With customers lining 
up to pay current prices for ISDN transmission at a 128K, it is 
unlikely to expect the businesses to acquiesce to the societal 
need to reduce costs of high speed transmission. The reduction 
of cost is characteristic of a mature industry. And the 
infrastructure sector, namely the telephone companies -is a 
mature industry. Its new business, data communication, is 
most definitely not mature. Furthermore it is still not clear 
what the final form of installation is going to be. As an 
example, for decades 3kHz voice transmission was all that 
phone companies provided. While the hobbyist may be 
content with what one gets, telemedicine's life and death 
implications demands more stringent requirements of OC-3 
and OC- 12 rates. 
Higher population densities win the competition for 
installation dollars- The higher population densities will win 
out over the lower population densities in the competition for 
installation dollars. Clearly in the high population densities 
there is less cost per paying customer for installation and this 
makes for a disincentive in installing resources at low 
population densities. With the infrastructure technology in 
turmoil, the demand for better and improved resources will be 
satisfied for those areas with higher population densities. 
Cannot recover installation costs- the situation is even bleaker 
because clearly at some point there is a population density 
below which a company cannot recover its reasonable cost of 
installation. While a community or interested organization 
could fund such an endeavor (probably limited to only a few 
select communities), such largess can be viewed as a sunk cost 
investment which will never be profitable. 
4. SATELLITES 
Interestingly, satellites provide infrastructure level resources, 
but operate completely independently of earth-bound 
infrastructure. Individuals in high population areas as well as 
low population areas can use the same satellite, and the charge 
should be the same for both. Furthermore the satellite cost can 
be set up on a usage basis rather than on a leased-line basis. 
143 
Communication satellites act like amplifiers in space. A 
transmitting station within the footprint of the satellite 
sends a signal to the satellite in the satellite's uplink 
frequency (upload frequency), and get sent back to the 
earth in possibly a different footprint at the lower, 
downlink, frequency. The uplink and downlink 
frequencies simply serve as carriers for the data and have, 
littleWdo, -except on a very fundamental basis, with the 
data capacity of the satellite. 
Communication satellites have been defined primarily as 
geostationary (GEO) because of their unique orbit whose 
rotation is the same as that of the rotation of the earth. 
Historically the primary communication satellite has been 
a geostationary satellite (36,000 kilometers, on equatorial 
orbit) and appears as an unmovable fixture directly above 
a particular point on the earth. For technical 
considerations the closest these satellites can be to each 
other is two degrees (although spacing as close as 112 
degree has been considered) so that of the 180 satellite 
slots, at most 90 could face the same hemisphere as the 
continental United States. Thus the number of satellites is 
limited and the explosive growth in communications is 
further limiting this resource, e.g. the C band or 416 GHz 
up/down link in most satellites is saturated. 
Primarily its channels and its transponders determine the 
signaling capacity of the satellite. The antennas for the 
most part provide the spatial character or footprint of the 
satellite. The channels on the other hand, provide the 
signaling 
DATA for the JNTELSAT VI1 spacecraft [6] 
Location: Over Brazil near the Atlantic 
Coverage: Continental US 
Upmown links: 6/4, 14/11, 14/12 GHz 
RF channels: Bandwidth 34,36,41,72,77, and 
112 MHz 
capacities of satellites. The channels for most modem 
satellites range from those suitable to voice transmission 
up to 72 and 112 megahertz. The data rate of a satellite 
uses tradeoffs between bandwidth, efficiency and the 
allowed error rate. Because it is dependent upon allowed 
error rate it literally depends upon the weather. The higher 
frequency satellites (Ku band 14/12 or Ka band 30/20) 
suffer substantially from deleterious effects due to the 
weather. Thus a transponder with a 72 MHz bandwidth 
can be used to transmit OC3 (155 megabit per second) 
data if the bandwidth efficiency used is two. Satellites are 
in their element in point-to-multi-point communication. 
One signal can be transmitted up to a satellite and then 
relayed back down to a large geographic area. Any 
appropriately tuned ground station in that area can pick up 
the signal. Similarly, data can be transmitted to small 
ground stations located over large geographic distances. 
Recently VSAT (very small aperture terminal) networks have 
arisen with their advantage of using the small antennas 
primarily for reception, although transmission is also possible. 
These use the Ka and Ku bands whose higher frequencies 
reduce substantially the antenna size. 
Satellite arrays 
Satellites in low earth orbit take 90 minutes to circumscribe 
the earth. Thus transmission to a specific satellite requires 
timing and tracking. Motorola has recently created a system 
called Iridium, which proposes to create a network of 66 
satellites in low earth orbit. With 11 satellites on a single polar 
orbit and six such orbits, satellites are spaced two degrees 
apart either in latitude or longitude. Communication takes 
place between the ground and satellite, among the satellites 
and back to the ground, providing worldwide coverage. The 
Iridium system is dedicated primarily to providing support for 
cellular telephone traffic. Unfortunately the future of Iridium 
currently appears uncertain. On the other hand Teledessic 
proposes a similar necklace of satellites and their satellites will 
be dedicated to providing Internet services. The future can 
expect both voice and data traffic. 
5. GROUND STATION 
Asymmetry in bandwidth or path may occur in Satellite 
Networks. A larger data rate in one direction compensates for 
limits on the transmission power and the antenna size at one 
end of the link. Other systems use the satellite on one way 
only and use a non-satellite return path (such as a dialup 
modem link). 
Asymmetrical 
An asymmetrical ground station will communicate with the 
primary station via terrestrial lines and the primary station will 
communicate via the satellite to the client stations. This has 
the advantage that the clients need only' ieceive the data and 
not transmit large amounts of data requiring high bandwidth. 
This would be useful in situations in which the tertiary care 
center had a large number of large files whereas the primary 
care center rarely provided large files. Of course the 
disadvantage is the nearly second class status of the client. 
VSATS, Virtual Satellite Systems, characterized by their small 
antenna size are suitable for such a system particularly in their 
use in the entertainment industry. 
Symmetrical 
In the symmetrical system both client and source can equally 
transmit back and forth. The primary disadvantage is the 
additional cost due to the requirement for transmission from 
each client 
6. PROTOCOL REQUIREMENTS 
Academic institutions have access to Internet 2, which 
supports OC-3 (155 Mbps) and OC-12 (622 Mbps) speeds. By 
use of a symmetrical ground station a primary care center can 
have access to the Internet 2 supported by its tertiary care 
144 
center. This implies the seamless use of the Internet and 
the associated protocol TCPAP. However TCPAP does 
not do well in a satellite environment. The slow start, 
highly error sensitive signal can defeat the advantages of 
high bandwidth in a satellite system. The delay in essence 
produces an effective data rate that must be observed if 
messages are spawned immediately upon reception. 
TCPLP Consideratioris 
The goal of providing Internet access to health 
professionals via satellites requires that the TCP protocol 
be considered. To be sure TCP can be in a layer above 
ATM, but TCP is wasteful of satellites resources. The 
model here is that the satellite link is a very long fiber 
optic line, that is, high bandwidth but long delays. 
0.6 O-*: 
The following are a list of such problems [7] 
The 3-way handshake to establish connections 
requires 1 to 1.5 round trip times. 
Slow start to gradually increase the TCP window. 
0 Number of and delayed acknowledgements 
0 Loss recovery 
0 Congestion avoidance 
/ 
Some solutions to these problems include 
Selective acknowledgements (SACKS) provide a way 
to mitigate the delay in waiting for time outs. The 
receiver sends an ack with information on missing 
segments. The sender maintains the count of these 
segments, which issues the retransmission based on 
the SACK information. 
Forward acknowledgement (FACK) uses SACK 
options to more precisely add data to the network to 
mitigate congestion. 
TCP spoofing (also performance enhancement 
protocols) divides the TCP connection between a 
client and a server. The path over the satellite 
connects the client to its gateway router then to the 
satellite, the other path also emanates from the router 
but traverses an intemet link. Critics of TCP 
spoofing point out that it breaks the end-to-end 
semantics of TCP. 
Pacing TCP segments. Spacing ACKs between 
segments paces the rate of data injection to the 
network. Also by using rate-based pacing, the data 
sender paces TCP segments at a given rate, in the 
absence of incoming ACKS. 
7. RANDOM OR DETERMINISTIC MULTI-ACCESS 
There are compelling reasons to examine the throughput 
in accessing satellite service. The aesthetics of 
maintaining the integrity of TCP/IP to decide its own path 
gives way to the reality that in locations with reliable 
telephone access the transfer of large image or diagnostic 
files can be initiated by ground lines. This is certainly 
true in the American Midwest. The use of ground-lines 
for control requires a topology that a specific server will 
decide that a file needs to be transmitted by satellite. The 
server then uses ground lines to control access to the satellite. 
Each request for satellite access arrives at a central computer 
via telephone lines, the central computer responds to the 
request by assigning a queue priority, and each ground station 
transmits to the satellite as if a distributed queue had ordered 
the responses .. The alternative is. to use multi access,- , , 
communication methods including random, slotted, token, and 
finally queueing methods. 
, 
Consider random and queueing methods as the extremes 
between random and deterministic multi-access methods [SI. 
First we review the well-known Aloha and slotted aloha multi 
access method and we compare that to all messages going to a 
centrally located computer. 
In random multi-access methods each station acts as an 
independent agent transmitting according to its protocol. The 
Aloha protocol allows a station to transmit to the satellite 
when it has packet ready to send. Slotted Aloha imposes some 
order by creating a slot for transmission. Slotted Aloha 
implies some decision making capability which is not 
available it the so-called "bent pipe" or repeater view of a 
satellite. Of course occasionally collisions occur at the 
satellite between packets transmitted by two or more stations. 
These collision packets will fail at the receiver and may be 
lost. The long round trip time to make random access 
methods reliable motivates the search for alternatives. 
The throughput S of the Slotted Aloha system (long dashes in 
figure A) is given by Ge-G, where G is the expected number of 
packets transmitted, and is a Poisson random variable. If no 
arrivals appear during transmission, no collisions occur. So in 
Slotted Aloha a slot can be viewed as the region of 
vulnerability. In contrast Aloha, transmits when ready but its 
region of vulnerability is twice the packet length so that 2G 
appears in the exponential. S for Aloha is Ge-2G and is shown 
as the curve with the short dashes. 
mu&Y.x V s C f e J e i L c E d  
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Figure A. The throughput of a centralized server system (solid 
curve), a Slotted Aloha system (large dashes), and Aloha (with 
small dashes). 
The meaning here is that for the random multi-access methods 
The best throughput is 18% (Aloha), and 36% (Slotted Aloha). 
Worse, the packets not transmitted will be lost and can only be 
retrieved from the source. 
145 
The business model. 
Cost of satellite service will be a major determinant in its 
adoption. This not only applies to broader satellite usage but 
its usage in telemedicine. Medicine is driven in part by 
market forces and the trend is to increase. A business model 
that seeks to lease large units of bandwidth must give way to 
one that provides an on-demand service. ' ,' 
.I . 
In contrast a centralized server connected by ground lines 
to manage the traffic through the satellite has a 
throughput of value G until the system saturates, at which 
point packets awaiting transmission must queue up for 
their turn. Here no packets are lost. Figure B shows the 
substantial difference in throughput between either 
method and the centralized server. 
Delay is the cost of the tradeoff if the collision detection 
occurs at a device transmitting and receiving. However 
the satellite system is worse, because the satellite acts as a 
repeater and does not have error detection capability. In 
random multi-access methods collisions occur at the 
satellite, they must be propagated to the receiver which 
detects the error. Since the senders address may also be 
corrupted the best that can be done is to either send a 
message to all senders indicating error or wait for ACKs 
to identify the error. 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Figure B the difference in throughput between the 
centralized server and Slotted Aloha (long dash), and the 
difference in throughput between the Centralized server 
and the Aloha system. 
On the other hand the centralized server served by land 
lines should use small control packets at low telephone 
speeds, which can accomplish setups in 10s rather than 
hundreds of milliseconds, substantially reducing the 1 . 5 ~  
round-trip time common for setting up a TCP/IP session. 
These arguments leads to the conclusion that TCP 
spoofing by using ground lines can be effective in 
improving multi-access throughput and may have 
beneficial impact on delay. The impact on delay is felt in 
two ways. The first is by the improved throughput and 
the reduction in packet retransmission. The second is the 
reduce time required to set up the satellite for packet 
transmission. 
There is another substantial benefit and that is the 
overhead required to set up for satellite transmission is 
done on low bandwidthflow cost resources and the 
satellites is reserved for the transmission of resource 
intensive files. 
For example say we want to use a 75 MHz transponder to send 
a large file at rates consistent with OC-3 (155Mbps). The 
lease of such a transponder for a year is on the order of 2 
million dollars. A file of approximately 20 Megabytes will 
cost 6 cents to transmit. While the lease cost will appear 
prohibitive to most medical providers, the pennies per second 
will not. Transmitting the same file size at 56Kbps at the 
common long distance rate of 6 cents per minute will cost 36 
cents. So. a satellite invokes an increase in cost of two orders 
of magnitude, but the corresponding decrease in time is 3 
orders of magnitude, reducing overall cost to the user. Of 
course such savings will quickly disappear if users are paying 
for dead time or unnecessary overhead. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Multi-media in telemedicine requires large bandwidths. For 
modem usage the OC-3 (155Mbps) and OC-12 (622 Mbps) 
rates will provide foreseeable bandwidth growth, but most 
important, reduced transmission delay. 
It seems clear that satellites must provide the infrastructure for 
such rates, particularly since the telephone and cable 
companies will most likely not do so. Terrestrial providers 
have little incentive to pursue those installations: there is less 
sharing since population density will be low, the providers 
may not recover installation costs sufficiently rapidly, and the 
booming demand for bandwidth competes for scarce 
installation resources. 
The primary care stations will each require access to the 
satellite. Each ground stations has easy access to low speed 
ground lines. The lower bandwidths of these lines can support 
satellite scheduling, for substantially improved throughput. 
Initial analysis shows that satellite providers need to pursue an 
on demand business model. Such a model will provide a cost 
based reimbursement mechanism. 
REFEWNCES 
[l] Gordon Bell and Jim Gemmel, CACM 39(7):55-61, July 
1996. 
[2] H Tyrer, Specifications for a Satellite Based Wide Area 
Network, Biomedical Sciences Instrumentation Vol 35, paper 
99-019 pages 111-116, Instrument Society Of America, Res. 
Trgl. Pk, NC, 1999. 
[3] IF Akyildiz and SH JeongJEEE Comm Mag, July, 1997 
146 
[4] JE Cabral and Y Kim, Multimedia Systems for 
Telemedicine and their Communications Requirements, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, pages 20-27, July 
1996. 
[5] STC Wong and HK Huang, Networked Multimedia 
for Medical Imaging, IEEE Multimedia, pgs 24-35, April- 
June 1997. 
[6] httr?:/lwwn.iritzlsnr.cotn/menu/technicn.httn (as of 
2/99) 
[7] httr,://l.OInnd.leic.nasa.eo\~/-tnallman/l~a~ers (as of 
2/99) Ongoing TCP Research Related to Satellites 
[8] D Bertsakas and R Gallager, Data Networks (2nd 
Edition) pages 277 to 282, Prentice Hall, 1992. 
Harry W. Tyrer is currently professor and associate 
chairman of the Computer Engineeriiig and Computer 
Science Department at the University of Missouri. He 
graduated from Duke University with a P1z.D. His area of 
specialization is computer network performance 
evaluation. He continues his interests in biomedical 
engineering, serving as a consultant to industly and 
government. He has published on biotechnology, 
instrumentation development, computer operating systems 
and networks. He has served as book editor and journal 
guest editor. 
147 
