Intelligent Maintenance Advisor for Turbine Engines 
Malcolm J. Ashby William J. Scheuren 
Tactical Technology Office Advanced Control Systems 
GE Aircraft Engines DARPA 
1 Neumann Way 
Evendale, Ohio Arlington, VA 
malcom.ashby @ae.ge.com wscheuren @ darpa.mil 
3701 N. Fairfax Drive 
5 13-243-001 3 703-696-232 1 
Abstract-Current gas turbine diagnostic and condition 
monitoring systems generate information that, while 
accurate the majority of time, is produced without regard to 
(or access to in most cases) other sources of related 
information. This leads to ambiguity in troubleshooting, 
requires maintenance personnel to make uninformed 
decisions and results in erroneous component removals and 
high operating costs. 
This paper describes a program, to address this problem 
through the design and test of a condition-based Intelligent 
Maintenance Advisor for Turbine Engines (IMATE) 
system. This system integrates sensor and model data from 
various diagnostic, prognostic and usage sources with 
information fusion algorithms to assess engine condition. 
A more focused maintenance recommendation can then be 
made based upon all available information rather than 
several independent and potentially conflicting sources. 
The program demonstrates a dual use capability by 
conducting demonstration testing on both a commercial and 
a military engine. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. NOMENCLATURE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. TECHNICAL APPROACH 
4. HARDWARE CONFIGWATIONS 
5. SOFTWARE FUNCTIONALITY 
6. TEST PLANS AND RESULTS 
7. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
8. REFERENCES 
CLM 
DEC 
EMSC 
FAA 
FADEC 
FCC 
GEAE 
GECRD 
GDATS 
GDL 
IFM 
JSF 
1. NOMENCLATURE 
Component Level Model 
Digital Engine Control 
Engine Monitoring System Computer 
Federal Aviation Authority 
Full Authority Digital Engine Control 
Federal Communications Commission 
General Electric Aircraft Engines 
GE Corporate Research & Dev. 
General Dynamics Adv. Tech. Sys. 
Ground Data Link 
Information Fusion Module 
Joint Strike Fighter 
LMCS 
MEMS 
NASA 
O&S 
ONR 
OST 
PHM 
PSU-ARL 
USAF 
VME 
Lockheed Martin Control Systems 
Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems 
National Aeronautics & Space Admin. 
Operation and Service 
Office of Naval Research 
Oceana Sensor Technology 
Prognostics and Health Management 
Penn State Univ - App. Research Lab. 
United States Air Force 
VERSAmodule Eurocard 
2. INTRODUCTION 
Commercial Airlines, NASA, USAF Air Combat 
Command, ONR and other studies report high maintenance 
burden due to inadequate diagnostics tools and time 
scheduled maintenance practices. The feedback from 
engine operation and maintenance personnel suggests that 
lack of a reliable and accurate diagnostic/prognostic system 
not only increases O&S costs but also increases turnaround 
time and leads to increased frustration. The lack of real- 
time diagnostic capability to identify and isolate the root 
cause of a problem results in multiple component removals. 
This means increased diagnostic time and increased 
inventory and component test time. 
Military and commercial customers are therefore 
demanding improved diagnostics and prognostics in order 
to enhance safety while at the same time reducing the 
maintenance and logistics burdens associated with current 
systems. The next generation of military aircraft, such as 
the JSF, will require onboard intelligence in a PHM system 
to support a logistics system that will be proactive instead 
of reactive. 
The IMATE program has addressed these needs and 
concerns by the application of technology in four specific 
areas: 
1. Enhancement of existing techniques: doing more 
with what we already have. Current engine 
monitoring systems have access to significant data 
sources but do not necessarily extract all available 
information from the data. The primary benefit of 
addressing this area is that of a relatively low 
implementation cost in a product offering. 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
21 1 
2. Evaluation and maturation of advanced sensing 
systems: wireless MEMS vibration measurement 
and processing. This particular sensing 
technology, although currently immature from a 
turbine product perspective, especially due to the 
high operating temperatures, offers the potential 
for enhanced turbo-machinery prognostics without 
an accompanying weight penalty. 
PSU-ARL 
GD ATS 
Harris (sub to GEAE) 
3. Generation of information from virtual sensors: 
use of a high fidelity real-time engine model to 
provide a wealth of gas path and performance 
related information. These data are then available 
for multiple uses such as model-based diagnostics, 
trending, and component life usage. 
Vibration algorithms 
Ground station software Ground station software 
IMATE computer 
4. Information fusion: combining all available 
sources of information to provide intelligent 
maintenance advice. The major benefits of this 
type of tool is a reduction in today’s maintenance 
data burden coupled with a significant 
improvement in output accuracy, both key features 
of tomorrow’s proactive logistics. 
The IMATE program approach was to demonstrate dual use 
capability by maturing and demonstrating hardware and 
software for both a military engine and a commercial 
engine application. The long-term goal is to be able to 
easily adapt IMATE hardware and software functionality to 
support a variety of models within an engine family as well 
as multiple turbine engine applications such as the JSF, 
marine gas turbine engines, and commercial airliners. 
The dual use nature of the IMATE program also applied to 
the funding structure, with cost sharing between 
govemment (primarily the JSF Program Office) and an 
industry team. The members and responsibilities of the 
industry team that executed the program are summarized in 
Table 1. 
The commercial application of IMATE was developed for 
the CFM56-7 engine. This engine is the newest production 
model of the CFM56 series used on the Boeing 737 aircraft. 
This engine model was selected because of the availability 
of the enhanced data set provided by the FADEC and the 
availability of engine test assets, consistent with the 
IMATE program schedule. 
The selected engine for demonstrating a military 
application of IMATE was the F110-GE-129. This engine 
is used to power the F-16 Fighting Falcon, and like the JSF, 
is a single engine application. The F110-GE-129 has a 
DEC that communicates with an aircraft mounted Engine 
Monitoring System Computer. These two devices provide 
$a rich source of data for the IMATE system. 
3. TECHNICAL APPROACH 
The IMATE system utilizes a modular hardwarehoftware 
design. The system automates data acquisition, analysis 
and trending functions to minimize manual intervention and 
interpretation. Thus diagnostic and maintenance 
information quality is improved. 
To minimize program costs and maintain flexibility during 
development and test, existing assets or commercially 
available data processing and storage hardware modules 
were employed in off-engine packaging. Additionally, 
product engine controller output data was utilized; i.e. no 
changes to the controller intemal functionality or data 
transmission content were made. 
The controller data is the primary source of data for the 
system and is received on a real-time basis by an IMATE 
computer that executes the real-time engine model and the 
advanced diagnostic algorithms. These algorithms utilize 
the input data to enhance existing information content by 
quantifying its qualityhtability and generating new forms of 
information such as engine trend status and model-based 
diagnostics to provide redundancy. 
The system addresses engine external component status 
such as C & A items, and intemal components such as the 
fan, compressor, high and low pressure turbines, bearings 
etc. Information associated with engine usage, plus the 
health and performance of the plant are all available to be 
fused to form a more reliable output product for 
maintenance support than would be otherwise available. 
Table 1 IMATE Team and Responsibilities 
I Team Member I Military IMATE Responsibility I Commercial IMATE Responsibility I 
GEAE 
GECRD I Algorithms I Algorithms, H/S integration 
1 Team lead, algorithms, testing 1 Team lead, algorithms, testing 
LMCS 
OST I MEMS sensor svstem 
1 IMATE computer, H/S integration 
21 2 
To support development activities and system testing, the 
overall engine and IMATE diagnostic/prognostic status is 
displayed on a local ground station during operation. A 
memory transfer is accomplished on a post test basis, for 
subsequent analysis and archival purposes. 
For demonstration purposes all of the advanced algorithms 
were executed in a single computer, however in product 
applications, physical constraints and resource capabilities 
will influence architecture. While most features can be 
expected to be available on-board the aircraft, some are 
likely to be implemented in a companion ground 
information system, with access to historical data and 
knowledge generated from service experience. 
4. HARDWARE CONFIGURATIONS 
Commercial Application 
The computational resources for the commercial application 
utilized a product developed by the Harris Corporation for 
the commercial airline industry called the Ground Data 
Link (GDL). This system was developed by Harris as part 
of a FAA initiative to provide an infrastructure to aid 
continued improvements in flight safety in the commercial 
airline industry. 
For the IMATE program, the airborne unit of the GDL was 
upgraded to increase processing power and mass memory, 
plus the addition of an ARINC 429 card for receiving data 
from the engine controller. This hardware also incorporates 
a low power unlicensed FCC Part 15 spread spectrum 
wireless data link which is used to transfer system status 
data during IMATE operation as well as the bulk memory 
data transfer, post-test. The overall system configuration 
for the commercial application is illustrated in Figure 1. 
Figure 1 System Configuration for Commercial IMATE 
Military Application A wireless vibration MEMS system was developed for the - _ _  
military IMATE application only. Four external sites on 
node - the front frame, the fan frame, the turbine rear frame 
and the accessory gearbox. 
For the application Of Martin the F11O engine were selected for application of a MEMS 
Control Systems, provided a general-purpose computer 
specifically designed to meet the real-time requirements of 
the system. This unit consisted of a portable VME chassis 
with four populated cards for handling inputloutput 
processing, central processing, a bulk memory module and 
a MEMS vibration processor. 
Each node comprised up to 3 accelerometers and 3 
temperature sensors plus an associated remote 
communications unit. The latter device samples the data on 
command and incorporates a RF transceiver for 
communicating with the IMATE computer. During steady 
state engine operation, the sensor data is digitally sampled 
over a 2-second period. The raw data is then wirelessly 
transmitted to the IMATE computer where it is received 
and post processed. 
Primary interfaces for this unit was Mil-Std-1553 for 
receiving data from the engine controller and ethemet for 
communicating with the test ground station. The overall 
system configuration for the military application is 
illustrated in Figure 2. 
21 3 
MEMS Vibration 
+ MEMS Processor 
System Computer 
Figure 2 System Configuration for Military IMATE 
In future versions of the MEMS sensor, the data will be 
reduced at the sensor level resulting in higher level 
information being transmitted across the RF link. This will 
greatly reduce the power requirements of the sensor and 
provide an archive and configuration control capability in 
the sensor. 
4. SOFIWAFE FUNCTIONALITY 
The IMATE Software was implemented in a highly modular 
form. The basic functionality includes input signal 
validation, a real-time aerothermal engine model, model- 
based Reasoners, on-line trending, life usage monitoring 
and information fusion. The overall functional architecture 
is illustrated Figure 3. 
Throttle 
Environmental Inputs I Quality Estimator I I I I + JI 
Sensors Input Virtual 
FADEC Status Processing bensors Engine Model (CLM) 
MEMS 
Sensors -
I Throttle, Environmeit Inputs 
I Monitor 
I 
....* Information Fusion 4 
.*.* 
...* 
On-Line Trending 
..... ..” Model-Based Reasoners ...- 
*. 
I ........................ 
I- 
I MATE Test Interface 
Figure 3 MATE Functional Architecture. 
Intermittence Tracking When problems occur they are generally assumed to be 
permanent, however field experience has produced 
numerous occasions of intermittent anomalies. To address 
this, algorithms were developed that quantify the time 
domain properties of the sensor and code status behavior 
The FADEC incorporates significant reasoning logic, 
related to sensor selection, actuator and dynamic control 
loop functionality. The resulting selection status and 
anomaly codes from this logic are available to IMATE. 
21 4 
during engine operation, to identify and quantify transient 
and intermittent conditions. 
Real Time Engine Model and Quality Estimator 
The engine CLM and associated quality estimator forms the 
core resource to enable model-based diagnostics, model- 
based trending and on-line life usage functions. The CLM 
and quality estimators are very similar in concept for both 
commercial and military applications but differ at the 
structural level due to the physical differences between the 
engine types and the installed sensor suite. 
The CLM is so called because all major components in the 
engine (fan, compressor, combustor, turbines, ducts, and 
nozzle) are individually modeled and assembled together. 
This model is designed to be a fast running transient engine 
cycle representation, with realistic sensitivities to flight 
conditions, control variable inputs and bleed levels. The 
CLM is designed to match a nominal engine given the 
appropriate inputs (environmental sensors, actuators, and 
component quality). 
Due to variations in sensor errors and engine component 
quality or deterioration levels, the model values will not be 
accurate for all engines in a fleet. To improve these values 
and hence closely match any specific engine a quality 
estimator is used. The quality estimator quantifies the 
differences between the nominal model and the specific 
engine so that selected model parameters can be adjusted to 
improve the matching. 
Model-Based Diagnostic Reasoners 
CLM and sensor information is used to identify changes in 
engine performance and relate these changes to specific 
engine hardware, such as gas path components, bleed duct 
leakage, geometry misrigging, etc. Anomaly identification 
techniques employed in IMATE are based upon two 
complimentary uses of the data available to the system. 
The first approach was to use absolute values of engine 
sensor and model data and classify the anomaly in a neural 
net. This technique does not use any prior information and 
can therefore identify pre-existing problems, however 
normal fleet variations in sensor inputs due to error and 
engine quality can be similar to faulted levels and can 
degrade classification performance. 
The other approach involved the computation of differences 
between engine sensors and equivalent model values. 
These deltas were then evaluated at specific fight 
conditions by linear regressors to provide anomaly 
classification. This technique is largely immune to engine 
sensor and quality differences but since deltas are used, pre- 
existing faults cannot be identified. A variation of this delta 
approach was also incorporated, comparing the quality 
estimator adjustments required at the beginning of a flight 
with those at the end. The output of each approach during 
operation includes the identification of each anomaly and 
an associated confidence level. 
On-Line Trending 
Current trending approaches are generally limited to 
specific sensors and the approach is confined to ground- 
based implementations that are invoked post flight, 
typically with significant time delays. 
The IMATE program incorporates algorithms that screen 
trend data during flight, automating the current process and 
removing the delays inherent in post flight processing. 
With the availability of the CLM, the traditional trended 
sensor set is augmented with virtual sensors and other 
model-based parameters. 
Life Usage Monitoring 
The accurate tracking of engine usage and the computation 
of life used on life limited rotating parts is a key driver in 
reducing overall engine life cycle costs. Traditionally this 
tracking has used a simplistic cycle counting scheme in 
order to approximate the key features of the mission profile. 
For the IMATE program a new approach that utilizes CLM 
data was incorporated to accurately compute engine life 
usage, using a two step process. Step one involves 
identifying operating conditions or transients that generate 
high stresses in the engine rotating components. This is 
accomplished by use of a conditional rate-gate algorithm. 
This algorithm identifies when CLM data is to be stored. 
Step two is to calculate life used based upon the stresshime 
profiles experienced during the conditions identified in step 
one. The latter step is a post tesvflight process, utilizing 
existing life assessment computer programs. 
MEMS Vibration Processing 
This processing uses advanced algorithms for feature 
extraction, data fusion, fault classification and health 
prognostics targeted at the main line bearings and primary 
gear drives. The megabytes of raw data received by the 
IMATE computer are reduced to 11 component (bearing 
and gear related) health parameters. Additionally, the 
synchronous fan and core vibration levels are extracted and 
scaled for use in the information fusion module. 
Iilformation Fusion 
A multi-layer IFM was designed for the IMATE program. 
The function of the IFM is to combine all relevant Reasoner 
and other on-board information, including current engine 
status, operational conditions and recent history, to produce 
a fault diagnosis (with an associated confidence value) in 
real-time that is more reliable and robust than any of the 
individual sources of information. 
The IFM must account for any discontinuities in the 
availability of diagnostic information in terms of flight 
conditions, timing and asynchronous operation. The IFM 
21 5 
must also account for the varying degrees of fault coverage 
and a-priori reliability of each individual source of 
information as well as resolve conflicts in the information 
provided. 
In particular, the hierarchical approach attempts to 
successively refine the fused diagnostic output by either 
discounting or reinforcing the contributions of the 
individual diagnostic tools by observing time of occurrence, 
resolving conflicts, aggregating information, integrating 
supportive evidence, etc. The multiple layer design 
approach provides a modular implementation of these key 
functional requirements. Further detail on the IFWI 
approach has been documented separately [ 1 3. 
5.  TEST PLANS AND RESULTS 
Test Plans and Procedures 
Verification of the IMATE functionality and validation of 
system performance was planned as a phased effort. A 
simulation test environment was developed that included 
the capability to inject engine performance faults, sensor 
errors and engine deterioration effects. The capability to 
invoke the overall simulation with flight profile test vectors 
was also provided. The latter was considered especially 
important since it enabled actual flight data to be used in 
the testing. 
As individual module designs were completed, simulation 
tests were completed and performance quantified. At the 
hardwarehoftware integration phase the test vectors from 
the final simulation tests were repeated on the application 
hardware and the associated outputs compared. The next 
phase of testing included active communications with the 
FADEC on a dry bench environment. In this test, the 
FADEC is connected to an engine simulation in a closed 
loop control mode. Testing in the dry bench included 
flying different missions on “engines” with various quality 
levels, injection of faults etc. This test phase allowed 
checkout of the IMATE system from input data through to 
output data display on the ground site computer. 
The final test phase will be to demonstrate IMATE 
functionality during ground engine test. A number of fault 
conditions will be introduced during this testing, however 
these faults will be limited to those having benign effects on 
engine operation, such as bleed leakage, stator mis-rigging 
etc. The other important objective of engine testing is to 
ensure that the IMATE does not produce false positives 
during normal engine operation. This testing is planned for 
the first half of 2000. 
Preliminary Test Results 
Simulation testing of IMATE functions has been completed 
and overall system performance is encouraging. A large 
number of engines with different component qualities, 
deterioration levels, and sensor errors were simulated at two 
‘or more operating regimes, such as takeoff and cruise. 
Each flight regime was defined in terms of a range of 
altitude and mach (e.g. 20k-30k feet, 0.6-0.9 MN), and 
included ambient temperature variations to encompass hot 
day and cold day operation. These engines were initially 
run unfaulted and then rerun with specific gas path faults of 
random magnitude introduced. Typically the range of fault 
magnitude was limited to a 1.0%-3.0% change in 
component efficiency and/or flow. 
To illustrate the performance of the individual model-based 
Reasoners, a matrix presentation of input versus response is 
used and is shown in Figure 4. Quantities expressed on the 
diagonal are correct classifications. Remaining quantities 
displayed either are false positives (no fault input but a fault 
output - top row), mis-classifications (wrong fault output - 
off diagonal in fault rows) or false negatives (fault input but 
110 output - no fault column). 
I Estimated Engine Condition 
Actual 
No Fault I Engine Fault 1 
Fault N 
nal element values 
% correct detection 
Diagonal element values 
represent % correct detection 
& classification. 
Figure 4 Matrix View of Reasoner Performance 
21 6 
An example of simulation test results (for the Delta Quality 
Estimation Reasoner approach) is presented in this matrix 
format as Figure 5. Results for the detection and negative rate is based upon the “faulted” test vectors only. 
classification of the four primary gas path faults are shown. 
Reasoner performance is summarized at the bottom of this 
chart. It is to be noted that the false positive rate is based 
upon the “no fault” test vectors only. Similarly, the false 
Comp Fault 
HPT Fault 
LPT Fault 
123 0 1291 3 0 
99 0 2 1311 0 
1 00 0 0 0 1293 
Figure 5 Example of Reasoner Performance - Delta Quality Estimator Approach 
1.1% 
A comparison of the performance for all three Reasoners correct classification. This is consistent with the fact that 
implemented in IMATE is included as Table 2. Overall this is more susceptible to variations in engine quality, 
performance of the inflight delta and delta quality sensor errors, etc. It is to be noted that the false positive 
estimation approaches are similar, with correct rates are relatively high. Even the 0.5% false positive rate 
classification in the 92 - 97% range. The absolute parameter for the inflight delta approach would be considered 
approach is significantly lower, at approximately 70% unacceptable in a product application. 
False Positives I No Fault Test Cases Only 
Table 2 Model-Based Reasoner Performance Summary - Simulation Test 
7.18% 
0.09% 
92.73% 
False Negatives 
Correct Classification 
Faulted Test Cases Only 
Misclassified Faulted Test Cases Only 
Faulted Test Cases Only 
Individual tool performance in the IMATE program is 
however not as critical, since the outputs from the tools are 
used collectively in the information fusion module. These 
simulation test results were used to establish a priori 
reliability levels of each of these tools for use by the IFM. 
The classification confidence from each tool is scaled to a 
0.0 - 1.0 range, where a value near 0.0 corresponds to low 
fault confidence and a value near 1.0 indicates a high fault 
confidence. By imposing a common output format on the 
diagnostic tools - fault classification, confidence, and a 
priori reliability, the outputs from these dissimilar tools can 
be easily accommodated by the IFM. 
The IFM performance has also been simulation tested with 0 0.5 confidence 1 
tool inputs varied using a Monte Carlo approach. 
80% of the data between 0.5 and 1 
20% of the data between 0 and 0.5 
cn 
0 cn
ld 
0 
The 
Reasoner Approach 
Delta Quality Estimation 
lnflight Delta 
Absolute Parameter 
distribution of diagnosiic tool outputs was* assumed to 
follow a Gaussian distribution per Figure 6. Figure 6: Distribution used for IFM simulation test 
Correct False False 
Mis-Classified Negatives Positives 
92.73% 0.09% 7.18% 1.1% 
97.24% 0.18% 2.57% 0.5% 
71.31% 12.72% 5.20% 8.3% 
21 7 
That is, for a priori reliability of correct classification, the 
corresponding percentage of faults where simulated in the 
0.5 - 1.0 range centered around 1. For example, if a tool 
has a recognition rate of 80% for a particular fault, then a 
distribution would be set such that 80% of the faults are 
simulated in the 0.5-1.0 range with a center around 
confidence 1. The remaining 20% fall into the range from 0 
to 0.5. 
Values for the reliabilities were taken from the confusion 
matrices for each tool. Subsequent simulation runs allowed 
coverage of the entire range of fault recognition including 
false positives and false negatives according to actual 
performance. In order to provide a benchmark to compare 
IFM performance against, a fusion approach using 
“maximum wins” strategy where the input was scaled by 
the a priori reliability was selected. Relative to this 
benchmark and assuming that all individual diagnostic tools 
expressed their opinion synchronously, the IMATE IFM 
produced significantly improved results compared to 
individual tool performance, in reduced false positives 
(0.01 %), false negatives (0.2%) and misclassifications 
(0.2 %) . 
6.  SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
An Intelligent Maintenance Advisor for Turbine Engines 
has been designed and implemented for both a military and 
a commercial aircraft engine application. This system 
integrates sensor and model data from various diagnostic, 
prognostic and usage sources with information fusion 
algorithms to provide a more accurate assessment of engine 
condition than available from any individual sources of 
information. The design has been accomplished in a highly 
modular form such that application to other engine models 
and gas turbine platforms can be readily achieved. 
Functional testing of the system elements has been 
successfully completed with dry bench and engine testing 
planned for completion in the first half of 2000. 
It is expected that future work will extend the real-time 
modeling aspects of IMATE to include oil, fuel, and 
starting subsystems with associated Reasoners being 
developed to identify anomalous conditions. The new 
information generated can then be made available to expand 
the current IFM functionality. 
7. REFERENCES 
[ 1 ] “Diagnostic Information Fusion: Requirements 
Flowdown and Interface Issues” by Kai Goebel, Michael 
Krok, and Hunt Sutherland; 2000 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, Big Sky, Montana, USA 
21 8 
Malcolm J. Ashby is a Staff Engineer in Advanced Control 
Systems at General Electric Aircrajl Engines (GEAE). 
Since joining GEAE in 1980, he has been involved in all 
aspects of engine monitoring and diagnostics on both 
military and commercial aircraft engines. He was the lead 
engineer on the team that developed the Engine Monitoring 
System for  the Fl lO engine in the F-16 Fighting Falcon. 
This system irtcorporates on-board event ideiitijication, 
diagnostics, and operational usage tracking, supplemented 
by ground based trending and maintenance support 
software. Other accomplishments include the development 
of the Menu Mode maintenance software for  the CFM56-5C 
engine on the Airbus A340 aircraft and F414 engine 
maintenance software for  supporting the Navy's latest 
fighter aircraft -- F/A-lSE/F. Currently he is a focal point 
within the Controls Center of Excellence for  engine 
prognostics and health management and is the technical 
integrator for  the Intelligent Maintenance Advisor for 
Turbine Engines (IMATE) program. Mr. Ashby has a BS in 
Engineering Science from the University of Wanvick in 
England and is a member of the SAE E-32 Engine 
Condition Monitoring Committee. 
Dr. William J. Scheuren is an aerospace engineer at the 
Tactical Technology Oflce of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). He is the program 
manager for  the Agency's involvement in the Joint Strike 
Fighter (JSF) program, the Active Noise and Vibration 
Reduction Technology Program, the Affordable Multi- 
Missile Manufacturing Program, and the TSOO engine dual 
use program. At  the JSF program office he leads all JSF 
R&D activities directed toward aircraft Prognostics and 
Health Mariagement. He served 26 years in the Marine 
Corps where he gained extensive experience in research, 
development, testing, and acquisition of military weapon 
systems. He is a graduate of the Naval Engineering Test 
Pilot School and as a Military experimental and 
engineering test pilot he sewed as project director and pilot 
for  numerous experimerital and engineering test projects. 
His research and military operational piloting experience 
includes fighters, multi-engine transports, helicopters, 
seaplanes, gliders, and V/STOL aircraft. His operational 
career included serving as Commanding OfJicer of the first 
Marine Corps Harrier Squadron where he supervised 400 
ofJicers and enlisted personnel in operational test and 
evaluation of the Harrier. He also served numerous 
operational tours in fighter and attack squadrons including 
an extensive Viehiam Combat Tour. Having entered the 
service an enlisted Marine Aviation Cadet, he became a 
commissioned oficer and eventually achieved the rank of 
Colonel. Dr. Scheuren has a PhD in Applied Research 
from the University of Virginia. 
21 9 
