Neural Network System for Helicopter Rotor Smoothing 
Dariusz Wroblewski, Paul Grabill’ 
OFUNCON Corporation 
9363 Towne Centre Drive 
San Diego, CA 92121 
858-455-5530 
ilariusz @o~incon.corn 
John Berry, Robert Branhof 
Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898 
US Army AMCOM-AMRDEC 
Abstract - Helicopter Rotor Smoothing (Track and 
Balance) is a periodic maintenance task required to 
minimize rotor induced aircraft vibrations at the 
fundamental (once per revolution) rotor frequency. We have 
designed and implemented a general, neural network based 
software system for rotor smoothing. Neural networks 
provide non-parametric mappings between the spaces of 
adjustments and vibration measurements. In the network 
training process, these mappings are extracted from 
experimental data without any assumptions about their 
functional form. On the other hand, when the experimental 
data available for training is not complete, simulated data 
based on model dependencies (linear or other) may be also 
incorporated into the neural network model. The neural 
networks are easily updated (retrained) if new data becomes 
available thus allowing the system to evolve and mature in 
the course of its use. 
The customization of the system for helicopters of different 
types is facilitated by general-purpose software for 
application development, which includes preparation of 
flight data and neural network training. It is worth noting 
that the prototype applications developed up to date required 
relatively modest amount of flight data (20-30 flights). 
The neural network system has been applied to Apache 
(AH-64), Blackhawk (UH-60), and Kiowa Warrior (OH- 
58D) helicopters as part of the Vibration Management 
Enhancement Program (VMEP). Preliminary results are 
very encouraging. In the verification tests, we were able to 
shorten the smoothing time for AH-64, with all of the rotor 
smoothing procedures completed in 2 to 4 flights. In all 
cases, the neural network approach produced solutions with 
experimentally verified low vibration levels and small track 
split. The system has also demonstrated the ability to detect 
errors in implementation of the smoothing adjustments. 
Application to other types of helicopters is considered. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
INTRODUCTION 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT 
VERIFICATION TESTS 
CONCLUSIONS 
o€TIMJZED ROTOR SMOOTHING 
COMPARISON WITH LINEAR METHOD 
1. INTRODUCTION 
VMEP program, sponsored by the South Carolina Army 
National Guard and the US Army, aims to develop a 
helicopter Health and Usage Monitoring System (HUMS). 
The system includes advanced diagnostic algorithms for the 
prediction of failures in aircraft components such as 
engines, gearboxes, and drive train. One of the system 
capabilities is the automatic rotor smoothing (rotor track and 
balance) that uses an imbedded, onboard data acquisition 
and processing system. 
Even a slight imbalance of the helicopter rotor may lead to 
large vibration levels in the aircraft structure and associated 
premature failure of components. The rotor smoothing 
process typically involves installation of special purpose 
instrumentation and a series of maintenance test flights, in 
which the vibration data collection is followed by rotor 
adjustments. The adjustments usually involve changing the 
dynamic balance (weight moves) and rotor aerodynamics 
(pi!ch link adjustments and tab bends). The rotor 
adjustments are traditionally calculated with the use of a 
linear model, in which vibrational response of the helicopter 
to the rotor adjustments is represented by a set of (linear) 
response coefficients [l-41. This approach is an 
oversimplification of the actual system, as it does not take 
into account the possible non-linear effects. Usually, the 
accuracy with which the linear coefficients may be 
determined is no better than about 20% and in many cases it 
is much worse. Thus in practice, the linear rotor smoothing 
is usually accomplished in several test flights, with 
consecutive sets of adjustments converging on an acceptable 
solution with low measured vibrations. 
2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
We report on the development of general, non-linear 
approach to the rotor smoothing based on the neural 
network computational paradigm. 
Our rotor smoothing system provides an integrated solution 
to the problem. Two main parts of the system are: 
1. Development software for flight data analysis and 
construction of empirical models, 
2. Rotor smoothing algorithm, a part of VMEP HUMS 
software installed on a portable computer. 
0-7803-5846-5/00/$10.00  2000 IEEE 
- Presently at Intelligent Automation Corporation, San Diego, CA 
27 1 
3. APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT 
The general approach to the rotor smoothing problem is 
based on empirical models of aircraft response to the 
correction moves. Thus, an application to a particular 
aircraft type consists of two principal steps: 
1 .  Development of a database of flight data. 
2. Construction of parametric and neural network models, 
which are used by a generic rotor-smoothing algorithm. 
These models are constructed off-line and may be 
easily updated and/or expanded as the available 
knowledge base increases. 
3.1 Database development 
Development of a robust empirical model requires a large 
database of experimental measurements, which covers as 
much as possible the operational envelope of the aircraft. As 
we are modeling the aircraft response to rotor adjustments, 
the database must contain at least three types of information: 
vibration data before the correction, adjustment (correction) 
information, and vibration data after the correction. 
Generally, the initial data are collected in a series of 
dedicated maintenance test flights. Historical data, if 
available and deemed reliable, are also included. Dedicated 
maintenance test flights are expensive and thus it is 
important to design the test procedure that maximizes the 
content of resulting data set. This may be accomplished by 
using a sequence of flights and associated adjustment 
moves. By comparing all flights in the sequence and using 
the ‘effective’ adjustments (sum of all corrections made 
between two given flights), the number of available 
examples of aircraft response may be substantially 
increased: N(N-1)/2 flight pairs may be produced from a 
sequence of N flights. 
The typical test flight plan, which maximizes the usefulness 
of sequentially collected data, consists of 
0, One or two baseline flights. 
Flights with corrections of the first type (e.g., pitch 
link). Typically, a small correction is followed by a 
large and opposite correction, which is followed by a 
correction that effectively nulls the previous two (and 
returns the aircraft to its baseline state). The aircraft is 
flown and vibration data are collected after each 
adjustment. 
Flights with corrections of other types (e.g., weight, 
tabs) performed according to the above scheme. 
Small number of flights with mixed adjustments such as 
combinations of tab and pitch link moves. 
0 
3.2 Linear models 
The calculation of linear coefficients requires experimental 
(flight test) data with a single adjustment type (e.g., weight, 
pitch link, tab). The linear response coefficients are 
calculated by comparing the vibration data before and after 
the correction. The coefficients are determined for the 
fundamental harmonic of the rotor - higher harmonics do 
not show linear correlation with the correction magnitude. 
The linear response Coefficients, &,lo are defined as: 
where: A v , ~  is the change in measured vibrations for flight 
state j and sensor k, and Ai is the correction of type i (e.g., 
pitch link, weight, etc.). 
Calculation of linear coefficients provides an assessment of 
the statistical significance of the linearity assumption. 
‘Typically, the statistical error for the linear coefficients 
determined from a significant number of measurements is in 
the range of 20-30%. Often, for some flight states and 
diagnostic signals, the statistical uncertainty is much larger 
and there is no clear linear trend in the response data. 
It is worth noting that one of the sources of the poor 
accuracy of the linear approach is generally poor 
reproducibility of the vibration data. In the tests conducted 
for the Apache and Blackhawk helicopters the vibration data 
were acquired repeatedly during the same test flight or on 
subsequent flights (with no rotor adjustments between the 
flights). As shown in Figures 1 and 2, the variations in 
vibration levels for nominally identical flights may be 
substantial, of the order of 0.1-0.2 incldsecond (ips). This 
should be compared to the vibration level targets for a 
smooth aircraft, which are typically about 0.2 ips. The 
flight-to-flight variations may be due to the airframe 
vibrational modes (at the rotor fundamental frequency) that 
are weakly dependent or independent of the rotor 
adjustments but may depend on other aircraft parameters 
(e.g., gross weight). The use of neural network model may 
help in eliminating the airframe mode contribution, 
provided that relevant parameters are available for use in the 
model. 
3.3 Neural network models 
The advantage of neural network approach is that it provides 
a non-parametric model of the data [5 ] .  That is, no 
assumptions are made concerning functional form of the 
aircraft response to the correction moves. Also, the neural 
network paradigm provides an efficient alternative to the 
normally used least-squares fit method. The neural network 
learns the mappings between the adjustment and vibration 
spaces from the experimental data. As mentioned above, the 
drawback of this methodology, especially for the initial 
development, is that to provide robust mapping, the data 
used for training should cover essentially the whole 
operational space of the aircraft. This problem is alleviated 
with data collection during the system lifetime 
One of the functions of the VMEP HUMS system is to 
collect and archive the relevant data for the whole fleet of 
serviced helicopters. Thus, it is fully expected that the data 
requirement will be eventually met. For the initial 
development of neural network approach, the data 
requirement may be somewhat relaxed by building 
parametric models. The commonly used linear model is 
expected to be inaccurate at extremes, but it provides a 
reasonable first approximation. Other parametric models 
may be developed as needed. Such models are easily 
encompassed by the general neural network architecture 
through inclusion of model (simulated) data in the network 
training. In the limit, if only simulated data from linear 
model are used for training, the neural network will 
reproduce the linear model. Thus, the neural network 
models may range from purely empirical (no model data) to 
purely simulated (i.e., trained solely on the parametric 
model data). The use of general computing paradigm allows 
the user to refine the model (e.g., to include the non-linear 
effects) as relevant data becomes available. That is, as the 
system matures and more data becomes available, the 
content of model data may be changed in favor of empirical 
data. 
272 
4. OPTIMIZED ROTOR SMOOTHING 
The processing flow for the general, neural network rotor 
smoothing algorithm is shown in Figure 3. 
1 
a8 
as 
J 
$ 0 2  
C 
300 
's la 
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7  
06 
8- 
B w  
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7  
300 
200 
8 
i 
@ la 
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7  
Flight states: 1= FPlOO LAT, 2=Hover LAT, 3=60k VERT, 
4=80k VERT, 5=100k VERT, 6=120k VERT, 7=140k VERT 
Figure 1 Variations in the Vibration Data for Nominally 
Identical (Baseline) Flights for AH-64 helicopter. The 
graphs show the average (+), minimum (blue bar), and 
maximum (yellow bar) measured values - yellow band 
represents the difference between minimum and maximum 
values. Data from 4 flights were used to produce this graph. 
UH-60, tail #658 baseline flights 
0.2 
0.1 
1 2 3 4 5  
F l ia l  stale 
A+B phase (d-4 
A-E mapilude (ips) 
0.4  
0 2  
0.1 
0 
1 2 3 4 5  
FI@l state 
A-8 phase (deg) 
0 
1 2 3 4 5  
F W I  stale 
1 2 3 4 5  
F l i~ ts la te  
Flight states: 1 = FPG100,2 = Hover, 3 = 8OKts, 4 = 12OKts, 
5 = 145Kts 
Figure 2 As Figure 1 but for the UH-60 Blackhawk 
helicopter. 6 data sets were used to produce this graph. 
The rotor smoothing models used here are derived from a 
combination of experimental and model (linear 
approximation) data. This approach allows us to avoid the 
difficulties in training the neural networks in the absence of 
a comprehensive empirical database. In the prototype 
implementation described here, the neural networks for 
adjustment prediction were trained solely on the linear 
model data. The vibration prediction networks were trained 
mainly on experimental data with the model (simulated) 
data providing information only about the boundaries of the 
adjustment space. 
I 4 \  
Figure 3 Flow chart for the rotor-smoothing algorithm. 
The principal components of the algorithm are described 
below. 
4.1. Correction calculation. 
The vibration data are used to calculate the corrections that 
are required to smooth the aircraft rotor. This is 
accomplished by a series of neural networks, each 
evaluating the correction solution for a subset of moves. 
4.2 Vibration prediction. 
The expected vibration level (after the correction) is 
evaluated for each of the correction solutions. This is 
accomplished by a separate neural network, which provides 
the mapping from the adjustment space to the vibration 
space. The vibration predictions are obtained for all the test 
states that are considered relevant. 
It should be noted that the vibration prediction accuracy of 
the presently used models is not entirely satisfactory. For 
our test data, the typical RMS error for the vibration 
prediction is in the range of 0.1 ips, but the deviations for 
individual detectors and test states may be much larger and 
reach the levels of vibration limits for a smooth aircraft (0.2 
- 0.3 ips). Also, it appears obvious that the prediction 
uncertainties will increase with the number of correction 
moves and thus our approach has been to use as few moves 
as possible. Although our goal is to be able to smooth the 
helicopter rotor based on the data from only one test flight, 
it may be expected that due to the model uncertainties, more 
flights will be occasionally required. 
We have attempted to improve the accuracy of vibration 
prediction by constructing purely empirical models (without 
the linear simulated data). This study aimed at discovering a 
possible nonlinear correlation between adjustments, 
different vibration measurements, and the resulting change 
in vibrations. In addition to the adjustment information, 
these models included, as inputs to the neural network, the 
initial state vibration data (before adjustments). Our 
preliminary results indicate that the use of initial vibration 
data does not improve the vibration prediction accuracy. In 
fact, the neural network using only the adjustment 
273 
information performed somewhat better than the networks 
that also employed the vibration data. This is in agreement 
with the results of linear model analysis. Similar accuracy 
was obtained for networks using different harmonics and for 
networks using more than one harmonic. 
4.3 Track optinzization. 
The (complex) correction solution needs to be implemented 
as adjustment moves on particular blades (spread out or 
detailed solution). In general, there is a large number of 
implementations corresponding to a given correction 
solution. The detailed (implemented) solution is selected to 
minimize the predicted track split. Presently, a linear model 
is used for track split prediction but more advanced models 
may be used if found useful. It should be noted that the 
main objective is to minimize rotor vibration. Minimal track 
split is a secondary goal. 
4.4 Solution Selection. 
The solutions are ranked based on: 
A fitness function is formed using the above parameters and 
the optimal solution (with maximum fitness) is presented to 
the user. In an interactive mode, the user has a choice to 
limit the number of correction moves, and to use different 
selection criteria (e.g., the solution with the smaller number 
of moves that is predicted to bring the vibration levels to 
within the prescribed targets). 
So far the optimal solution has been formed by equally 
weighting all of the traditionally used (Aviation Vibration 
Analyzer) flight conditions for the aircraft. An extension to 
this program will be to determine a weighting of flight 
conditions (or even addition or deletion of flight conditions) 
that has the best merit. Merit will be determined based on 
suitability for both pilotlpassenger comfort and mechanical 
degradation over the usage spectrum. 
4.5 Consistency check. 
This module detects gross errors in correction 
implementation. The vibration changes for the latest flights 
are compared with the adjustment information recorded by 
the operator. A large discrepancy between the measured 
change in vibrations and that predicted from the adjustment 
moves indicates that either the correction moves were 
recorded incorrectly or an error was made in the 
implementation of correction moves. Persistent 
inconsistency between the recorded corrections and 
measured vibration changes indicates a mechanical fault. 
Our experience with recently collected AH-64 test data 
indicates that mistakes are often made in one or both of 
these steps. We examined data for 23 flight tests conducted 
in the beginning of 1999 and found strong evidence that the 
correction moves were incorrectly implemented (or 
recorded) in five of these tests (error rate of about 
20 percent!). The test crew subsequently confirmed one of 
the errors as a pitch link move that was put on the opposite 
blade. In three other cases, we found that the corrections 
were probably implemented with the opposite sign (or on 
The level of predicted vibrations (which should be 
minimized). 
The complexity of the adjustment (single moves are 
preferable to multiple moves). 
The predicted track split (which should be minimized). 
the opposite blades - these two errors have the same effect). 
In one case, the corrections were most probably 
implemented on perpendicular blades (blade 1 instead of 
blade 2, and blade 3 instead of blade 4). Thus, the 
consistency check function will be extremely important in a 
fielded system. Detection of possible implementation errors 
will alleviate the frustration due to the unexpected response 
of the aircraft. 
5. VERIFICATION TESTS 
The rotor smoothing system was implemented for Apache 
,4H-64, Blackhawk UH-60 and Kiowa Warrior OH-58D 
helicopters. Applications to other helicopter types are 
considered. In this Section, we present a summary of 
verification tests for Apache AH-64.helicopter. 
The system has been employed in routine maintenance 
]procedures for rotor track and balance at South Carolina 
.Army National Guard in Columbia, SC. In the initial stages 
(of system development, the vibration data collected during 
the test flights were transmitted via Internet to ORINCON, 
where the solutions were calculated and recommended set 
d correction moves was transmitted back to the 
maintenance crew. Later, we implemented the system on a 
portable computer for direct use by the maintenance 
personnel. 
Five adjustment types are used in smoothing of AH-64 main 
rotor: weight (W), pitch link length (PL), tab pockets 4-10 
(T4), tab pockets 6-10 (T6), and tab pockets 8-10 (TS). For 
the flight test, the vibration measurements are taken at 7 
flight states: FPGlOO (flat pitch on ground), hover, and 
forward flight at 60,80, 100, 120 and 140 knots (60K, 80K, 
100K, 120K, 140K). The vibration detectors are denoted as 
LAT (lateral) and VERT (vertical) and measure the cabin 
vibration levels. 
The AH-64 smoothing procedure is performed in three steps 
(test modes): 
Ground, with data collected at FPGlOO (the initial pitch 
link adjustment, only), 
Initial, with data collected at FPGlOO and Hover 
(weight and pitch link adjustments), and 
Flight, with data collected at all flight states (all 
adjustments). 
Majority of our verification tests was conducted for the 
flight test mode, where it is expected that preliminary pitch 
link and weight adjustments have been performed. 
However, on few occasions we were able to conduct the 
smoothing without the first two steps, even after major 
maintenance tasks such as blade replacement. 
The rotor smoothing system was demonstrated in eight 
actual smoothing procedures of the AH-64 helicopter at the 
South Carolina Army National Guard (SCANG) in 
Columbia, SC. In all tests, the aircraft rotor was smoothed 
in two to four test flights (i.e., one to three set of 
adjustments). Two aircraft required only one adjustment set 
(two test flights), two aircraft required two adjustment sets 
(three test flights), and four aircraft required three 
adjustment sets (four test flights). Thus, on average, the 
smoothing procedure required about two adjustment sets 
(three flights). Some of these tests were conducted during 
the development of the smoothing algorithm. 
274 
As an example, we show the details of the smoothing 
procedure for Apache AH-64 aircraft (tail # 460) performed 
at SCNARG base in Columbia, SC - cf. Table 1 and 
Figure 4. This aircraft was smoothed in 3 flights with two 
sets of adjustments. 
Table 1 Main rotor adjustments for the smoothing 
procedure for Apache #460 at SCANG 
May-99 Tab 6-10 (blade 1): +2.0 deg 
Tab 6-10 (blade 4): +2.5 de 
, T 
I May-99 I Pitch Link (blade 4): -1.25 flats Tab 8-10 (blade 3): +1.5 deg Tab 8-10 (blade 4): -1.0 dee 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Flight slate, FPGlM)->140k 
LAT magnitude 
0 
2 3 4 5 6 7 
FligM slate, FPGlW>140k 
Figure 4 Vibration magnitudes for Apache tail #460 
smoothing procedure. The data is shown for the first (o), 
second (x), and third (I) flight in the series. 
6 .  COMPARISON WITH THE LINEAR METHOD 
It is interesting to compare the performance of the neural 
network based algorithm with that of the traditional least- 
squares linear algorithm. In the course of our verification 
tests we found that the neural network system generally 
produced more accurate solutions than the least-squares 
method. That is, the neural network model produced 
solutions with smaller number of moves and lower predicted 
vibrations. 
As an example we show a comparison between the solutions 
produced by the neural network system and the least- 
squares method for the Apache tail# 460 smoothing 
procedure. Table 2 shows the linear and neural network 
solutions for the second flight in the series and Figure 5 
shows the predicted vibration levels obtained with the two 
methods and the vibration magnitudes measured for the last 
(third) flight in the series. 
Table 2 Correction solution for AH-64 #460 obtained with 
the linear least-squares method and with the neural network 
algorithm. B 1-4 denotes blades 1 through 4. 
Linear I NeuralNetwork 1 
0.4 
v) 
Q .- 
0.2 
0 
Figure 5 Predicted vibration levels for the solutions 
obtained with the least-squares method (diamonds)) and the 
neural network algorithm (circles) are compared with the 
vibrations measured after the neural network corrections 
were implemented (squares). 
We note that the linear method produces a solution with 
larger number of correction moves and higher predicted 
vibration levels. Comparison between the network predicted 
vibration magnitudes and the actually measured values 
shows good prediction capabilities of the neural network 
model. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
We developed a general, neural network-based approach to 
the problem of helicopter rotor smoothing. The modular 
software may be adopted to different aircraft types and to 
changing test conditions. Also, as the smoothing data is 
collected and archived, the neural network models may be 
updated and improved. 
We note that the AH-64 and UH-60 data shows large 
variations in the vibration measurements between nominally 
identical flights. Further study will be required to identify 
and quantify the sources of these variations. However, the 
linear approximation results in only about 20-30 percent 
accuracy in the prediction of aircraft response to a single 
correction move. We attempted to obtain estimates of non- 
linear effects such as dependence of the vibration change on 
the correction magnitude or cross coupling between 
different types of corrections. These effects seem to be 
negligible, i.e., smaller than the inaccuracy of the linear 
approximation. 
With the neural network function approximator, one can 
construct an empirical model of the helicopter response 
without any assumptions about the functional form of the 
275 
response. Such a model may include different sources of 
experimental data (sensors, aircraft configuration, etc.), and 
is capable of finding dependencies between the aircraft 
parameters and the vibrational response that are not obvious 
from parametric analysis. 
In the initial applications of the neural network-based 
system, we observed improvement in performance with 
respect to both the traditional (linear least-squares) scheme. 
In particular, the neural network generally produced 
solutions that appear more accurate than those obtained by 
the least-squares method, i.e., solutions with a smaller 
number of moves and lower predicted vibrations. The neural 
network system was demonstrated in a limited number of 
verification tests, where the AH-64 helicopter was smoothed 
using a smaller number of the adjustment moves than 
recommended by the linear system. 
It should be pointed out that the observed uncertainties in 
the response coefficients and inaccuracies of the neural 
network predictions indicate that the data utilized by these 
models still does not fully describe the aircraft behavior. As 
more helicopter data are acquired in the future stages of the 
VMEP program, we should be able to improve the 
prediction accuracy. 
REFERENCES 
[l] T. P. Goodman, “A Least-Squares Method for Computing 
Balance Corrections,” Joumal of Engineering for Industry B 86, 
273-279, August 1964. 
[2] A. Rosen and R. Ben-Ari, “Mathematical Modeling of a 
Helicopter Rotor Track and Balance: Theory,” Jounzal of Sound 
and Vibration 200, 589-603, 1997. 
[3] R. Ben-Ari and A. Rosen , “Mathematical Modeling of a 
Helicopter Rotor Track and Balance: Results,” Joumal of Sound 
and Vibration 200, 605-620, 1997. 
[4] Howard J. Taitel, Kourosh Danai, and David Gauthier, 
“Helicopter Track and Balance with Artificial Neural Nets,” 
Transactions of the ASME 11 7,226-231, June 1995. 
[5] Christopher M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattenz 
Recognition, Oxford Clarendon Press, 1995. 
Dariusz Wroblewski is a Senior 
Principal Engineer at Orincon 
Corporation, San Diego. He received 
his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering 
from the University of Wisconsin- 
Madison. His recent research interests 
are in application of artificial 
intelligence methods to data modeling 
and analysis, including problems in 
machine health monitoring, magnetic 
confinement of high-temperature plasma, medical devices 
automation, and bio-informatics. 
Paul Grabill received his B.S. degree 
in mechanical engineering in 1986 at 
the University of Cincinnati. He 
worked for 10 years at General Electric 
Aircraft Engines as a dynamics 
engineer where he was involved in gas 
turbine vibration testing, engine 
balancing, and system dynamic 
analysis. He received his M.S. degree in 
mechanical engineering in 1992 at the 
University of Cincinnati where he was sponsored by the 
NASA Health Monitoring Center and UC’s Structural 
Dynamics Research Laboratory. He is currently employed at 
[ntelligent Automation Corporation in San Diego where he 
is developing advanced diagnostic and prognostic systems 
for helicopters, gas turbines, aircraft, and ship systems. 
John Berry is a US Army engineer in 
aviation aeromechanics technology. He 
received his Ph.D. degree in Aerospace 
Engineering from the Georgia Institute 
of Technology in 1990. He has lead 
research efforts exposing the physics 
of rotor-fuselage interacting 
aerodynamics using wind tunnel and 
computational techniques. He currently 
serves as a senior engineer for the 
Aviation and Missile Command Directorate of Aviation 
Engineering supporting airworthiness and new technology 
applications for Army Aviation. 
Bob Branhof is a US Army engineer 
in the Aviation Engineeiing 
Directorate at the Aviation Missile 
Command. He received his B.S. degree 
in Engineering Mechanics in 1988 at 
the University of Missouri, Rolla. He 
has worked in 
aeromechanicsldynamics and has led 
the development and support of US 
Army helicopter rotor smoothing, 
drive train vibration, engine vibration monitoring and other 
vibration related programs. He has also been responsible 
for the vibration qualification of components installed on all 
army aircraft. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
‘This work was supported by AEDCDOT Contract No. 
F40600-98-C-0016. We are also grateful to CW5 Lem Grant 
and the helicopter maintenance personnel at South 
Carolina National Guard in Columbia, SC for their 
continuing help and encouragement. 
276 
