The Trigger System of the MAGIC Telescope
R. Paoletti, R. Cecchi, D. Corti, M. Mariotti, R. Pegna and N. Turini
Abstract— The MAGIC telescope aims at the detection of very
low energy gamma rays (E > 10 GeV) through the atmospheric
emission of Cherenkov light. The high background rate originated
by the night sky background (NSB), muons, hadronic showers and
bright stars sets a seriuos challenge to this goal. Application of
topological selection cuts at trigger level can have a big impact
on the background reduction allowing the telescope to operate
at lower thresholds and reducing the minimum detectable energy.
The trigger of the MAGIC telescope is a two-level system following
a pipeline philosophy, similar to those adopted in the high energy
experiments. Operative since october 2002, the trigger system has
been a key point in the commissioning of the MAGIC telescope
that is now taking data. The trigger hardware is described in
detail.
Index Terms— Astroparticle Physics, Astrophysics, Imaging Air
Cherenkov Telescope, Trigger
I. INTRODUCTION
THE MAGIC (Major Atmospheric Gamma ImagingCherenkov) telescope is a second generation ground tele-
scope that aims to measure low energy gamma-initiated showers
(E ≈ 30 GeV) by looking at the Cherenkov light emitted in
the atmosphere [1]. The motivation to push for a low energy
threshold telescope was the fact that first generation ground
telescopes were able to confirm only a very small number of
the sources detected by the EGRET satellite. To cover this un-
explored energy range a new low threshold IACT telescope was
designed by making use of new technological improvements.
The shower signal is contaminated by background events due
to various sources: hadronic showers, local muons, Night Sky
Background (NSB), moon light and bright stars in the field of
view of the camera. Simple topological trigger schemes looking
for adjacent triggered pixels had been already implemented in
previous Cherenkov telescope to limit the accidental trigger rate
due to NSB events [2]. In addition to this, the trigger system
of the MAGIC telescope is a true topological trigger that can
apply sophisticated selections.
II. THE TELESCOPE
Located at the Observatorio Roque de los Muchachos (island
of La Palma, Islas Canarias), the building of the telescope frame
began in September 2001 and the whole frame structure was
finished after few months (December 2001). The 17 m diameter
f/D = 1 telescope frame is made by a nest of carbon fiber
tubes specifically designed to achieve stiffness and light weight,
Manuscript received October 29, 2004.
R. Cecchi, R. Paoletti, R. Pegna and N. Turini are with University of Siena
and I.N.F.N. Sezione di Pisa.
D. Corti and M. Mariotti are with University of Padova and I.N.F.N. Sezione
di Padova.
Fig. 1. The MAGIC telescope. The reflective surface has been completed in
August 2004. On the left is the telescope tower, used to access the camera.
about 20 tons, that add to the undercarriage weight to give a
total weight of 40 tons (see fig. 1).
The reflective mirror surface of the MAGIC telescope has a
parabolic shape to minimize the time spread of arrival photons
produced by the Cherenkov flashes. The study of the time
structure can contribute to a better separation between hadron–
and gamma–initiated showers as well as to disentangle the
effect of NSB light.
III. THE CAMERA
The MAGIC camera has 1.5 m diameter, 450 kg weight
and 3-4◦ field of view. The inner hexagonal area is composed
by 397 hemispherical photomultipliers (PMT) (Electron Tubes
9116A, 1” diameter) surrounded by 180 PMTs (ET 9116B,
1.5” diameter). The time response FWHM is below 1 ns.
The photocathode quantum efficiency is raised up to 30%
and extended to the UV by a special coating of the surface
using wavelength shifter (figure 2). Each PMT is connected to
an ultra-fast low-noise transimpedance pre-amplifier. Winston
cones are used to collect light on the photocathode and to
enhance the probability to double cross the photocathode for
large acceptance angles. The camera was commissioned in
March 2003 and first starlight using DC current readout was
recorded after few days.
The signals from the PMTs are amplified inside the camera
enclosure and transmitted over 162 m long optical fibers using
Vertical Cavity Emitting Laser Drivers (VCSELs, 850 nm
wavelength) to reduce the weight and size of standard copper
cables and to minimize the electromagnetic noise on the lines.
In the electronics room the signal is split into two branches.
The first branch passes through a software adjustable threshold
discriminator that generates a digital signal for the trigger
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 73
Fig. 2. View of the MAGIC camera. The photomultipliers are mounted on a
hexagonal structure. On some photomultipliers the light collector has been
removed, the wavelength shifter deposited on the photocathodes is clearly
visible.
system. The second branch is stretched to 6 ns FWHM,
amplified and sent to the readout system for digitization.
IV. THE TRIGGER
The actual rate of noise due to night sky background depends
on the threshold applied on discriminators and the logic used
in the trigger. The night sky background rate was measured
in La Palma to be 0.9 photons/ns/pixel. The expected rate
with four-fold next-neighbor logic is around 2 kHz, for a
2 photoelectrons/pixel threshold. Other sources of noise are
bright stars that should be masked at trigger level, and hadronic
showers and muons that may contribute up to few tens of kHz
to the total rate. It is required to mask bright stars and perform
a simple gamma-hadron separation to keep the acquisition rate
below 1 kHz.
Since MAGIC will perform different type of observations,
like sources near or at large zenith angles and gamma bursts
– either with the source centered on the camera or not – a
large trigger flexibility is required. Moreover, the MAGIC data
acquisition samples a time slice of 80 ns using 300 MHz Flash
ADCs, and stores the digitized information in a 5 ms deep FIFO
buffer. Therefore, the trigger should perform its analysis in less
than 5 ms.
The trigger area is restricted to the 325 pixels of the camera
inner region. Trigger cells (“macrocells”) are defined by cells
of 37 pixels mutually overlapping (see fig. 3). This particular
overlap has been chosen to ensure an efficient coverage of all
the logic combinations over the trigger area.
The trigger system is based on two pipelined levels [3],
following a philosophy similar to the systems used in high
energy physics experiments. Level 1 fast n-fold (n=2–5) next
neighbor logic is very effective in the rejection of background
light while Level 2 pattern recognition is be used to mask bright
stars or to perform a preliminary event selection at trigger
level. The trigger system can work up to a maximum input
rate frequency of 10MHz.
Fig. 3. The trigger area is restricted to the camera inner region. Trigger
cells are mutually overlapping to ensure an efficient coverage of all logic
combinations.
A. The Level 1 Trigger
The digital information coming from the receiver boards is
shared by the Level 1 boards by means of a custom backplane
that has the purpose to split and distribute this information to
the other boards (see fig. 4). A lot of care was put in the design
and layout of the backplane since the overall time jitter must
be kept under one nanosecond.
The Level 1 boards use ALTERA EPLD128ATC100-7 Pro-
grammable Logic Devices (PLD) to look for n next neighbours
in tight time windows in any of the 19 overlapping trigger cells
(see fig. 5).
Fig. 4. Level 1 backplane. The connectors for the input signal coming from
the receiver boards are visible while individual trigger boards are connected to
the center (not yet mounted).
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 74
Fig. 5. Level 1 trigger board. Shown are the PLDs used for logic combinations.
Internal delay in the combinatorial array of the devices was
carefully simulated and studied. It turned out to be better than
one nanosecond as required by the Level 1 specifications and
independent from the route of the signals if the all sets of
equation can be written in a single macro-cell of the PLD.
Inside every board, combinations of n neighbour pixels
(n=2–5) are computed by equations directly implemented in
the programmable logic. The choice between one of the four
multiplicity configurations is remotely performed by software.
The Level 1 trigger also latches the complete pixels config-
uration in an output buffer so that, when a given multiplicity
logic is satisfied in any of the trigger cells, the whole digi-
tal information is transmitted to the second level for further
selection. The overall time delay of Level 1 is measured to
be about 80 ns. The input rate per pixel can exceed the MHz
range depending on the level of the discriminators thresholds.
In standard conditions, a Level 1 rate of the order of few kHz
or less is expected corresponding to a rejection factor between
103 and 104.
B. The Level 2 Trigger
The second level trigger consists of a first stage of 19 VME
programmable modules, called SMART (see fig. 6), where
the digital information for each trigger cell is split into three
12 channels, mapped in Look-Up Tables (LUT). Each LUT
is made by a 4096 bytes static memory in which the 12
address bits are direclty connected to the inputs. Every input
configuration is seen at the input of the three LUTs as three
independent configuration sets, i.e. 3×212 combinations instead
of the total 236 ones. The selection criteria are coded in the 5
less significant bits (LSB) of each memory and grouped in a 15
bits word that goes into a fourth LUT. The decision is coded
in a 6 bits output word. Several outputs can be fed into other
SMART modules as shown in fig. 7.
The typical transition time of a SMART module is 60 ns and
the global trigger decision delay time is kept under 400 ns.
Fig. 6. One of the SMART boards used in the Level 2 trigger.
In order to monitor effectively the telescope behaviour,
frequency rates for individual pixels are measured by custom
VME scalers. Every board houses an Altera EPF10k200 FPGA
to measure simulataneously the rates of 80 LVDS/TTL channels
with 32 bit counters, up to a maximum frequency of 50 MHz.
Two 64 bit special registers are used to measure the experiment
live and dead times with 25 ns accuracy.
The trigger pipeline architecture reduces the system dead
time practically to zero. The re-arming time of Level 1 is the
only source of dead time but it can ignored since it is 0.01%
at 1 kHz (only 7% at 1 MHz!).
Fig. 7. Level 2 trigger system architecture. Note the possibility of implement-
ing external signals, e.g. calibration, in the trigger system by feeding one of
the SMART modules.
The trigger decision is finally coded in an 8 bit word that
is sent to the VME prescaler boards and to the FADC system
for event acquisition. In the prescaler board, every trigger bit
can be individually prescaled by 16 bit counters (useful range
0-65535). The board can disable the counters when the data
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 75
Fig. 8. Trigger electronics. The Level 1 trigger is shown on top. Input signals
are cabled on the back of the rack, the output signals are transmitted over the
white cables going upward. Also shown is the Level 2 crate with the CPU,
some SMART modules (20–24), the prescaler and the scaler boards (from left
to right). Not shown are the nineteen SMART modules directly interfacing with
Level 1.
acquisition system is busy (“dead time”). Twelve lines are
reserved for utility signals (see fig. 7), like random triggers
or dedicated signals coming from the calibration system. Since
these signals are entering in the Level 2 trigger, calibration or
pedestal triggers can be selected together with shower triggers
to calibrate the experiment during data taking. Coding the
trigger word in 8 bits allows to work with simultaneous triggers,
e.g. showers trigger can be mixed to calibration triggers.
The trigger system can be remotely programmed by a dedi-
cated CPU located in the Level 2 VME crate.
C. Commissioning
The trigger system was commissioned in two phases. The
Level 1 and a simple Level 2 version (the CPU, one SMART
module and the prescaler) were installed in november 2002
while the full Level 2 system was ready by March 2003 (see
fig. 8).
Several algorithms are now under study for trigger selection
at Level 2. For example, the multiplicity of the cluster has
been studied as a selection parameter to reject accidental NSB
Fig. 9. Level 2 rejection of NSB. Number of events as a function the pseudo-
size cut. The inset shows efficiency of accepted events vs NSB rejection.
events [4]. This method can reduce the rate of NSB events
below the maximum data acquisition rate (1 kHz) and enhance
the trigger collection area by 2-3 times more than the standard
Level 1 trigger [5]. One of the methods under study is the
“pseudo–size”, that is the number of pixels belonging to a
cluster (see fig. 9). For example, using a cut pseudo–size ≥ 8
more then 80% of NSB is reduced while more than 60% of
the signal is kept. The trigger rate, about 3 kHz at Level 1, is
reduced to 500 Hz.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The MAGIC telescope is a second generation Cherenkov
telescope that incorporates many technological improvements
to explore the 10-300 GeV energy window. Just after few
months from installation and even if it is still in the commis-
sionig and calibration phase, the telescope has already detected
two very high energy sources, Crab and Mrk 421, with high
significance.
The MAGIC telescope has the most sophisticated trigger
system ever implemented in a Cherenkov telescope. The experi-
ence gained in high energy experiments has been very helpful to
design the whole trigger system. Use of the fast logic at Level
1 trigger with PLDs has shown to be effective and reliable.
Implementation of new selection algorithms at Level 2 are
currently in use and their performances are being studied.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Instituto de Astrofisica de
Canarias (IAC) for excellent working conditions. The support
of the Italian INFN, German BMBF and Spanish CICYT is
gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Baixeras et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 518 (2004) 188
[2] S. M. Bradbury et al., Proc. 26th ICRC, Salt Lake City (1999) OG 4.3.21
[3] D. Bastieri et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 461 (2001) 521
[4] M. Meucci et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 518 (2004) 554
[5] A. Stamerra et al., Proc. of the 28th ICRC, Tsukuba (2003) p. 2959
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE
0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 76
