Radio, concerts and the future of music distribution 
Anders Edström Frejman 
Media Technology and Graphic Arts, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 
frejman@kth.se
Abstract
Internet has undoubtedly changed the prerequisites for 
global music distribution once for all. After years of 
skepticism, clinging to old business models and pirate 
hunt on P2P networks, the record industry has reluctantly 
begun to embrace the new channel for marketing and 
distribution of cultural content. But what do we know 
about music consumption on P2P networks? Does it 
coincide with the variety of cultural content in traditional 
media channels? This paper describes the differences in 
cultural content on P2P networks, concerts and 
traditional broadcasted media based on comprehensive 
data on theoretic rage of choice, air play and requested 
music at P2P services. The study also describes some of 
the changes in business models that have already taken 
place. The study concludes among all that legal 
download services might reduce the present dominance of 
the big five major record companies in the long run.                   
1. Introduction 
The mix of music available via different media 
channels has been the subject of a lively discussion over 
the past few years. Some observers claim that the range of 
choice in traditional broadcasted media does not reflect 
the audience's desires. Voices from both commercial and 
public service radio claim, however, that they actually air 
the “correct” mix and base their postulate on detailed 
polls and charts.  
On the other hand executives of services monitoring 
traffic on P2P-networks and organisations working for 
diversity in media, claim that record companies and radio 
networks actually “teach” the audience to listen to and 
buy certain type of music. Therefore their audience 
research polls, reinforced by commercials on TV and 
radio, become self-fulfilling prophecies. 
At the same time the traditional market for CD singles 
is more or less collapsing due to widely spread illegal 
P2P-copying and cherry picking via legal services. In fact 
in October 2003 the turnover of these legal services 
began to outrival CD single sales both in terms of units 
and money[1]. 
At time of writing the number of downloadable legal 
music titles via Internet are in the region of some 700,000 
and is fast growing with the help of Apple (iTunes), 
Roxio (Napster 2.0), Wal-Mart and others. In other words 
companies by tradition not associated with content. The 
number of illegal titles available via P2P-networks is 
difficult to monitor but is in the region of tens of millions 
according to IFPI. 
At the same time the concert and touring business has 
experienced booming[2] ticket sales and an overall 
increased interest for live music the last few years. This 
trend has been documented via numerous articles in both 
US and UK based music magazines. 
A second trend is the accelerating production of CD-
titles despite alarming sales reports from executives at 
major record companies. Affordable digital recording 
equipment has lowered the threshold for musicians to 
produce high-quality recordings and the obvious strategy 
of a few “big” acts per major record company has most 
likely led to ever more rejected demos. Many new small 
record companies started by artists and bands use clubs 
and the Internet as primary market channels. P2P 
activities seem to attract rather than frighten away SMEs. 
Little has been written about the differences between 
repertoires available at concerts, via broadcast media and 
files requested over the Internet and reasons for possible 
discrepancies. The evidence in this paper shows some 
interesting differences that can be related to producer 
driven vs. emerging consumer driven markets. 
2. Objectives, questions to be answered 
This paper seeks to describe the difference in terms of 
output (songs) between concerts, broadcasted media, files 
requested via P2P-networks and “legal” downloading 
sites. In what way does the mix of songs overlap or differ 
between these audiences and if so, why?  
Are there any trends that can be observed over the past 
years? Are there any indications that the increased use of 
Internet and file sharing clients has served to change the 
traditional marketing role of radio as regards concerts? 
Where do we find the really new business models - in 
the SMEs activities in the P2P environment, or amongst 
the slowly emerging legal downloading sites approved by 
major producers and rights holders? 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
3. Method 
The study uses four extensive statistic sources. A 
database with hundreds of thousands requests for specific 
music files from a US-based P2P-network in 2003. 
Second; Reports from STIM, the Swedish Performing 
Rights Society, of works (songs) performed at concerts in 
Sweden over the last three years.
Third; comprehensive air play reports from STIM, on 
works aired by seven national radio channels in Sweden 
the last eleven years. Fourth; a complete copy of the fast 
growing Gramophone Archive (Grammofonarkivet) of 
the Swedish Public Service Radio with more than 2.4 
million recordings from the last 110 years with detailed 
genre classification on each work, serving as a blueprint 
for theoretic range of choice. All databases (except for 
P2P) uses a common identifier enabling extensive 
matching procedures. 
The Swedish concert market and the de-regulated 
radio market have been used as a CASE-study to describe 
trends within and between these two channels for musical 
content. The P2P-database has been used to picture the 
characteristics of music searches on P2P-services. What 
kind of music that is requested and if any pattern can be 
identified.  
Official weekly top 10 and top 100 statistics from P2P 
monitoring services and “legal” downloading sites have 
been gathered in order to complement this data. 
Both domestic and foreign articles-, papers and other 
literature related to this subject have been studied to 
support global predictions on this fast moving arena.  
4. Observations 
4.1. The traditional business model
By tradition record companies have to a great extent 
been able to control the flow of new music to the market.  
For example certain TV and radio channels have been 
given exclusive rights to “break” carefully chosen single 
tracks. Followed by thoroughly planned album releases, 
often in big scale. In other words trying to sell songs 
twice, first as singles - during a limited period of high 
interest and media penetration - and then as albums. A 
business model principally based on selling tangible 
products via a hierarchy of distributors and retailers.  
In many cases the focus has been to build “big” artists 
selling records on many markets. Radio and TV air-plays 
have been the natural shop window and album sales the 
economic backbone for record companies.  
Concerts have been regarded absolutely not more than 
a tool for selling a few more albums and maintaining and 
cultivating popularity among loyal fans.      
4.2. New business models
Major record companies still try to control the flow 
and maintain the interest for their products. But the 
prerequisites on the market have changed a lot, especially 
during the last decade.
First affordable digital recording equipment has 
lowered the barrier for musicians to produce soundtracks 
with high technical quality without access to 
multimillion-dollar recording studios. Most likely a fact 
contributing to the high number of album releases.  
Second the increasing range of potential media 
channels has caused a clear segmentation of audience, 
making it more expensive to reach a big audience via 
traditional marketing. Nevertheless radio and TV still are 
important marketing channels. 
Third the increasing number of artist-owned record 
companies. Certainly to a degree a reaction to difficulties 
in being signed or in some cases a conscious choice of 
seeking success in smaller scale with the ability to keep 
most of the profits. According to Statistic’s Sweden, the 
central government authority for official statistics, the 
number of record companies and music publishing house 
have more than doubled the last ten years in Sweden.  
Fourth the more or less collapsing single market (in 
terms of profits) where P2P-piracy and cherry picking via 
legal services are considerable competitors to physical 
singles. As mentioned earlier, legal sales of digital music 
files outperformed single sales both in numbers and 
money during 2003.  
The changing prerequisites have forced the traditional 
record industry to reconsider its business models. Many 
record companies try to reduce the reliance on mechanical 
revenues, basically CD sales, as the market declines. 
Public performances, concert revenues, the use of songs 
in audiovisual works such as advertisements, television 
programs, films and computer games grows are becoming 
more and more important sources of income. 
An obvious example is the interim result presented by 
the EMI Group in November 2003. The turnover for the 
Music Publishing division was only 21 percent of EMI 
Group but generated 65 percent of the profits[3].   
Reluctantly record companies have embraced legal on-
line sales of digital music files. A milestone when 
considering that this is about selling intangible products 
far away from the traditional physical value chain selling 
tangible products, as CDs.  
Record companies own alternatives e.g. Press Play and 
Music Net with different subscription models have not 
been very successful so far. 
Ironically the first service that claimed to be profitable 
on selling music files on line was not a part of the 
traditional content industry. With iTunes, Apple, 
succeeded to unite record companies on a common price 
model, 99 cent apiece, regardless of size and catalogue. 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
The record companies share of each sold file is 47 cent 
excluding artists and composer royalties[4].  
According to Apple over 70 million files have been 
sold the first year. In May 2004 the rate was 3.3 million 
files a week[5]. 
Apples initiative of selling single digital music files 
have been followed by e.g. Wal Mart, MusicMatch and 
Napster 2.0. The latter one owned by Roxio a company 
selling software for CD and DVD burning. Napster 2.0 is 
based on a subscription model with an option to buy 
single music files for 99 cent each. 
5. Results 
5.1. CASE Study Sweden
As the Swedish radio market was deregulated in 1993 
some 80 local licenses were auctioned during the first 
round as a complement to the four national public service 
channels. By the end of 1993 three commercial networks 
owned 25 licences and in March 2004 these networks 
(Mix, Rix and NRJ) owned or controlled 66 of the 91 
present licences.
In this study “national radio” is defined as a radio 
channel or network geographically covering 66-99 
percent of the potential listeners aged 9-79.  
In Sweden this means the mentioned commercial radio 
networks and the original four public service radio 
channels (P1-P4). 
Fig 1 Works (titles) played on national Swedish radio. 
The longitudinal empirical study on play lists shows 
that the number of musical works/titles a listener could 
hear on any of the national channels year 1992 to 2002 
remained fairly stable around 50,000 (Fig 1) despite the 
increase of total air plays as a result of commercial radio 
(Fig 2). 
The empirical study shows that the public service radio 
is the main source of diversity. For example P3 reported 
some 72,000 plays of about 18,000 works during 2002.  
The play lists of the three national commercial 
networks, Mix, Rix and NRJ comprised 2,833, 4,156 and 
1,036 unique works respectively in 1994. 
Fig 2 The use of musical works in national Swedish radio. 
By 2002 the size of the play lists had shrunk to 1,082, 
952 and 481 works respectively, despite a total number of 
performances of between 100,000 – 150,000 per 
network/annum. In other words there was a decrease in 
the size of play lists (diversity) between 54 and 77 
percent.
Fig 3 Average annual similarity of play lists 2002 vs. 2001 and 
2002 vs. 2000 respectively. 
Another way of comparing the use of musical works 
between public service and commercial radio is how 
works are “re-used”.  Fig 3 shows that the three national 
commercial radio stations “re-use” most of their play list 
from one year to the other.  
Public service radio as a whole seems to renew most of 
the musical material from one year to the other. P3, the 
“youngest” public service channel, show the most 
dynamic play list. 
A comparison of the 200 most played works clearly 
indicates an increasing overlap in programming between 
commercial radio stations over the years.  
An interesting fact as they use three different so called 
programming formats, Adult Contemporary, Hot Adult 
Contemporary and Contemporary Hit Radio respectively.  
A similar tendency on format homogeneity has been 
documented on the U.S. radio market in an American 
study from 2003[6], performed by the non-profit 
organisation Future of Music Coalition. 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
It has also become harder to get works aired during the 
year of release. There is apparently no exception for the 
dominant genre “pop, rock, blues”. Despite an increasing 
number of played works/titles and total air plays in this 
genre, a decreasing number of new works reaches the 
play lists of the seven Swedish national radio channels 
each year. 
The concert repertoire differs to some extent from 
radio. The genre “pop, rock, blues” is still dominant in 
terms of performed titles, but the genre “entertainment 
music, light dance combos or schlager” get more plays. 
This tendency seems to have been quite stable over the 
last seven years.
There is in other words a clear discrepancy in terms of 
music repertoire between radio and concerts. 
The repertoire seems to be fairly dynamic as more than 
40 percent of works played a certain year was not 
reported as performed the year before.       
Fig 4 Played songs/genre on Swedish concert scenes from
2000 to 2002. 
It is also important to have in mind that “pop, rock, 
blues” is a pretty coarse genre in this context. Most of 
today’s mainstream music is sorted into this genre using a 
classification system from early 1970-ies, consisting of 
only twelve different genres. As a consequence for 
example Metallica, Britney Spears, Bob Dylan and 
ABBA share the same genre. 
Fig 5 Played songs/genre on national Swedish radio 2002. 
But how comparative is this data with other countries? 
Unfortunately the presented analysis which matches 
reliable play-lists and detailed genre classification seems 
to be quite unique.  
The main task for STIM and its counterparts in other 
countries is to collect fees from public performances or 
mechanical reproduction and distribute royalties to their 
members. These organisations haven’t gathered much 
detailed statistics or breakdown in certain genres.  
The earlier mentioned survey[6] is perhaps the closest 
study available.    
Exclusive statistics from Ticnet, the biggest Nordic on-
line ticket service, shows almost exponential growth of 
online sales since 1999. The company sells tickets to 
sports events, concerts and other cultural events.
According to Ticnets Key Account Manager Peter 
Lilliencrona, the increase of sales is equally divided 
between mentioned events. However ticket sales to pop- 
and rock concerts have increased significantly more than 
for example classic concerts, according to Lilliencrona. 
Sales depend of course strongly on time of year, big 
sports events and record releases. Year 2003 Ticnet sold 
100,000 – 200,000 tickets a month, nearly a 50 percent 
increase compared to 2002.  
It is likely to believe that websites as Ticnet and 
Ticketmaster or concert promoters have overtaken much 
of radios marketing role as regards concerts.    
During the period June to September 2003 TNS 
Gallup performed a demographic study on visitors at 
Ticnet probably giving a picture of the average online 
ticket buyer.  
The biggest demographic group (age 25-39) represents 
38 percent of the visitors. The second largest group (15-
24) 24 percent. One fifth visits 1-5 concerts during a six-
month period and 82 percent uses Internet 30 minutes or 
more each day.  
Perhaps the most interesting finding is that nearly 44 
percent buy 1-5 CDs during a six-month period and 15 
percent as much as 1-3 CDs a month. In other words, 
Ticnets customers, e.g. concert visitors, claim to be 
frequent CD buyers. 
5.2. CASE Study P2P searches
The security company Palisade Systems acted as a 
node on a US Gnutella network for almost three weeks in 
February 2003 in order to collect empirical data on 
searches for a content study. Palisades survey[7] 
concluded among all that most of the content on this 
particular network was either illegal copies of 
copyrighted music files or movies or pornographic 
material. 
22,000,000 searches were gathered during these three 
weeks and some 250,000 searches on specifically music 
files were randomly chosen as raw-data and made 
available for this particular paper. Almost all searches for 
this paper origin from edu-networks in USA, most likely 
giving a good indication on the music interest among 
younger consumers. 
Many studies on Internet usage have stressed the 
significant use among younger demographic groups. 
According to a study[8] done by Pew Internet Project 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
during the same period of time downloading music were 
done by 56% of full and part time students. Furthermore a 
majority of the age cohort 18-29 were downloading music 
according to the same study. It seems likely that some 
individuals are found in both groups.  
The searches gathered from edu-networks are 
interesting as they represent future consumers developing 
habits on music consumption. 
Some hundred searches from the 250,000 were 
randomly selected and manually matched to the extensive 
and detailed works database, Grammofonarkivet. When a 
search for song and artist matched several recordings in 
Grammofonarkivet the oldest recording was chosen.  
Not very surprising the dominant genre among P2P-
searches was the broad genre “pop, rock, blues”. More 
than 95% percent of the searches aimed for this type of 
music. The majority of the requested recordings in this 
limited survey were more than two years old. 
Spot tests on ”big” artists confirmed the hypothesis 
that a limited number of songs tend to be very popular on 
P2P networks. 
Examples: 50 Cent (4,346 rows), Madonna (1,608), 
Christina Aguilera (1,333), Britney Spears (872), Avril 
Lavigne (828), Celine Dion (759).  
A result that well coincides with observations at 
official top 10 and 20 list on P2P-downloading from 
monitoring services as Nolla and BigChampagne. It also 
coincides with numerous observations on Wal-Marts 
weekly top100 list on sold digital music files. 
Nevertheless the study shows a broad interest for 
songs that are not only new “hits”. Even though new 
popular music dominates downloads in terms of numbers 
the diversity of requests is interesting.  
Examples: Beatles (1,514), Mozart (297), Louis 
Armstrong (163), Tchaikovsky (58).     
6. Conclusions 
The repertoire on Swedish concert scenes is fairly 
dynamic. A significant number of works performed a 
certain year were not reported as played the year before. 
However the touring dance orchestras, an important 
element of the Swedish music community, is probably 
one explanation to the high number of performed songs in 
the genre “entertainment music, light music, and dance 
combos”. Musical content played by particularly 
commercial radio has become static with the dominating 
genre “pop, rock, blues”.  Compared to public service 
radio commercial radio present an extremely limited 
number of works (titles). 
It is reasonable to assume that going to a concert or 
downloading a certain song via a P2P-service reflects a 
conscious active choice, i.e. what somebody really wants 
to hear. Therefore the limited variety of played works 
(titles) in commercial radio might be somewhat 
surprising.
The analysis of P2P requests confirms the overall 
opinion in the business that a limited number of titles are 
active, and frequently downloaded, during a certain 
period of time. Mainstream music both new and fairly 
recent recordings dominates the downloads to at least 90 
percent.
Nevertheless the variety of the requests to the studied 
P2P-service also shows an interest for more “narrow” 
and/or older music. This trend will probably be reinforced 
with newer versions of P2P-clients, supplying exhaustive 
searches on all segments of networks and over multiple 
P2P-networks. In other words a minor technical 
revolution making it possible to search for “the needle in 
the haystack” for basically anyone, anywhere and 
anytime.  
Overnet is the first known example of a P2P-network 
where nodes know what other nodes to send a search to. 
This makes a search much more comprehensive than, for 
example, in a Gnutella network where the searches and 
publishes are sent more or less randomly. 
Many legal downloading services have also 
implemented services or search engines in order to help 
users find music similar to what they already like. The 
common 30 second samples or similar features helps 
music lovers to discover new music and will grow in 
importance as an alternative to radio that have served as 
the number one shopping window for decades. 
It’s likely to believe that upcoming consumers won’t 
have the affection to physical CDs as earlier customers.  
The increased sales of MP3 players are proofs of a new 
way of consuming music in big scale far away from 
physical, tangible, goods. 
A challenge for the traditional record industry. But an 
opportunity for “smaller players” to compete with giants 
on the same conditions at legal services.   
7. References 
[1] Five Eight Music Business Insight, “The weeks top news 
stories”, PDF,  November 7, 2003.
[2] Billboard Newspaper, Web is a Windfall for Touring Biz, 
December 21, 2002, pp. 1, 72
[3] EMI Group PLC Interim Results to 30 September 2003, 
http://www.emigroup.com/news/pr206.html (accessed March 
20, 2004)
[4] Music and Copyright (2003:2) “On-line music market 
expands but high costs and increased competition threaten 
standalone web retailers”. No 265,December 24, 2003. Informa 
media group, London 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
[5] Official Apple Press Release, “iTunes Music Store Sells 3.3 
Million Songs in One Week”  http://www.apple.com/ 
pr/library/2004/may/05itunes.html (accessed May 31, 2004) 
[6] P. Dicola, K. Thomson, Radio Deregulation: Has it Served 
Citizens and Musicians? The Future of Music Coalition, 
Washinton D.C, USA, 2002, pp 25 
[7] Stephen Brown, “Porn tops file sharing usage”, Palisade
Systems,
www.palisadesys.com/news&events/p2pstudy.pdf (accessed 
March 20, 2004) 
[8] Lee Rainie, “The impact of recording industry suits against 
music swappers” (Data Memo),  
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/PIP_File_Swapping_M
emo_0104.pdf (accessed March 19, 2004)
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Web Delivering of Music (WEDELMUSIC’04) 
0-7695-2157-6/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
