2004 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 
Detection of Fastener Failure in a Thermal Protection 
System Panel 
John Rosenstcngel, Isaac Miller, and Martin DeSirnio 
Qualia Computing, Inc. 
Beavercreek, OH 45431 
j rosenstengel@cadxsystems.com 
itm2Qcornell.edu 
mdesimioQcadx3ystems.com 
937.431.7079 
Mark Derriso and Kevin Brown 
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL/VAS) 
Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433 
Mark.Derriso@wpafh.af.mil 
Kevin.Brown@wpafb. af.mil 
937.904.6813 
William Braisted and Steven Olson 
University of Dayton Research Institute 
Dayton, OH 45469 
Olson@udri.udayton.edu 
Braisted@udri.udayton.edu 
937.229.3018 
Abstract- This paper presents development methods 
and application results for a structural health monitoring 
(SHM) system for assessing the condition of mechanical 
fasteners in a test article representing a realistic por- 
tion of a thermal protection system. The test article 
is a carbon-carbon panel bolted through 15 brackets to 
a backing structure. Mechanical states considered in- 
clude all bolts fastened to a nominal torque value, or 
one of the 15 bolts loosened. Four transducers on the 
backing structure provide actuation and sensing signals. 
Spectral functions are computed from all single and pair- 
wise signal combinations: (cross) power spectral densi- 
ties, transfer functions, and coherence functions. Aut- 
mated analysis of the spectral functions shows frequency 
intervals exist over which the function values are indica- 
tive of the mechanical state of the test article. These 
frequency intervals are used to provide features for the 
SHM classifier. Statistical pattern recognition methods 
select a subset of the features. The status of the test a- 
ticle is determined as “undamaged” or “bolt j is loose.” 
The overall localization accuracy of the SHM system on 
test data is 99.1% with 89.7% probability of detecting a 
damaged condition at  a 0.2% probability of a false alarm. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 INTRODUCTION 
(r7803-S155-6/04/s17.Ofl/~~”~~ LEEE 
IEEEAC paper # 1258 
2 EXPERIMENTS 
3 ANALYTICAL EFFORTS 
4 RESULTS 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Structural health monitoring (SHM) refers to automated 
methods for determining adverse changes in the iiitegrity 
of mechanical systems [l]. The Air Force Research Lab- 
oratory’s Air Vehicles Directorate at Wright-Patterson 
Air Force Base conducts research to sustain current air- 
frame structures and intends to implement integrated 
health monitoring systems on future space vehicles. One 
focus area is a reusable launch vehicle known as the 
Space Operations Vehicle (SOV) [2]. The SOV is a 
key element of the future launch capability. This paper 
presents SHM laboratory experiments with a canonical 
element of a conceptual space operations vehicle. 
Overview of Related Work 
This work is an extension of the research presented in [3], 
where initial capabilities for damage detection and local- 
ization were established for the test article. This work 
is also similar to the excellent work presented in the se- 
ries of articles by Worden, Manson, and Allman [4,5,6]. 
The authors methodically establish functions, features, 
and methods useful for novelty detection beginning with 
simple structures in the laboratory and an aircraft panel, 
0-7803-81 55-6/04/$17.00 2004 IEEE 2464 
and ending with localizing which one of a set of nine pan- 
els had been removed froni an aircraft wing. In general, 
Worden et a1 found that selected spectral hands from 
transniissihility functions provide useful information for 
determining structural status. However, the search for 
determining useful frequency bands was accomplished 
with an exhaustive visual search of the transmissihil- 
ity functions. The squared Mahalamhis distance is the 
preferred test statistic to determine novelty (i.e. dam- 
age). In [6], damage localization is accomplished with 
a multi-layer perceptron artificial neural network. This 
paper presents a damage localization system using three 
spectral functions, automated search methods for deter- 
mining spectral bands and final feature selection, and a 
statistical classification method. 
SHM and the Space Operations Vehicle 
Carbon-carbon panels cover the fuselage of the SOV as 
part of a thermal protection system. If a panel was 
to lose one or more fastening bolts, the vehicle’s fuse- 
lage could be exposed to the environment, compromising 
vehicle integrity, nltimately jeopardizing mission safety 
and effectiveness. Furthermore, the thermal protection 
system of the SOV is one of its most vulnerable compo- 
nents, due to the likelihood of space debris strikes and 
the certainty of extreme temperatures during re-entry. 
The thermal protection system must be in good condi- 
tion before launch due to its critical role in protecting the 
vehicle’s primary structures and subsystems. A desired 
operational feature of the SOV is a tnrn around time on 
the order of hours rather than months as required by 
space shuttles. SHM methods could significantly reduce 
turn around tinie by automatically assessing structural 
integrity of the SOV (71. Therefore, automated SHM 
methods are needed to support the operational goal. 
Statistical Pattern Recognition 
We apply a statistical pattern recognition methodology 
for the SHM systems designed in this paper. The design 
process begins by collecting data from the structure. Vi- 
bration signals are applied to the structure and responses 
recorded for the damage conditions of interest. The sig- 
nals are stored with corresponding structural state infor- 
mation. Then, a set of measurements, or feature vectors, 
are computed from the responses and associated with 
the structural state. The resultant information provides 
labeled data for classifier design. Statistical classifier de- 
sign involves the specification of discriniinant functions 
estimated from the statistics of the feature vectors. Fi- 
nally, performance of the designed classifier is estiniated 
by applying labeled feature vectors to the input and mea- 
suring the resultant classification accuracy. 
2. EXPERIMENTS 
The Canonical Element 
All experiments are conducted in the laboratory with a 
single carbon-carbon panel. We consider the canonical 
element to be the simplest collection of elements approx- 
imating a space operation vehicle’s thermal protection 
system, as depicted in Figure 1. A carbon-carbon panel 
provides the foundation of the thermal protection sys- 
tem. The pnnel is approximately 2’ x 2’ x 1/8” and is 
bolted to 15 evenly spaced brackets with x 20 bolts. 
The brackets are in turn bolted to a 0.1” thick ribbed 
hacking structure with 0.67” ribs. The hacking structure 
represents the vehicle’s fuselage. Figure 2 is a side view 
of the canonical element showing the connection details 
of the carbon-carbon panel, brackets, and hacking struc- 
ture. Fonr piezoelectric transducers are fastened in the 
valleys between the ribs of the backing structure. The 
transducers are attached on the side of the backing struc- 
ture representing the inner fuselage of the aerospace ve- 
hicle where temperatures should remain well within the 
operating range of the piezoelectric materials. 
This configuration represents realistic sensor placement 
since piezoelectric devices will fail at the high tempera- 
tures encountered on the outer surface of an SOV. Also, 
the complex mechanical structure of the canonical el- 
ement hints at  the level of difficulty inherent in field 
applications. 
Figure 3 shows a diagram of the canonical element in- 
cluding sensor placenient and bolt numbering for the ex- 
periments described in this paper. In all experiments, 
sensor 1 provides the activation signal and responses are 
recorded at  sensors 2 ,  3, and 4. 
Structural Conditions 
Different structural conditions are obtained by loosen- 
ing one bolt at  a time from the carbon-carbon panel by 
a one-quarter turn counterclockwise. The particular ar- 
rangement of loose and tight bolts is referred to as a 
bolt pattern and bolt pattern j represents the condition 
of bolt j loose; bolt pattern 0 represents the baseline, or 
healthy, condition of all bolts fully fastened. A bolt loose 
condition corresponds to a damaged state. We define two 
types of structural health monitoring tasks, damage de- 
tection and damage localization. The damage detection 
task requires identification of only two states: healthy 
or damaged. Damage localization refers to identifying 
which bolt, if any, is loose from the TPS panel. The 
localization experiment requires identification of one of 
16 possible bolt patterns. The system must declare the 
structure healthy or specify which bolt is missing. 
2465 
Signal Generation and Collection Equipment 
Signals are generated and recorded using Labview ver- 
sion 8.1 software, with a National Instruments PXI 6120 
data acquisition card. A Fluke PM5193 Programmable 
SynthesizerjFunction Generator produces a swept f ro  
quency sinusoid, 0 to 7000 Hz in approximately 1 second 
as the broadband excitation signal. 
The stimulus is amplified to approximately GO volts peak 
to peak with a Krohn-Hite 7500 then applied to piezo- 
electric disk transducers of approximately $'' diameter. 
Responses are collected for 30000 samples at a 20 lcHz 
sample rate and 18-hit analog to  digital conversion. 
Figure 1. Top view of the canonical element show- 
ing carbon-carbon TPS panel, surface bolts and wash- 
ers. The brackets visible at the top and bottom edges 
connect the panel to the backing structure. 
Data Collection Procedure 
Vibration data from healthy and damage states cor- 
responding to different bolt patterns are collected in 
rounds as follows: 
. all bolts are tightened to 20 in-lbs; . N stimuli are applied to piezoelectric transducer 1; 
the stimulus and N responses are recorded from piezo- 
electric transducers 2, 3, and 4; . bolt j is loosened; 
the stimulus and N responses are recorded from piezo- 
electric transducers 2, 3, and 4; 
bolt j is tightened. 
These steps are repeated for bolts j = 1.. .E. In differ- 
ent rounds, N varied from 3 to 25, providing 45 to 375 
responses from the healthy condition and an equal num- 
her of responses from the damaged conditions. The fully 
fastened condition corresponds to  20 in-lbs of torque, the 
maximum rated value for the carbon-carbon panel. A 
pass through j = 1.. . 1 5  constitutes one round of data. 
The data were collected from 43 rounds collected during 
a 7-week interval. 
Feature Design 
To develop a classification system with the ability to 
correctly classify all sixteen damage conditions (all bolts 
tight and 15 conditions where one bolt is loose) features 
must he designed that have the ability to discriminate 
Figure 2. Side view of the canonical element showing 
fastening details of the TPS panel to the hacking struc- 
ture with bolts and brackets. The piezoelectric trans- 
ducers are attached to the right hand side of the hacking 
structure. 
between damage conditions. The basis for the features 
is the output of the MATLAB@ 'spectrum' function [8].  
The eighteen output functions of interest are: 
power spectral density at each of the 3 sensors (3 out- 
put functions) 
cross power spectral density for each potential pairing 
of the 3 sensors ( 3  output functions) 
transfer function from the input signal to each of the 
3 sensors (3 output functions) 
modified transfer function (not using input signal) he- 
tween each pairing of the 3 sensors (3 output functions) . coherence function from the input signal t o  each of the 
3 sensors (3 output functions) 
coherence function between each pairing of the 3 sen- 
sors (3 output functions) 
2466 
Figure 3. Diagrani of bolt and sensor placement for 
the experinierits described in this paper. Although the 
piezoelectric transducers are visible in this drawing, they 
are attached to the far side of the backing structure. 
Given 18 output functions, a 4096point FFT (2049 re- 
sulting frequency bins), and 16 damage conditions, the 
search for meaningful features can be very time consuni- 
ing. To make a thorough search for features practical, 
the automated process presented in Figure 4 was imple- 
mented. 
To make the automated process tractable, instead of 
searching for individual frequency bins in each of the 
18 output functions of interest that have some ability to 
discriminate between a11 1 G  damage classes, the problem 
is broken dowu into a series of two class problems. Given 
16 structural conditions, there are 120 potential pairs of 
classes. Therefore, we endeavor to find features that are 
able to discriminate between two of the 16 classes at any 
one time. Further simplification comes from considering 
groups of contiguous frequency bins (bands) from each 
of the 18 output functions in turn. We define a 'band' 
as containing: 
begin frequency (the lowest frequency value of a group 
of contiguous frequency bins) 
end frequency (the highest frequency of the group) . output function (which function the band is from) . operation (either 'sum,' 'mu, '  or 'min') to perforni on 
the bin values in the band to create a single feature value 
Compute Spectral Statistics 
Considering each of the 120 two class problenis (damage 
condition pnirs) in turn, we compute an average output 
fuiiction (i.e. transfer function at sensor 2) with a con- 
fidence interval for each of the 18 output functions of 
Pairwise 
Features - 
811 Bands Damage 
Compute 
Spectal 
Statistics 
Find 
Significant 
Bands 
Compute 
Feahms 
Bands 
Correlation 
Feature 
I- 
I 
Feature Classifier 
Selectlo" Design 
Correlation 
-based 
Feature 
Figure 4. Overview of the methods for candidate fea- 
ture generation and reduction. The final set of caudidate 
features are input to a feature selection process. 
interest as follows: 
1. Choose a representative assembly of rounds of col- 
lected response data, M (only 10 rounds are used to 
compute the spectral statistics). 
2. Compute all 18 output functions of interest for each 
observation relating to the first damage condition of the 
current pair of damage conditions (1 pair out of 120). 
3. For each bin, compute the mean bin value and stan- 
dard deviation across all bins on all output functions for 
this particular damage condition. 
4. Repeltt Steps 2 and 3 for the second damage condition 
of the current pair. 
After this process, we have a mean function and a stan- 
dard deviation function that can represent the expected 
value and confidence interval bounds for each bin and 
every possible combination of two structural conditions 
to be separated. 
Find Significant Bands 
In this step, we search for bands of contiguous freqnency 
bins where there is a t  least as much separation between 
the confidence intervals of the two damage conditions in 
the current pair as the total width of the two confidence 
intervals for that frequency bin. Groups of some mini- 
mum number of contiguous frequency bitis meeting these 
criteria are recorded as bands (begin and end frequencies 
fur the particular output function). A further check is 
performed to enstire that the band comes froni a portion 
of the output function that is significant (i.e. exceeds a 
2467 
Classifier Design threshold for the mean value). 
Bands are identified for each of the 18 output functions 
of interest. A final step is to create 3 potential features 
from each initial band by applying an operatiou across 
the frequency band to create a scalar feature. The three 
operations are 'sum,' 'min,' and 'max.' 
Compute Features From Bands 
Now that we have identified bands wherein there should 
be statistically significaut separation in values between 
the two damage conditions being considered, we go back 
through the M ,= 43 rounds of data and compute features 
for each observation relating to any one of the two dam- 
age conditions being considered. This process creates a 
feature matrix arid a corresponding class label vector. 
Correlation-based Feature Reduction 
Now that we have a multitude of features that may sepa- 
rate the two clnsses currently being considered, we need 
to reduce the total number of features by keeping only 
those features that are relatively uncorrelated to each 
other but highly correlated to the damage condition. 
This is accomplished by augmentiug the feature matrix 
by adding the class label vector as the first column in 
the matrix, in effect making the first 'feature' for each 
observation be its class label. Next, we compute a cor- 
relation coefficients matrix. The absolute value of the 
elements in this matrix are used in the following way to 
reduce the number of features: 
1. Keep only those features with correlation coefficients 
relating to the class label above a threshold. 
2. Identify groups of features with cross-correlations 
above a threshold. 
3. For each group identified in Step 2, retain only the 
feature with the highest correlation to class label. 
Now we have a set of relatively uncorrelated features 
that may be expected to have some discrimination ability 
between the two classes currently being considered. 
Compute Features From All Bands, For All Damage 
Conditions 
Once all bands have been designed for each of the 120 
damage condition pairs, all of the remaining bands are 
used to compute features on all observations (regardless 
of damage condition) for each of the M = 43 rounds of 
data being used to design features. 
The same correlation-based feature reduction procedure 
is performed, except that observations of all 16 classes 
are considered at  the same time. During this step, fea- 
tures that survive must have some level of correlation to 
the class label for all damage conditions. 
Classification is accomplished using one discriminant 
function for each structural state to be recognized. The 
discriminant functions are derived from the multivariate 
Gaussian class-conditional probability density functions 
as: [9] 
where z is a feature vector to be classified, j = 0 . .  .15, 
representing the healthy condition and 15 unique d a m  
age conditions, and p3 and C, are the mean and covari- 
ance matrices of a11 feature vectors corresponding to the 
jth structural state. 
Elements of the feature vector are determined in the fea- 
ture selection process. Classification is accomplished by 
evaluating each discriminant function for the input z, 
then assigning the category according to the discrim- 
inant function with the largest value. Damage detec- 
tion outcomes may be obtained by treating categories 
j = 1.. .15 as the damage state and j = 0 as the healthy 
state. 
Feature Selection 
Feature selection provides a subset of measurements 
from the feature pool most useful for classification. In 
general, the fewer features used in a classifier, the more 
likely the training set performance will be representative 
of test set performance. 
We use a sequential floating forward selection method as 
described in [lo]. A brief description is given here. The 
current optimal feature set is initialized to the empty 
set. Then the "best" feature is added to the optimal 
set by determining which feature provides the greatest 
quality metric, usually related to classification accuracy. 
The current feature set and corresponding quality met- 
ric are stored for comparison in a subsequent step. In 
the next step, the "worst" feature is determined. The 
worst feature is defined as that feature, which when re- 
moved from the current feature set, provides the greatest 
quality metric. The feature set and quality metric from 
this step are also stored. The quality metrics of the can- 
didate feature sets obtained from adding the best and 
removing the worst features are compared. The c h e  
sen feature set is selected to provide the largest quality 
metric. The process repeats until a stopping criterion 
is achieved, typically an upper limit on the number of 
features, or until the quality metric stops increasing. 
A key element of feature selection is the quality met- 
ric. Since the final system must perform well on data 
not available during training, we use a hold out method 
in computiug the quality metric to preferentially select 
features that generalize to independent test data. 
2468 
Recall, = 43 rounds of training data are obtained 
by recording responses through the set of 16 possible 
zero and one bolt at a time loosc structural states. Wc 
hold out one round of the data, perform feature selcction 
on the remaining (M-1)  = 42 rounds of data, apply a 
classifier using the candidate feature set to thc held ant 
round, and record the average localization accuracy for 
that round. We repeat these steps a total of M = 43 
times, so each round is held out then tested to provide a 
hold out IocalizatioIi accuracy. The quality nietric for a 
candidate feature set is the average hold out localization 
accuracy. 
3. ANALYTICAL EFFORTS 
We believe that exploiting information about the phys- 
ical structure is essential for long term success of any 
SHM system. Therefore, in addition to the signal pro- 
cessing and pattern recognition approach, analytical 
techniques for assessing the dynamic response of the test 
article are applied. 
Analytical techniques, snch as the finite element method, 
can be used to predict the changes likely to result from 
particnlar types of damage, as well as to facilitate sensor 
placement and assess damage severity. A finite element 
model of the stiffened carbon-carbon TPS panel with the 
backing structure has been generated as shown in Figure 
5. In this simple model the bolts are not explicitly mod- 
eled, but boundary conditions are imposed at  each bolt 
location to reflect either a fixed or free condition corre- 
sponding to an undamaged or completely failed bolt. 
To assess the vibrational characteristics and mode 
shapes of the pristine structure as well as that of the 
damaged configurations, a series of natural frequency 
analyses have been performed. Fundamental frequen- 
cies and mode shapes for the undamaged structure and 
for the structure with a missing bolt are shown in Fig- 
ures 6 and 7. Comparing these figures indicates that 
at some modal frequencies the bolt loss has little im- 
pact on dynamic response, while in other cases there is 
a significant change in both mode shape and frequency. 
Such results are useful in selecting classifier features suit- 
able for detecting the damage conditions of interest. The 
analyses also indicate that the loss of a bolt has a rela- 
tively local effect, which has significant implications to 
actuator/senwr placement. Utilizing a series of analyses 
of various damage configurations, it is possible to deter- 
mine if a particular actuator/sensor pattern will detect 
all the possible bolt failures. 
The complete failure of a bolt allows new frequencies and 
mode shapes to occnr which provide clear signals for in- 
dication of bolt damage. Obviously, a primary goal of 
any SHM system would be to detect damage prior to the 
loss of an entire bolt. To better understand the effects 
of partial damage in bolted connections, analysis tech- 
niques are being developed to incorporate the influence 
of bolt damage on the resulting dynamic behavior of the 
structnre assuming that the bolt damage can be simu- 
lated analytically and experimentally as a loss of preload 
in the fwtener. Detailed niodels incorporating changes 
in local stiffness due to loss of preload are underway. 
Figure 5. TPS assembly finite element model. Modeled 
components include the carbon-carbon panel, mounting 
brackets and backing structure. 
Fully Bolted 
84.0 Hz 
C ~ f l & W ~ t i ~  
Damaged Bolt 
82.3 Hz 
Co"flg"rali0" 
Figure 6 .  Finite element atialysis showing damage in- 
sensitaue vibrational mode shapes. 
4. RESULTS 
Feature Selectzon 
The feature selection process returned the 12 element 
feature set shown in Table 1. The 'Function' column 
indicates which spectral function and sensor(s) provide 
the raw input signal. The letter 'P' indicates a (cross) 
power spectral density, and 'T' indicates a transfer func- 
tion while the subscripts show the sensor indices. The 
'Operation' column denotes the operation applied to the 
spectral function values, and the 'Interval' column shows 
the frequency range used for that feature. 
Classification Accuracy 
Results from the classification experiments are shown in 
the confusion matrix of Table 2. These test results are 
accumulated across the held out rounds from the fea- 
2469 
Figure 7. Finitc element analysis showing daniage sen- 
sitive vibrational mode shapes. 
ture selection process. That is, these results are from 43 
different cl~~?sifiers, all using the same feature set, but 
trained with a unique collection of 42 rounds of data. 
The average accuracy across a11 the tests is 99.1%. The 
lowest accuracy for a given round is 96%. The probabil- 
ity of false alarm (declaring a loose bolt given a healthy 
system) is (11/4658) = 0.2% and the probability of a 
missed detection (declaring a system healthy given a 
loose bolt) is (9/3525) = 0.3%. Therefore, the proba- 
bility of correctly declaring damage for any loose bolt 
condition is 99.7%. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
This paper provides an improved version of a structural 
health monitoring system for a difficult structural health 
monitoring task, relative to [3]. A primary factor leading 
to the improvement is the automated feature generation 
approach. In this step, frequency intervals that reliably 
separate pairs of structural conditions are first identified. 
Then, candidate features are computed from those fre- 
quency intervals and re-evaluated to measure how well 
they may be expected to separate all the structural con- 
ditions under consideration. Final features are obtained 
by a hold out based feature selection method. The re- 
sultant system has substantially higher localization accu- 
racy than presented in [3], as well as a higher probability 
of detecting damage and lower probability of false alarm. 
The automated methods developed in this work should 
be applicable to a variety of structures. One of the most 
important elements in this approach is to provide rele- 
vant training data. In this study, a single carbon-carbon 
panel is tested in a laboratory environment. Therefore, 
vibration and acoustic loads from other are= of the ve- 
hicle are not considered in these experiments. We are 
currently working to  apply these methods to different 
SHM tasks and to better exploit information obtained 
from analytical methods. 
2470 
Table 1. Details of sclect.ed features. 
Index Function,,, L F F  ~~ 
2 p44 
4 e33 
5 p44 
6 4 z 
7 P44 
3 p14 
Sum 
Sum 
4819 - 4932 
5283 - 5376 
5195 - 5347 
5050 - 5127 
5820 - 5972 
4570 - 4590 
3887 - 3970 
3716 - 3735 
3916 - 3945 
3901 - 3936 
Table 2. Confusion matrix for the damage localization experiment. This confusion matrix shows the number of 
occurrences of each classification outcome for each actual damage location. The row and column indices of the 
confusion matrix correspond to the number of the bolt that is actually loose and the bolt number assigned by the 
classification decision. Bolt '0' corresponds to  the a11 bolts fully fastened condition. 
Actual 4 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Assigned 
0 1 2  3 4 5 6  7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5  
4 6 4 7 0  1 1  0 0 0  0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 2 3 3 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
2 1 2 3 2 0  0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 2 3 5 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 2 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0  
0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 3 0  0 1 1  0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 5 0 0 0 2 3 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 2 2 8 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 1 0 0  5 0 2 2 6 0  0 0 0 0 3 
0 0 0 0 5 0 0  0 0 1 2 2 9 0  0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  1 0  0 0 2 3 3 1  0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 1 5  0 2 2 9 0  0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 5 0  0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 5 0  
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 5  
2471 
REFERENCES 
[1] H Solin and C Farrar, ”Daniage diagnosis using time 
series analysis of vibration signals,” Smart Materi- 
als and Structures, 10, 1-6, 2001. 
M Derriso, P Fnss, J Calcaterra, J Barnes and W 
Sotomayer, “Structural Healh Monitoring Applica- 
tions for Current and Future Aerospace Vehicles,” 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on 
Structural Health Monitoring, 3-11, 2001. 
M DeSimio, I Miller, M Derriso, K Brown, and M 
Baker, “Structural Health Monitoring Experiments 
with a Canonical Element of an Aerospace Vehi- 
cle,” Proceedings of the 8003 IEEE Aerospace Con- 
ference, Big Sky, MT,  March 2003. 
K Worden, G Manson and D Allman, “Experimen- 
tal Validation of a Structural Health Monitoring 
Methodology: Part I. Novelty Detection on a Lab- 
oratory Structure,” J. Sound and Vibration, 259, 
323-343, 2003. 
G Manson, K Worden, and D Allman, “Experimen- 
tal Validation of a Structural Health Monitoring 
Methodology: Part 11. Novelty Detection on a Gnat 
Aircraft,” J. Sound and Vibration, 259, 345-363, 
G Manson, K Worden, and D Allman, “Experimen- 
tal Validation of a Structural Health Monitoring 
Methodology: Part 111. Damage Location on an Air- 
craft Wing,” J.  Sound and Vibration, 259, 365-385, 
2003. 
“System Requirements Document for a Military 
Spaceplane System,” Air Force Research Labora- 
tory, Military Spaceplane System Technology P r e  
gram Office, Version 4.2, 12 Feb 2001. 
Matlab version 6.5.0.180913a (R13), June 18, 2002, 
Signal Processing Toolbox, Revision 1.6, The Matl-  
works, Inc. 
R Duda and P Hart, Pattern Clas.sfication and 
Scene Analysis, John Wiley and Sons, N Y ,  1973. 
[Z] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
2003. 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
John Rosenstengel has more than 
15 gear.$ experience designing signal 
processing and computer vision sys- 
tems. He has a M.S.E.E. from the 
Air Force Institute of Technology, 
Wright-Patterson Air Force, Base, 
OH. 
Isaac Mil ler  is currently a Ph.D. 
student at Cornell University. His re- 
search interests contml systems and 
machine learning. During co-op em- 
ployment sessions with industq,  he 
has designed and built pattern recog- 
nition applications, databases, and 
GUI softwar.e. 
M a r t i n  DeSimio  is the Technical 
Director at Qualia Computing Incor- 
porated in Beauercreek, OH, where he 
has designed computer vision systems 
for medical imaging applications. Be- 
fore joining Qualia, he was a pro- 
fessor in the Department of Electri- 
cal and Computer Engineering at the 
Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright-Patterson Air 
Force Base, OH where he tanght graduate courses and led 
research in automatic target, speech, and speaker recog- 
nition systems. He has a Ph.D. from the University of 
Dayton. 
Mark  Derriso is a program man- 
ager in the Analytical Structural Me- 
chanics Branch of the Air Vehicles 
Structures Division. He has years of 
ezperience in research and dewelop- 
ment of advanced metallic and ad- 
vanced composite structures. Mark 
also has vast experience in developing 
unique data acquisition and controls systems for testing 
aircraft structures and materials. Currently, he serues as 
laboratory director for AFRL/VAS Fatigue d Fracture, 
Extreme Environment and Multifuctional Structures re- 
search and development facilities. He i s  also the techni- 
cal lead for the research area of Structural Health Moni- 
toling (SHM). His current research efforts are in the ar- 
eas of aircraft structural sustainment, structuml health 
monitoring, and space structures. Previously, he worked 
at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) where he 
performed research on Metal Matrix Composites (MMC) 
and Ceramic Matrix Compogites (CMC) for the National 
2472 
Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. Mr. Denisa has a 
degree in Electronics Engineering Technology from Ken- 
tucky State Univemity and an Electrical Engineeiing de- 
gree from Wright State University. Cumntly, he is pur- 
suing his Graduate degree @om the University of Dayton 
in Engineering Management. 
-- Kevin Brown is a mechanical 
engineer for the Fatigue and Fmc- 
ture Laboratory, United States Air 
Force Research Labomtoy, Wright- 
Patterson Air Force Base, OH. His 
c u e n t  focus aieas include conduct- 
ing in-house technical activities in the 
awas of strucbaml health monitoring 
for the Space Operations Vehicle and software develop- 
ment for control of test frames and data collection. He 
has a BSME from Wright State University and i s  CUT- 
rently doing his graduate studies in Mechanical Engi- 
neering at the University of Dayton. 
Steven Olson is a Senior Research 
Engineer at the University of Dayton 
Research Institute in Dayton, OH. He 
has over 10 years of eqerience work- 
ing on projects involving structural 
design and vibration analysis. He has 
used finite element codes to perform 
linear and nonlinear static and ther- 
mal analyses, natuial frequency and forced response anal- 
yses, buckling analyses, and impact analyses. His work 
with thermal protection systems has included theimal 
and static analyses of heat exchangers designed for  use 
in the National Aerospace Plane. He has a Ph.D. in 
Mechanical Engineering fmm the University of Dayton. 
William Bmis t ed  is a Senior Re- 
search Engineer at the University of 
Dayton Research Institute in Dayton, 
OH. He has over 15 years ezperience 
in the design, analysis, and testing 
of aerospace structures on numerous 
aircruft including T-38, B-IB, F-16, 
F-18, F-24  JSF, and AV-8B. DUT- 
ing these programs, he has perfomed detailed finite ele- 
ment analysis of impact events, parametric design stud- 
ies, fabrication of prototype hardware, jWl-scale pualifi- 
cation testing, and transition to flight certified hardware. 
He has a Ph.D. i n  Mechanical Engineering from the Uni- 
versity of Dayton. 
2473 
