IMTC 2004 - lnslrumentation and Measurement 
Technology Conference 
Como. Italy. May 1830.2004 
Gas Identification Algorithms for Microelectronic Gas Sensor 
S. Brahirn Belhouari, A. Bermak, C .  Wei, P. C. H. Chan 
Hong Kong University of  Science and Technology. 
EEE Department. Clex Water Bay. Koulaon. Hung Kong. 
Phone: +852 2358 8844, Far: +X52 2358 1485. 
E-mil: eebclhou@ust.hk. eeberrnak@ust.hk. ccgfwei@ust.hk. mpchan@ust.hk 
Abstract - Gas idetzrifimtion represents a big challenge for pattern 
recognition sysrons due to several particular problems. The aim of 
this study is lo <mt,J/>UW the accuracy of (I range of advanced and 
classical parteni recognition ulgoritlzms for gas identification from 
setisor array signals. Density estimation is applied in the consfruc- 
tioii ofclassifiers th roqh  the use of Bayes rule. Erperimeiits on real 
S ~ U O ~ S '  data pmaed the effecri~~eness ofthe appma'rh with an excel- 
lent classification yerJbnmnce. We cornpare the classification accu- 
racy ofdifferent density models with severalneural networks amliitec 
tures. On our gas sensors data, the best perfomnce was achieved 
by Coussian mixture models with more than 92% accuracy. 
Keywords - Classification, gas sensor a r r q  density models, neural 
tierworks. pattern recognition. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
During the last decade, increasing attention has been given 
to the development of Microelectronic gas sensors. Among 
various types of sensors, the micro-hotplate based SnOa thin 
film sensors offer a number or interesting Ceatures and are 
particularly attractive for their practical interest [ I ] .  Indeed, 
these devices feature high sensitivity, lower power consump- 
tion, as well as compactness and compatibility with semicon- 
ductor technology. Unfortunately, thin film sensors, (as do all 
gas sensors) suffer from a number of shortcomings such as non 
selectivity and nonlinearities of the sensor's response. Pattern 
recognition algorithms combined with a gas sensor array have 
been traditionally used to address these issues [ 2 ] .  In fact, a 
gas sensor array permits to improve the selectivity of the sin- 
gle gas sensor, and shows the ability lo classify different odors. 
An may of different gas sensors is used to generate a unique 
signature for each odor. After a preprocessing stage, the result- 
ing feature vector is used to solve a given classification prob- 
lem, which consists of identifying an unknown sample as one 
from a set of previously learned gases. Significant work has 
been devoted to design a successful pattern analysis system for 
machine olfaction 121. Various kinds of flexible pattern recog- 
nition algorithms have hcen used for classifying chemical sen- 
sor data. Most notably neural networks have been exploited, in 
particular multilayer perceptrona (MLP), radial basis functions 
(RBF) and self organizing maps (SOM) [2]. Other methods 
0-7803-8248-X/04/$17.00 02004 IEEE 
based on the class-conditional density estimation have been 
used, such as quadratic and I< nearest neighbors (K") clas- 
sifiers. 
Recently, a new family of semiparametric mcthods based on 
mixture distributions, have been successfully applied for a 
number of applications such as speech recognition [3] and im- 
age retrieval [4]. Despite their great potential as classifiers, 
density model-based approaches have not bcen exploitcd for 
machine olfaction and electronic nose applications. In this pa- 
per, we will present a gas classification approach based on ei- 
ther class-conditional density estimation using different den- 
sity models or discriminant functions. The ability of the pro- 
posed models to perform gas identification will be compared 
using an experimentally obtained dataset. An inlegated sen- 
sor array has been designed with the aim of the identification of 
combustion gases. Data collected from the microelectronic gas 
sensor constituted of a VLSI chip including 8 sensors would 
first undergo a preprocessing stage before being fed to the clas- 
sifier. A total of six classifiers operating on PCA, Neuroscale 
and LDA projections will be compared. 
11. DATA DESCRIPTION 
Measurements have been done using an experimental setup 
consisting of a special sensor chamber equipped with gas 
pumps and mass flow controllers as well as a data acquisition 
board (Figure I). 
Fig. I. Scheme ofthe experimental setup. MFC slands ior Mass Flow 
Contmller. 
The sensor array composed of 8 micro-hotplate hased S7iOa 
thin film gas sensors, have been used. Four sensors with 
PtlSnO:, sensing lilm, two with Au/SnOa sensing film and 
the other two with Pt/Cu(0.16 w t % ) - S d 2 .  The sensors' op- 
erating temperature wds 300'C for the purpose of good sen- 
5 84 
sitivity to studied gases. The sensors output are raw voltage 
measurements in  the form of exponential-like curves. as shown 
in Figure 2. Data is collected at sampling period of Isec. 
"" 
0 7 -  
0 6 .  
"I 
n 
Fig. 3. Hislograms showing lhe response paurms uf the eight gas SC~SOIS 
exposed 10 CH4, CO and their mixture. 
I I 
x a ~ m m ~ 1 m s m  
ti_ (S) 
Fig. 2. Raw respanre of an m a y  or X micmelcctranic gas scnsors 
Gases used in the experiment are methane, carbon monoxide, 
hydrogen, and two binary mixtures: one of methane and car- 
bon monoxide and another of hydrogen and carbon monoxide. 
Vapours were injected into the gas chamber at a How rate de- 
termined by the mass How controllers (MFC). Concentration 
ranges are reponed in Table I. 
Gas I Concentration range (ppm) 
CO I 25-200 
500-4000 
25-200 & 500-4000 
500-2000 
25-200 & 500-2000 
CO & CH,  
CO & H2 
TABLE I 
G A S E S  A N D  THElK C O N C E N T K K r l O N  R A N G E S .  
The steady state value was recorded for each concentration of 
the live gases. Figure 2 shows the typical steady state response 
for the sensor array exposed to different gases. Since our goal 
is the qualitative classification of patterns, a normalisation pro- 
cedure is used in order to reduce the innuence of concentra- 
tions and nonlinearities. Each input pattern is divided by its 
Euclidean norm. A gas dataset of 220 patterns was used for 
estimating the performance of different classifiers. 
111. FEATURE EXTRACTION 
The recognition procedure involves preprocessing and di- 
mensionality reduction, learning from data and validation 
stage. In order to avoid problems associated with high dimen- 
sionality and redundancy, the initial feature vector is projected 
onto a lower dimensional space. The goal of feature extrac- 
tion is Io find a low dimensional vector that preserves most of 
the information in the original feature vector. Most fcature ex- 
traction techniques for electronic nose applications have been 
based on linear techniques mainly Principal Components Anal- 
ysis (PCA). 
We used PCA, and compared it with Linear Discriminant Aual- 
ysis (LDA) and Neuroscale [SI. PCA, a classical linear tech- 
nique, serves for redundancy removing and fcature reduction 
before the use of the classifier. Figure 4 presents the two- 
dimensional PCA scores for all the studied gas sensors steady 
stale voltage. We can note that the decision boundaries are not 
well defined due to strong ovcrlappings. 
4 5  4. 4 2  -02  4, 0 0 1  nZ 0, 0. 0 5  
Fig. 4. PCA results for the microelectronic sensor a m y  steady state vollage. 
Mrauremenl lypc. CO (circles). CH4 (plus signs), mixture CO-CHn 
(diamonds). 112 (t~imglcs) and mixture C O ~ H l  (yua~rs) .  
As compared to PCA, LDA provides a linear projection of the 
data with (number of classes-I) dimensions, by taking account 
ofthe scatter of data within each class and across classes. Fig- 
ure 5 shows the LDA plots for the studied gases. Compared 
to PCA results, it is clear from Figure 5,  that the LDA method 
permits to reducc the overlappings between the classes. 
Neuroscale projcction is n non-linear topographic (i.e. distance 
preserving) pmjection that uses a RBF network. This method 
585 
.,I 
v 
t+ 
-12 t*+ ++e v -0" fl
whcre ,p(zlC,) is the class-conditional density and p(Ck) is 
0% !, , , , , , , w;mi the prior probability. In the absence of prior knowledge, p ( C k )  
can be approximated by the relative frequency of examples in 
the dataset. One way to build a classifier is to estimate the 
class-conditional densities by using representation models for 
how each pattern class populates the feature space. In this 
approach, classifier systems are built by considering each of 
thc classes in turn, and estimating the corresponding class- 
conditional densities p(xlCk) from data. 
The most widely used method of nonparametric density esti- 
mation is the K Nearset Neighbors (KNN). Despite the sim- 
plicity of the algorithm, i t  often performs very well and is 
an important benchmark method. Howcvcr, one drawback of 
K" is that all the training data must he stored, and a large 
D ," rn ->a 
- , I  
-,I 
.lS 
-54 4 40 4 * -21 -220 -,I -10 -5 
Fig. s. LDA rcsu~ts for the micrwiectronic array m a d y  sate  ita ape. 
Measurement typt. CO (circles), CH4 (plus signs). mixtux CO-C& 
(diamonds). Hz (triangles) and mixture CO-Hl (squares). 
presents the advantage of preserving the data structure, as well 
as the possibility of incorporating subiective information. In 
p(Cklz). To minimize the probability of misclassification one 
should consider the maximum a posterior rule and assign z to 
class Cp: 
. .  
our case, Neuroscale was used with class information in order 
to generate a useful feature space that separate classes. Figure 
6 shows the Neuroscale plots for the studied gases. Compared 
to PCA and LDA results, Neuroscale presents the most com- 
plex scatter plot with large intra-class variability compared to 
a small inter-class separation. It is important to notice that the 
dimension of the projected data is a variable to be optimized. 
0 4 -  
02- 
0~ 
4 2 -  
d . ~  
4 6  4 s  
amount of processing is needed to evaluate the density for a 
new input pattern. An alternative is to combine the advantages 
of both parametric and nonparametric methods, by allowing 
a very general class of functional forms in which the number 
of adaptive parameters can be increased to build more Bexi- 
ble models. This leads us to a powerful technique for density 
estimation, called mixture modcl [6]. In our work we focus 
on semiparametric models based on mixture distributions. In 
a mixture model, a probability density function is expressed 
as a linear combination of basis functions. A model with hf 
components is described as mixture distrihution 161: 
0 0  0 oo 
0 00 M n 
* + +  t e a u  
e * I  s g : *  d.1 = P ( j ) P ( W  ( 2 )  
0 8  j=l 
" B B  
* * *  ." ~ 
R P ,  P 
a a  
o n o m  
".a= 
% o  'B where p(j) arc the mixing coefficients and the parameters of 
a v  z*+ 0 0%. thc component density functions p(zlj) vary with j .  Each 
mixture component is defined by a Gaussian parametric dis- 
tribution in d dimensional space. The method for training mix- 
ture model is based on maximizing the data likelihood. The 
log likelihood of the dataset ( z ~ ,  ...,z,,), which is treated as 
v 
O B  OB 
0 + 00 
"$' * +3 
*3 I 03 0 0,;i 8 ** it 
01  01 0 6  4 6  * a  4 2  
an error, is defined by: 
Fig. 6. Data projected using Nsumscalc with clmss information. 
Measurement t y p ,  CO (circles), C H 4  (plus signs). mixture CO-CH4 
(diamonds). H ,  (triangles) and mixture CO-If2 (squms). 
= 1% P(4 
i=l 
IV. CLASSIFIERS DESCRIPTION A specialized method is commonly used to produce optimum 
parameters, known as the expectation-maximization (EM) al- 
The objective of pattern recognition is to set a decision rule, gorith"' 
which the data space into regions, one The dcnsity models used were Gaussian mixture models 
for each class C,. A pattern classifier gencrates a class label (GMM)3 Generative Topographic (GTM) ['I and 
for an unknown feature vector E ~d from a discrete set of KNN. The discriminant functions used wcrc Gcncralizcd Lin- 
previously learned classes. The most general classilication ap- ear (GLM)3 MLP and RBF networks 1'1. 
proach is to usc the posterior probability of class membership 
586 
V. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS 
Classifier 
K N N  
GM h.f 
GTM 
PCA (%) Neuroscale (%) LDA (%) 
89 86.8 83.2 
92.7 88.6 90.5 
89.5 85.5 83.2 
Classifier 1 PCA (%) I Neuroscale (%) I LDA (%) 
RBF 1 83 I 76.8 I 80 
M L P  
GLhi 
90 88.2 89.4 
86.4 86.4 81.8 
For the PCA tool, the hest performancc is achieved when pro- 
jecting to five principal components. The addition of com- 
ponents actually degrades the performance of the classifier as 
shown in Figure 7. GMM is shown to outperform MLP. 
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
In this paper we presented a gas identification method based 
on either class-conditional density eslirnation or discriminant 
classifier. We conducted comparative experiments lo decide 
which algorithms were most suitable for the problem of clas- 
sifying combustion gases. Data were obtained from an array 
of 8 Microelcctronic gas Sensors using an experimental setup. 
It was found that GMM offers the hest performancc as com- 
pared to MLP, GTM, KNN, RBF and GLM. A aignificant de- 
pendence of classifiers performance on thc number of principal 
NY-npnlllpsl m-ms 
Fig. 7. Accuracy as a funclion oflhr number ofpnncipal components. 
components was round. 
Work is underway in order to incorporate more features than 
the steady state value. Pattern analysis systems will be de- 
signed to classify and quantify thc different gases. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work described in this paper WZF supported by a Direct 
Allocation Grant (project No. DAG02/03.EG05) and a PDF 
Grant for HKUST. 
REFERENCES 
[I] P.C.H. Chan. G. Ym. L. Shmg. R. K. Shmma, Z. Tang. J.K.O. Sin, 1- 
M. Hsing. Y. Wang, "An integrated gas Sensor technology using surface 
micro-machining:' Sensors and Acluators B 82. pp. 277-283, 2002. 
[?I R. Gutiemm-Osuna "Pattern analysis for machine olfaction: n review," 
IEEE Sensors Journal. Vol. 2.  NO. 3. pp. 189-202, 2002. 
[31 Y. Zhang. M. Aldcr and R. Togne", "Using Gaussian mixlure modeling 
in speech recognition." In Pmc. ICASSP Conf., 1994, Vol. I ,  pp. 613- 
616. 
141 N. Vaconcelos md A. Lippmm. "Featun representations for image n- 
trirval: beyond the color histogram," In Pmc. IEEE ICME Cant. 2000. 
Vol. 2, pp. 899-902. 
[SI D. Lowe and M. E. Tipping, "Fed-lbnumd neural networks and topo- 
Faphic mappings for exploratory data analysis," Ncural Computing and 
Applications, 4. pp. 83-95. 1996. 
161 D.M. Titlerington. A.F.M. Smith and U.E. Mako% " S t d i S t i C d  analysis 
of finite mixture distributions," John Wiley. New York. 1985. 
171 C. M. Bishop, M. Svcnscn. md C.K.I. William. "GTM: The Generalive 
topographic mapping:' Neural Computaiian. IO ( I ) .  pp. 215-235. 1996. 
I81 C. M. Bishop. "Neunl nrlwnrks for paltern ncagnition." Clurndon 
press, Oxford. 1995. 
587 
