IEEE AFRICON 2004 22 1 
Design and Construction of a Talking Call Line 
Identification Unit 
Marius A. Beukes Beatrys M. Lacquet 
Department of Electrical and School of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering Information Engineering 
Rand Afrikaans University University of the Witwatersrand 
PO Box 524, Aucklandpark, 2006, South Africa Private Bag 3, Johannesburg, WITS 2050, South Africa 
E-mail: mab@ing.rau.ac.za E-mail: b.lacquet@ee.wits.ac.za 
Abssrrocf-The most electronic devices convey information to 
the user by displaying it on a Liquid Crystal Display (LCD). Visu- 
ally impaired people cannot benefit from using electronic devices 
with LCD technology. Adapted products exist, but because no 
market for these products has been established, relatively small 
numbers are imported. Therefore only a few useful products 
are availsble at an affordable cost. We present the design and 
construction of a talking call line identification (TCLI) unit 
with integrated sound output to be used on Telkom' lines. This 
unit incorporates audio and visual inputloutput of all on-board 
functions. Visually impaired users can navigate the unit settings 
assisted by prerecorded voice prompts and big input buttons. 
A graphical LCD unit completes the unit, BS it could still be 
used by the non-impaired. The reproduction of a human wire  
is accomplished by prerecording on a solid-state Information 
Storage Device (ISD) that is capable of recording eight minutes 
of voice data. This enables the unit to znnounce the incoming 
callers number or an associated recording of the callers name 
and comes as a great benefit to uot only the visually impaired, 
but normal users of telephones as well 
Index Terms-Calling Line Identity, Frequency Shift Keying, 
Information Storage Device, Visually Impaired, Telephone Line 
Terminal Equipment, Audio-output. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
N a technologically advanced world, the visually impaired I depend more on others to help them function. The reason 
being that every electronic device uses some form of visual 
output that renders these "useful" devices useless to the 
visually impaired. A good example would be the Identicall 
unit distributed by Telkom Ltd' . The Identicall device uses 
an LCD display or output medium, through which information 
about the incoming call (eq. date and time, incoming callers 
number) is displayed. The Identicall unit uses the Calling Line 
Identity (CLI) service offered by most PSTN operators around 
the world. When enabled for a monthly fee, the CLI service 
sends important information, called CLI data, regarding the 
incoming call to the called users telephone line terminal 
equipment (TLTE). This identifies the incoming party before 
the phone is answered, as the CLI data is presented to the 
TLTE during the long silent period after the first ring signal. 
'South Afncan Public Switched Telephone Nework (PSTN) operator 
I 
Fig. I .  Proposed design for the Tdking Cali Line ldcntity (TCLi) unit 
CLI enabled TLTE devices are normally inserted in parallel 
with a standard telephone line and decode CLI data that origi- 
nates from the calling party's exchange. CLI data is transmitted 
using phase consistent frequency shift keying (FSK). The 
inherent design sholt-coming encounterred in the Identicall 
unit is overcome by incorporating sound output into this newly 
designed CLI unit. The addition of a voice output gives the 
impaired person access to data and information regarding the 
incoming call not previously possible. See Figure 1 for the 
proposed look of the unit. 
Section 11 explains the fundamentals of FSK modulated 
signals and summarises the specifications about CLI data 
structure according to the European and South African stan- 
dards. The conceptual design, device functions and peripherals 
are discussed in Section 111. 
11. BACKGROUND 
CLI data is sent from the calling party's exchange using a 
FSK modulation scheme. This section gives some backround 
knowledge on FSK modulated signals and the CLI data 
0-7083-8605-1 / $17.00 2004 IEEE 
TABLE I 
MODULATION RATES A N D  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C  FREQUENCIES FOR A 
1200 B A U D  FSK DATA-TRANSMISSION CHANNEL 
FO 
Mean frequency 
m 
FZ FA 
Symbol I Symbol 0 
Mark Space 
1200 baud 
Fig. 2. 
modulatcd CLI rransmission 
Super-imposed spectal densiv of the WO symbols used in FSK 
1700 Hz 1300 Hz+ IO Hz 2IW Hz-t 10Hz 
A .  Frequency Sh@ Keying 
Communications established by switching on the PSTN 
must presently be able to support data transmission through 
phase consistent FSK modulation, conforming to the Intema- 
tional Telecommunications Union (ITLJ) [ I ]  standards. Half 
duplex transmission at 1200 baud involves hvo symbols or 
modulation frequencies. The frequencies of interest are pre- 
sented in Table 1. Because only one symbol is present at any 
given moment, two symbols (space and mark) would have a 
combined power spectral density with peaks at Fa and Fz. 
This is depicted graphically in Fig. 2. 
The time period per symbol at the given baudrate of 1200 
symbolsis is 833.3 ps/symbols, that is the number of seconds 
a signal with frequency FZ or FA is present. Fig. 3 shows 
an FSK modulated byte that represents the ASCII letter " U  
or binary "01010101"2. A logic 0V is represented by Fa and 
logic 5V by Fz. The FSK signal shown in Fig. 3 has no 
discontinuities and is phase consistent throughout logic level 
changes. 
B. CLI Data Structure 
The timing diagram for CLI data reception is presented 
in Figure 4. The CLI data structure was investigated and 
'Approximately lhilfy eight ASCII ' V s  represents the channel seizure. Sec -. ~ 
222 IEEE AFRICON 2004 
tng. 4. Fig. 4. On-hwk FSK lransmision s p~ EE 300 659-1 specification. 
ASCII " U  :m . .  . . . .  . .. 
. . .  .... ... . > z  
I . .. . .  . ..... 
. .. .... D I 0 1 0  .. . 
0 1 2 1 . 5 1 7 8  
o s  
F 
P O  
4 5  
Fig. 3. FSK mdulated ASCII "U" 
simplified by using the following specifications: . ETS 300 659-1 [2] . ICASA TE-010 [3]. 
Further references, are made to the ETS specification only, 
as the ICASA specification is derived from the European 
standard. The CLI data structure is presented graphically in 
Fig. 6 and contains the data-link packet. The structure is 
explained as follows. 
I )  Data-link Packer: After the first ring burst the channel 
seizure signal, mark signal, message type, message length 
and check sum will be presented as per ETS 300 659.1 
specification. 
TIME 
I RingBorrt I I 
500ms < TI  c 2000ms 
Channel Saizvre 
3W bits of 
OIOIOIOI ....... 
Constant Mark 
11111111 ....... 
7 
2OOms< T2 < SOOms 
Ring Burst 2 
0-7083-8605-1 /$17.00 2004 IEEE 
IEEE AFRICON 2004 
Message 
d p e  
Call SeNp 
223 
Non-Mandatory Mandatory 
Parameters Parameters 
Dale and Time Calling Pany Namc 
Calling Line ldcntity Reason for absence of 
(CLI) Calling Pany Namc 
Reason for absence of Complcmenraly CLI 
CLI 
Called linc ID Ncrwok Messagc 
Call 'ype Exlcntion foropnator 
First Callcd Line 
Identity (in case of 
forwarded call) 
Typc of forwarded 
systcm StaIUS 
"se 
Type (Blnsry) 
HGFE DCBA 
loo0 0000 
1000 OOlO 
2) Channel Seizure Signal: I t  shall consist of a block of 
300 continuous bits of alternating "0"s and "1"s. The first bit 
to be transmitted shall he a "0'. The last bit to be transmitted 
shall be a "I". It should only start the data transmission in 
"on-hook data transmission. 
7) Mark Signal: The mark signal consists of a block of 
180 z t  25 mark bits or, as a network operator option, the mark 
signal may consist of 80 * 25 mark bits. 
4) Message Type (I Octet): The message type octet or 
byte contains a value to identify the message type. Relevant 
Message type coding parameters are listed in Table II. 
5) Message Length { I  Octet): The message length octet 
or byte contains the number of octets of the Data Link layer 
message (not including the Message type, Message length and 
Checksum octets). This allows a presentation-layer message 
length between 3 and 255 octets. 
6) Checksum Octet ( I  Octet): The checksum octet contains 
the twos complement of the modulo 256 sum of all the octets 
in the message starting from the Message type octet up to 
the end of the message (excluding the Checksum itself). The 
protocol does not support error correction or message re- 
transmission3. No sequence number or acknowledgement shall 
be used for the data messages transmitted from the exchange 
to the TLTE. 
7) Presentation Layer: Our main interest is in the Call 
Setup (Soh) message type parameter, as i t  contains the relevant 
'NOTE: The unit discards any incorrect Data-link mcssages. 
Type Message name status 
(Hexadecimal) 
SOH Call SeNp Mandatory 
82H Messagc Waiting Non-Mandatory 
Indicator 
call I 
~ y p e  ofcalling user I 
Rcdirecting Number I 
information about the incoming call. Fig. 6 sets out,the data 
structure of the presentation layer. The Call Setup data consists 
of parameters listed in Table 111. 
8) Data Word Strucrtrre: Each data word consists of one 
start bit (space), then eight data bits followed by one stop bit 
and 0-9 mark bits as shown in Fig. 6. 
111. PROPOSED DESIGN 
This section identifies conceptual boundaries and the phys- 
ical inpuf/output requirements for the prototype. Refer to Fig 
6 for the functional block diagram of the unit. By definition 
all embedded systems contain a micro-controller and residing 
software. With the exception of a few common features, the 
embedded hardware components are usually unique. Thus each 
system adheres to completely different requirements, any or 
all of which can affect the compromises and tradeoffs made 
during the development of the product. 
A .  Line lnnterface 
The line interface adheres to standard specifications for 
TLTE that connects to the PSTN. The regulatory body that en- 
forces these specifications is the Independent Communications 
Authority of South Africa (ICASA). ICASA-TE-001 Standard 
Specification for TLTE for Connection to the PSTN [4] was 
used in the design of the units line interface: 
The units ability to dial stored numbers is accomplished 
by playing prerecorded Dual Tone Multi Frequency (DTMF) 
tones over its line interface. Therefore the line interface 
includes a speech circuit that facilitates bi-directional flow 
of analog signals. The line interface does not loop the line 
when dialling but requires the user to pick up the connected 
telephone handset. Play back of prerecorded DTMF tones that 
reside on the ISD is known as tone dialing. Because DTMF 
tones should have a maximum frequency tolerance of *1.5%, 
0-7083-8605-1 / $17.00 2004 IEEE 
224 lEEE AFRICON 2004 
Fig. 6. Functional block diagram for TCLl unit 
the ISD device uses a very stable extemal clock frequency. 
This ensures the correct separation between the high and low 
frequencies of the DTMF tone. The line interface does include 
first and second stage lightning protection. 
B. Call Line ldentifrr - CMX602A 
The CMX602B decodes CLI data and presents it to the 
micro-controller via a serial output line. The identifier has 
two transmission modes: in mode one data is sent at a constant 
1200 baud towards the micro-controller and mode two requires 
the micro-controller to clock the data out of the hardware 
identifier via two additional 1/0 lines. Mode two requires 
extra embedded code development, hut does not require the 
micro-controller to have an on-board USART. The micro- 
controller used in the project did fortunately have an on- 
hoard USART and mode one was implemented. An extemal 
crystal of 3.579545 MHz was used for synchronised 1200 baud 
transmission. 
The hardware identifier proved to be an easy and inexpen- 
sive way of decoding FSK modulated CLI data and required 
less development time than software decoding techniques 
C. Voice Reproduction and Storage - ISDSII6 
ISDSI 16 Chipcorders provide high quality, fully integrated, 
single-chip Record / Playback solutions for I -  to - 16 minute 
durations. Address, control and selection are accomplished 
through an IzC interface to minimise pin count (only two 
control lines are required). 
I )  ISD Digital Memory: The ISDS 116 device is capable of 
storing digital data, in addition to analog data. This feature 
is utilised by storing frequently called numbers, received call 
lists, system configuration parameters and message address 
locations. 
2) ISD Anolog Memory; A sample frequency of 8 kHz 
ensures good reproductionhecording quality of analog signals. 
If the ISD storage is utilised for analog recordings only, a total 
of 8 minutes of recording time is available. This analog storage 
space is utilised to record voice prompts, pre-recorded DTMF 
tones and user recordings. 
0-7083-8605-1 /$17.00 2004 lEEE 
IEEE AFRICON 2004 225 
D. User Input 
Users navigate the device menus with three buttons, and 
one multi-function rotating dial button which acts as a menu 
navigator and volume control. A good quality electret micro- 
phone enables the recording of frequent caller names. The user 
recordings enable the unit to announce an associated recording 
of the callers name. These recordings are stored in the ISDs 
analog memory. Recordings of the user’s voice at a distance 
of 0.5 meters deliver acceptable sound quality and playback 
is audible at a distance of I O  meters. 
E. Output 
I) Voice output - miniature speaker: The unit plays hack 
the pre-recorded and user-recordings through a miniature 80 
speaker. ISD output signals are amplified and the output 
gain or volume is adjusted digitally via the push buttons or 
incremental encoder. Digital volume control is achieved by 
implementing the TPA0172 amplifier 
2) TPAO172 2- W amplifier with I zC bus: The ISD speaker 
output, SP+ and SP-, are connected to a TPA0172 amplifier 
available from Texas Instruments. Key features of this ampli- 
fier are: . 12C bus compatible . Delivers I-Wlchannel rms output power into 8il load . Total harmonic distortion is less than 0.2 percent over the 
. lntemal thermal shutdown protection mechanism . Low power consumption when in shutdown mode. 
audio spectrum 
This device utilises the 12C bus to control its functionality, 
which minimises the number of external components needed, 
simplifies the design, and frees up board space for other fea- 
tures. The overall gain of the amplifier is controIled digitally 
by the volume control registers which are programmed via the 
12C interface. Each register contains six bits, that allows 64 
gain steps, and two bits that mute the amplifier. Included with 
the device is integrated depop circuitry that virtually eliminates 
transients that cause noise in the speakers during power-up, 
power-down, and while in transition in and out of shutdown 
mode. 
3) Audio output: ISD recordings: Recorded voice output 
consists of the following recordings and prompts: . Notification prompts: Notifies the user of incoming calls, 
Spoken numerals and DTMF tones (0-9) 
missed calls, date and time etc 
System navigation prompts: This helps the user navigate 
the different menus. 
4) liisual output: LCD: The unit incorporates a 128 x 64 
pixel graphical LCD to display the following CLI information: . Incoming callers number. A list of up to 99 previous calls 
. Displays "Private" if CLI number delivery has been 
. Displays ”Unavailable” if CLI information is unavailable. . Date and time. 
can he accessed. 
blocked. 
. Type of calling user. A Graphic image depicts the calling 
user type and is displayed on the LCD. The different 
incoming call types are: 
- Voice call. 
- Data call. 
- Mobile phone. 
- Payphone. 
With every transition of the menu item a voice prompt is 
played hack to assist the visually impaired to identify the 
features of the unit. The voice output, given when navigating 
menus, could he muted by disabling the feature in the unit’s 
configuration options. 
F Data Processing and Micro-conrmller 
I) Micro-controller: The PIC18F452 micro-controller is 
a single chip, self-contained computer which incorporates 
all the basic components of a personal computer, just on a 
smaller scale. The micro-controller is a programmable chip 
that controls most of the above mentioned peripherals. The 
choice of micro-controller was influenced by the following 
criteria: 
Central processing unit (CPU) or speed . ROM memory 
RAM memory . Input and Output peripherals 
s On-board timers 
. Available communication buses . C compiler compatibility 
Interrupt circuitry 
The PlClSF452 micro-controller ranks in the top 10 con- 
trollers ever manufactured by Microchip. It scores highly in 
all the above mentioned criteria and is compatible with Mi- 
crochips C l 8  compiler. All embedded C code was developed 
in Microchips MPLAB IDE and compiled with their C18 
compiler. Development time was drastically minimised by 
using this compiler. 
2) Processing power: The graphical LCD peripheral re- 
quires the highest processing power, but these requirements 
are met easily by the PIC18F452 that runs on a 4 0  MHz clock. 
Because most instructions take four clock cycles to complete, 
10 million instructions can be executed in a second. 
3) Memory Requiremeno: The memory requirements are 
influenced by the size of the graphical user interface (fonts 
and graphics) and the underlining process code. The TCLl 
unit is able to store 20 frequent caller names and numbers, 
including a list of 99 previously received call numbers. The 
total program memory used should not exceed 32 kBytes as 
external EEPROMs would he required to free up some of the 
PlCs program memory. This is highly unlikely because the 
ISD could store up  to 174 KBytes of digital data when two 
thirds of its analog memory is used for recordings. This leaves 
the unit with ample space for the program memory needed for 
further development and the addition of new features. 
4) Input and output requirements: The PIC18F452 micro- 
controller is able to controllinterface with the following de- 
vices in the system: 
0-7083-8605-1 /$17.00 2004 IEEE 
226 IEEE AFRICON 2004 
Line interface . CMX602B call line identifier . Graphical LCD unit . ISD5116 infomation storage device . 4 push buttons and the incremental encoder . Texas Instruments TPA0172 2 Wan amplifier . PC serial port by using its on-hoard USART. 
IV. UNIT OPERATION 
When a incoming call initiates, CLI data is stored in 
memory. A checksum computed during reception is compared 
to the received checksum. If the received checksum differs 
from the computed checksum, the unit halts, displays "Data 
error" on the GLCD and a voice prompt informs the visually 
impaired of the data error. If there is no difference in received 
and computed checksums the incoming callers number is 
printed on the GLCD. Memory is checked for previous user 
recordings that match the received number. If found, the user 
recording is played hack in the following format "You have a 
call from <user recording>". If a user recorded the name 
"Fred Flinstone" and associated the recording with Fred's 
telephone number, the following output would he heard when 
Fred phones. "You have a call from Fred Flinstone". The 
output "You have a call from" is spoken words in a male 
voice. The output "Fred Flinstone" is spoken words in the 
voice of the user. 
When no associated recordings are found in memory, a 
male voice announces the following "You have a call from 
<number>". Frequent caller names can be recorded by brows- 
ine the received call list. If the desired number is hiehliehted. 
It is sincerely hoped that the device developed and described 
herein will improve the state of this technology and will he 
of great benefit to the visually impaired and to ordinary users 
of telephones. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Telkom SA (Pty)Ltd, 
ATC (Pty)Ltd, Marconi Communications SA, THRIP and the 
Rand Afrikaans University for their financial assistance and 
involvement in this project. 
LATEX 
This document was prepared using MT@ [6] and the IEEE- 
tran class [ 5 ] .  
REFERENCES 
[ I ]  Telecommunications Standardization Sector of 1TLL Dolo Communication 
Over the Telephone Nerwork - 600N200-Boud Modem Srondmiked for 
the General Switched Telephone Nefwork , 1TL Rccommcndation V.23. 
[2 ]  European Telecommunications Slandards InSiiNte, Public Switched Tele- 
phone Network (PSTN); Subscriber line pmtocol over the loco/ loop for 
displploy (and drted) services: Pan I :  On hwk dolo transmission - ETS 
300 659-1, February 1997. 
[3] lndependcnt Communications Authority of South Africa, Functional 
requirements for ortologue colling line identificorion (CLI) customer 
pmmises equipment - ICASA TE-010, May 2002. 
[4] lndependcnt Communications Authority of South Africa, Standard Spec- 
ification /or TLTE for Connection to the Public Switched Telephone 
Nehwrk ~ ICASA TE-001, January 1999. 
[SI M. Shell (2002), How to Use the IEEErron Clars, IEEE- 
tran homepage on CTAN. [Online]. Available: hnp:llw.etan.orgiler- 
archiveimacro~atcniconvjbhupponedilEEna~ 
[61 H. Kopka and P. W. Daly, A Guide to mEy, 3rd ed. Harlow, England: 
Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
I 1 -  I 
the user initiates the record process when the "Record" button 
is pressed. The following prompts are heard from the unit 
"Record this callers name after the tone, press any button when 
finished ........ <BEEP>". Recordings are terminated by press- 
ing any button during the recording process. User recordings 
can he re-recorded, reviewed or erased in the same manner. 
Mariur A. Beuker (M'1995) received a B.lng 
degrec in electrical engincenng from the Rand 
Afrikaans University, Johannesburg in 2W2, and is 
cumntly working towards an M.lng. He is invcs- 
ligating the design and conmuclion of a Talking 
Call Line Identity Unit. His interests include em- 
bcdded desipn, home automation. FPGAs and em- 
bcdded software algorithms for implementation in 
the telecommunications industry. 
v. CONCLUSION 
Because the unit incorporates audio and visual output, it is 
now possible for the visually impaired to navigate the CLI 
unit settings and access the information offered by the device 
without the assistance of others. 
0-7083-8605-1 I$17.00 2004 IEEE 
