FA2-2 
An Ultra Low Power Transcutaneous Impulse 
Radio Link for Cochlea Implants 
THOMAS BUCHEGGER, GERALD OSSBERGER 
Linz Center of Mechatronics GmbH, Altenbergerstrde 69,4040 Linz, Austria 
E-mail: thomas.bucheaeer@lcm,at, eerald.ossbereer@lcm.at 
ERWIN HOCHMAIR 
Leopold Franzens University of Innsbruck, Technikerstraae 25,6020 Innsbruck, Austria 
E-mail: erwin.hochmair@,uibk.ac.at 
ULLA FOLGER 
Cantonal Hospital of St.Gallen, 9007 St. Gallen, Switzerland 
E-mail: ulla.foleer@ksse.ch 
ALEXANDER REISENZAHN, ANDREAS SPRINGER 
Johannes Kepler University of Linz, Altenbergerstrde 69,4040 Linz, Austria 
E-mail: a.reisenzahn@,icie.iku.at, a.sminger@.icie.iku.at 
Abstract- The big potential of ultra wideband radio, in 
particular low power consumption, low power spectral 
density, high immunity against interference, affords many 
benefits, not only for consumer electronics, but also for 
medical devices. A cochlea implant is an electronic hearing 
apparatus, where a wireless link through human tissue is 
required. In this paper we propose a UWB link for a data 
rnte of 1.2 Mbps and a propagation distance up to 
500 mm. Transmitter, antennas and receivers are 
described and proposals for semiconductor integration are 
made. 
Key words- broadband antenna, cochlea implant, 
detector receiver, step recovery diode, tunnel diode, Ultra 
wideband. 
I. 1NTRODUCTION 
A cochlea implant is an electronic device intended to 
help severely to profoundly deaf individuals who gain 
little or no benefit from hearing aids [I]. It consists of 
hvo main parts: an internal implanted part and an 
external part known as the speech processor. The 
speech processor can be worn discreetly behind the ear 
as shown in Fig. 1. Sounds are picked up by a 
microphone ( I )  and turned into an electrical signal, 
which goes to the speech processor (2) where it is coded 
into a special pattern of electrical pulses ( X A -  
modulation). These pulses are sent to the coil (3) and 
are then transmitted across the intact skin (inductive) to 
the implant (4). The implant sends a pattern of electrical 
pulses to the electrodes in the cochlea. The auditory 
nerve ( 5 )  picks up these electrical pulses and sends 
them to the brain. The brain (6) recognizes these signals 
as sound. 
0-7803-8373-7/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE - 356 - 
Fig. 1: HOW a cochlea implant works. 
The drawbacks of the presently used coil (3), for 
inductive transmitting to the receiver (stimulator), are 
the high power consumption, the size and optical 
reasons. The big challenge now is, if it is possible, to 
substitute the inductive communication system with an 
UWB system and fulfill all the claimed requirements. 
The transmitter and its antenna will be included into the 
speech processor’s case, the receiver and its antenna are 
beneath the skin and connected to the implant. The 
lifetime of the implant’s battery is of capital importance, 
because for every changing, a surgery is necessary, 
which is high in costs and nasty for the patient. Another 
reason than low power consumption for UWB is the 
low spectral density which should be more healthful for 
brain and body than a constant magnetic field. 
11. SPECIFICATIONS 
First of all the FCC requirements [2] should be fulfilled 
(bandwidth: 3.1 GHz - 10.6 GHz). Nearly all parts have 
to be implemented in a CMOS (0.18 pm) process to 
save power and space. The power consumption for the 
receiver should be below 100 pW as a mean value over 
the time. The distances should be 5 to 50” 
transcutanous and 500 mm in the air. There should be a 
transcutanous wireless connection between speech 
processor and implant and on the other hand between an 
MP3 player, a mobile phone or another electronic audio 
device and the speech processor. It is also intended to 
make stereo hearing possible by connecting each ear’s 
speech processor by a UWB wireless connection, 
through or around the head. The antennas should be as 
small as possible and its radiated pulse should be able to 
penetrate human tissue. The input signal of the 
transmitter is Z A -  modulated with 1.2 Mbps. 
111. TRANSMITTER 
This 1.2 Mhps EA- modulated signal is perfect for an 
on-off keying (OOK) modulation. OOK uses mono 
phase modulation, where a pulse transmits a “I” and no 
pulse transmits a “0” as shown in Fig. 2. The 
transmitted signal can be defined as in Eqn. 1 .  The 
symbol time Ts is divided by the number of frames Ns 
(number of pulses per symbol), whereas each frame 
lasts T/ = Ts/Ns.  Variable uk,, which is , , l”  for a high bit 
and ,,O“ for a low bit. E, accords to the energy of one 
symbol. 
Fig. 2: OOK principle. 
N,-l 
s ( t )  = &- 1.‘ C w ( t  -nT, -U,) ( 1 )  
The major problem in a UWB transmitter is the pulse 
generation with a pulse spectrum above 3.1 GHz. The 
pulse duration for Gaussian monocycle pulses has to be 
below 300 ps for the spectral requirements, therefore 
CMOS or SiGe BiCMOS processes would be desirable 
for fast pulse generation. Gerrits [3], Kim [4] and 
Azakkour [5] presented fundamentals to generate 
i ”4 
different pulse shapes on integrated circuits. Anyway 
CMOS is still to slow for 250 ps pulses with an 
amplitude of 0.5 V,,, but this goal is very soon 
reachable and an ultra low power UWB transmitter can 
be manufactured. For our prototype we use an 
ACT - TTL logic and an SRD pulse sharpener circuit. 
In Fig. 3 the transmitter principle is shown. 
1- t- I-- 
Fig. 3: UW3 transmitter with OOK and SRD pulse sharpener. 
A 50MHz crystal clock oscillator generates a TTL 
output, which triggers a D-flip flop and resets itself 
immediately. The short output pulse of the D-flip flop 
has a duration of about 2.5 ns, which is to long for a 
UWB pulse. With a SRD pulse sharpener the rise time 
of’this pulse can be fastened up to 70 ps for 3.5 V of 
amplitude [6]. The 50 MHz pulse repetition frequency 
(PRF) is - 40 times the symbol rate of 1.2 Mbps. The 
transmitter output signal is shown in Fig. 4. The 
problem with this prototype of Fig. 5 is the high bias 
current of the SRD, hence for a low power application a 
transmitter in CMOS technology is obligatory. 
Fig. 4: OOK transmitter output. PRF=SOMHz, symbol 
rate = 1.2 Mbps. 
- 357 - 
Fig 5:  UWB transmitter prototype. 
1V. ANTENNAS 
Ultra Widehand antennas are nowadays of huge interest 
based on the enormous demand in broadband wireless 
systems. Because of the small power levels authorized 
by the FCC, every dB counts in a UWB system [7]. 
Antennas can be categorized into magnetic and electric 
antennas. Magnetic Antennas are loops or slots and 
generate a high magnetic field close to the Antenna 
which have excellent propagation characteristics in 
human tissue in contrast to the nearly non invasive 
electric antennas (dipoles, horns, etc.), having an 
intense electric field around. The bandwidth of an 
antenna describes the nearly constant characteristics in a 
frequency interval. Important values are the input 
impedance, the radiation pattern and the polarization. If 
the VSWR (voltage standing wave ratio), defined in 
Eqn. 2 fulfills Eqn. 3, the antenna is called broadband 
antenna. 
f 
f. (3) 
VSiVR i 2,O in the range of 2 2 2,O 
For our prototype we used very simple monopole 
antennas shown in Fig. 6 .  
A 1.5 mm thick copper wire, soldered with an SMA 
connector and packaged in a shrinkable tubing, was 
used. This is no special broadband antenna, but it is 
very small in size and it is possible to penetrate human 
tissue with UWB pulses. The antenna a U2 monopole 
or Marconi antenna was developed for a center 
frequency of 5 GHz. The ground plane is the outer 
conductor of the SMA connector. In Fig. 7 the VSWR 
of the manually enfolded monopole antenna is plotted 
and exhibits in the range of 1.8 GHZ to 3.7 GHz a 
wanted poor matching, which results in nearly no 
radiation helow 3.7 GHz, therefore no filter for the FCC 
requirements is needed. 
. .  , . . 0 5  : . .  
0 
1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 7: VSWR of the manually enfolded monopole. 
V. RECEIVER 
An asynchronous or non coherent receiver is sufficient 
for a communication link from the ear to the implant. 
The first receiver prototype in Fig. 8 consists of an 
LNA, a detector diode, which rectifies the signal of Fig. 
9, a low pass filter for getting the envelope and an 
operational amplifier which amplifies the signal back to 
a TTL level. Instead of the detector diode a ready chip 
from Linear Technology can he used (LTC SSOS), 
which results in a signal like in Fig. 10 [SI. The printed 
circuit board of this prototype is shown in Fig. 11. 
\I/ 
i ................. : 
Fig 8: Nan coherent UWB Receiver 
Fig. 6 30 mm manapole antenna 
358 - 
-0 12 
0 02 04 06 08 1 
Time (us) 
Fig. 9: Detector diode output, rectified signal 
Fig. IO:  Output of the LTC 5508 detector chip. 
Fig. 1 I : Receiver prototype. 
For less power consumption tunnel diodes or back 
tunnel Diodes can be used. In the tunnel diode, the 
semiconductor materials used in forming a junction are 
doped to the extent of one-thousand impurity atoms for 
ten-million semiconductor atoms. This heavy doping 
produces an extremely narrow depletion zone similar to 
that in the Zener diode. Also because of the heavy 
doping, a tunnel diode exhibits an unusual current- 
voltage characteristic curve as compared with that of an 
ordinary junction diode. The characteristic curve for a 
tunnel diode is illustrated in Fig. 12. The three most 
important aspects of this characteristic curve are (1) the 
forward current increases to a peak ( I p )  with a small 
applied forward bias, (2) the decreasing forward current 
with an increasing forward bias to a minimum valley 
current (Iv), and (3) the normal increasing forward 
current with further increases in the bias voltage. The 
part of the characteristic curve between I, and Iv is the 
region of negative resistance. Backward diodes or back 
tunnel diodes are tunnel diodes with a maximum 
forward voltage of - 100 mV and a minimum reverse 
voltage of - 500 mV. These diodes operate in reverse 
mode as a very sensitive pulse detector. Because of the 
high sensitivity no more LNA is needed. The drawbacks 
of diode biasing and LNA power consumption 
disappear when using this diode. By using hack tunnel 
diodes it should be possible to fulfill the < 100 pW 
power consumption requirement for the receiver. 
Fig. 12: Characteristic diagram ofa tunnel diode. 
VI. RESULTS 
Two different prototypes for an ultra short distance 
UWB communication link below 500 mm were 
developed. On the photo of Fig. 13 the SRD transmitter 
on the left side and the detector receiver with an 
LTC5508 is pictured. If a hand encloses each antenna, 
as shown Fig. 14 the signal is still received perfectly as 
359 - 
shown on the scope screen behind. Better results are 
reached with a tunnel diode detector or receiver. The 
power consumption of the receiver can be minimized to 
1.5 mW. This 1.5 mW consist of the tunnel diode bias 
current and the active low pass filter. By using the hack 
tunnel diode a degradation of the power consumption of 
a decade should be possible. 
I ._II .. . . . .,, ... .~ .,. . ,. 
Fig. 13: A UWB communication link protoiype, lefl tmsminer, 2 
monopole antennas, right: non coherent receiver. 
Fig. 14: Transmining through human t i m e .  
VII. CONCLUSION 
An electronic hearing apparatus, like the cochlea 
implant with its low power consumption requirements, 
is an ideal application for a UWB communication link. 
A complete prototype system for this application is 
proposed. The OOK transmitter with a data rate of 
1.2 Mhps has a pulse repetition frequency of 50 MHz 
and is based on pulse generation with step recovery 
diodes. The monopole antenna only transmits in the 
FCC spectrum and has excellent propagation 
characteristics through human tissue. Three different 
detector receivers with a ready detector IC, tunnel 
diodes and backward diodes are compared in relation to 
power consumption and sensitivity. The use of UWB 
conlmunication systems for cochlea implants becomes 
soon realistic if all the components are integrated in a 
fast CMOS process as described and the pulse detection 
in the receiver can be done by a passive element like the 
back tunnel diode, to reach a long battery lifetime in the 
implant. 
VlII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was carried out at the Institute for 
Communication and Information Engineering (ICIE), 
University of Linz and was funded by the Linz Center 
of Competence in Mechatronics (LCM). We would like 
to acknowledge MI. Ralf Rudersdorfer and Mr. Gerhard 
Kaineder for their help in manufacturing the test 
hardware. 
IX. REFERENCES 
"h1m: l iw .mede l  cam: MED-EL Medical Electronics. 
"Firs1 Repon and Order," FCC, Washington, D.C. FCC 02- 
48, 22. April 2002. 
1 F. M. Gerritr and I. R. Farreioru. "Wavelet emeration 
circuit for UWB impulse radio ap&calions," k Electronics 
LenerT, vol. 38,2002. 
H. Kim, D. Park, and Y. 100, "Design of CMOS Scholtz's 
Monocycle Pulse Generalor," in Proc. IEEE Con/erence on 
Ulna WidebondSysrems and Technologies (UWESV, 
Reston, VA, USA, 2003. 
A AzaWtour, "Challenges for 8 new integrated ulm- 
wideband ( W E )  source: in Proc. IEEE Conference On 
Ulna Wideband Syslems and Technologies (UWBST), 
Reston, V A ,  USA, 2003. 
T. Buchegger, G. OOberger, A. Reisenzahn, A .  Stelzer, and 
A.  Springer, "Pulse Delay Techniques for PPM Impulse 
Radio Transmilten," in Pmc. IEEE Conference on Ultra 
WidebondSysrems and Technolom'es (UWBSrl, Reston, 
VA, USA, 2003. 
H. G. Schantz, "Inhoduerian to Ultra-Wideband 
Antennas," in Proc. IEEE Conference on Ultra Widebond 
syrtemi and Technologies (UWESlJ, Reston, VA, USA, 
2003. 
A. Reisenzahn, "Hardwarekamponenten fur Ultra- 
Wideband Radio," in 
NaehrlchlenrechniWInformorionslpchnik. Linz, Austria: 
Johames Kepler UniversitBl, 2003, pp 86. 
- 360 - 
