The 47th IEEE htemational Midwest 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems 
A High Order Multi-Bit CA Modulator for Multi-Standard Wireless Receiver 
Ling Zhang, Vinay Nadig and Mohammed Ismail 
Analog VLSI Lab. 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
The Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH-43210 USA 
Abstract-The next generation of cellular systems will be in- 
creasingly similar to a data communication system. Not only 
will it transfer voice and multimedia data, it will also be inte- 
grated with WLAN to access Internet whenever possible. Thus 
these cellular systems need highly integrated multi-standard re- 
ceivers. The design of the A/D converter in such receivers is a 
big challenge. A reconfigurable EA modulator which is suitable 
for GSMNCDMANLAN standards, is introduced in this paper. 
According to the different signal bandwidth and Dynamic Range 
(DR) specifications, this EA modulator is reconfigured to achieve 
the required dynamic range with less power consumption. The 
prototype is implemented in TSMC 0.18pm CMOS process with 
1.8V power supply. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Cellular systems are now moving from 2G to 3G. While a 2G 
cellular system focuses on voice transmission, 3G brings high- 
speed data transmission which enables wideband multimedia 
applications. 4G mobile systems will be further integrated with 
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN). A user will employ 
the WLAN mode whenever the mobile terminal is within range 
of a WLAN access point [ 11. WLAN-enabled cell phones are 
expected to contain multimode cellular capability. A sugges- 
tion is to encompass GSM and WCDMA operation, in addition 
to WLAN [2]. WCDMA will take care of wide-area medium- 
speed data connections, while GSM will provide speech and 
lower-rate data in remote areas. The addition of WLAN com- 
patibility will add high-speed data connections to the mix. 
Fig. 1 depicts the multi-standard receiver architecture pro- 
posed by the Analog VLSI Lab. of the Ohio State University. A 
switch selects between the three receive modes and the transmit 
mode. A low-IF (100 kHz) architecture has been used for GSM 
to reduce the DC offset problem and relax the image rejection 
requirement while a zero-IF architecture has been used for the 
other two standards. Three RF filters have been used to select 
appropriate signal bands. Due to the proximity of WCDMA 
and WLAN bands, LNA and mixer have been shared between 
them but a second LNA and mixer is necessary for GSM opera- 
tion. However, when one set of LNA and mixer is operational, 
the other set is powered down to reduce power consumption. 
Baseband components in the I and Q paths include a DC-notch 
filter, poly-phase filter, VGA and ADC and these are shared 
among the three standards. The receiver was designed using 
MS Excel@ and a transient analysis of the receiver was per- 
formed using Sirnulink@ to gain a better insight into the design 
trade-offs. 
To cover multiple cellular and WLAN standards is a chal- 
lenge, since the bandwidth and resolution requirements are 
widely spread in those standards. The ADC in the receiver path 
is a bottleneck in such a system. Table I summarizes the chan- 
nel bandwidth and dynamic range requirements of the baseband 
Fig. 1. Triple standard receiver architecture 
TABLE 1 
ADC DR REQUIREMENTS OBTAINED FROM THE 
MULTI-STANDARD RECEIVER MODEL SIMULATIONS 
Standards 
935-960 (Rx) 
1920-1980 (Rx) 
20 MHz 
ADC for the three standards, obtained from the Sirnulink@ 
model of the receiver. EA ADC is an attractive choice for a 
multi-standard solution, since data rate is naturally traded for 
resolution in such an ADC. 
This paper describes a switched-capacitor (SC) E A  modu- 
lator operating from 1.8V supply and implemented in TSMC 
0.18pm CMOS technology. It achieves SNDR of 83 dB for 
GSM mode, 73 dB for WCDMA and 58 dB for WLAN. It can 
also be used for some other standards (e.g. Bluetooth) without 
any modification. 
The paper is organized as follows. The architecture of this 
multi-standard EA modulator is first explained followed by a 
description of the important building blocks. The simulation 
results and discussion are then provided and the important re- 
sults are summarized in the conclusion section. 
11. E A  MODULATOR ARCHITECTURE 
Theoretical DR of a E A  modulator is the maximum signal to 
quantization noise ratio (i.e. peak SNRQ).  As shown in (l), 
there is a trade-off between the order L, the oversampling ratio 
M and the number of bits B in the quantizer. For signals of very 
wide bandwidth, such as in WLAN receiver, oversampling ratio 
might only be 4 or 5 because the achievable clock frequency 
is constrained by the process technology. As a result, higher 
order and/or multi-bit quantizer have to be employed to get the 
0-7803-8346-X/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 
I11 -379 
TABLE I1 
COMPARISON OF EA MODULATOR ARCHITECTURES 
required resolution. For the lower data rate application, such 
as GSM receiver, M can be easily made more than 100 due to 
much smaller signal bandwidth. Thus 2nd order and single bit 
quantizer is usually enough for this kind of application. 
3 2 L + 1  
2 I+ 
Peak SNRQ = - . -. 
Table I1 compares peak SNRQ of the three standards for dif- 
ferent values of L, M and B. Due to stability issues of high order 
single loop EA modulators and loading effects and nonlinear- 
ity problems of multi-bit quantizers, a MASH topology with 
smaller number of bits in the quantizer is preferred. Thus the 
configuration of the .EA modulator, which is in bold in Table 11, 
is found to be the most suitable. 
Due to scaling effects and non-linearities of the building 
blocks, around 10 dB drop from the theoretical DR is expected 
upon implementation. As the theoretical DR (shown in Ta- 
ble 11) is more than 10 dB higher than the specifications for 
GSM and WCDMA, this drop causes no problem in these two 
modes. However, it could be of concern in WLAN applica- 
tion. In order to further increase SNRQ for WLAN mode, the 
quantization noise power in the signal bandwidth has to be re- 
duced. This can be done by adjusting the zeros of Noise Trans- 
fer Function (NTF). Usually all zeros of NTF are placed at DC. 
If some of these zeros are placed inside the signal bandwidth 
but at higher frequencies from DC, it will help to minimize the 
quantization noise power in the useful bandwidth [3] [4]. 
Taking into account the above considerations, a cascade 2- 1 - 
1 - 1  structure with multi-bit quantizer is proposed. The topol- 
ogy of this multi-standard EA modulator is shown in Fig. 2. 
The first stage is a second order, single bit EA modulator. 
Since the GSM mode needs only 2nd order and single bit EA 
modulator, only the first stage is powered on to do the A/D con- 
version. All the other stages are turned off to save power. Latter 
stages are all first order EA modulators for easier configuration 
as third, fourth or fifth order EA modulators. For a medium- 
speed data transmission, like for a Bluetooth signal which has 
1 MHz channel bandwidth, 3Td order EA ADC is enough. For 
a higher speed data transmission, such as in WCDMA, the first 
3 stages (i.e. qth order) are employed to get more than 60 dB 
SNDR. As discussed above, in WLAN mode, careful place- 
ment of the zeros of NTF so as to further suppress the quan- 
tization noise power is a must. This is realized by adding a 
feedback path from the last stage to the third stage as shown in 
Fig. 2. In addition, a 9 level quantizer is used in the last stage 
and a 3 level (1 .S bits) quantizer is employed in the second last 
.- 
VI  iJ\ N 
Fig. 2. Triple standard receiver architecture 
stage to make sure the total quantization noise power is small 
enough. 
Transfer functions for the last 2 stages are as follows 
Y~(z) = z - ~ X ~ ( Z )  + (1 - K1)Q3(2) + aK1Q4(.) (2) 
Y ~ ( z )  = -22-l . Q3(2) + z-'(I - z - * )  . Q ~ ( z )  (3) 
where Q3 and Q4 are the quantization errors of the 3'd stage 
and qth stage respectively, X3 is the input to the 3rd stage, 'a' 
is the feedback factor from the last stage to the 2"d last stage. 
Thus NTF of the last two stages is 
z- l [ l  - 2(1 - 0,)z-l + 2-21 
2-1[1 - 2(1 - u)z-1 + 2 - 2 ] ( 1  - 2 - 1 ) 3  
(4) 
Combined with the first 2 stages, the total NTF of the system is 
( 5 )  
Feedback factor 'a' is used to adjust the zeros in this NTF. 
Minimization of the noise power inside the signal bandwidth 
becomes an optimization problem formulated as follows 
min, G = 
- 
h.I 
I(1- e-j')'. [l - 2(1- u)e-j* +e-j2*] l 2  dR 
(6) 
The optimal value of 'a' is then determined by 
1-a = 
* + +in($) - s in (%)  + $sin(%) - & s i n ( g )  
g - :sin($) + : s in(%)  - &sin@) 
(7) 
Table I11 shows the optimal feedback ratio 'a' for different 
M. Basically a notch is placed at around 0.88f~ (where f~ 
is the signal bandwidth, i.e. half of the channel bandwidth). 
However, when M increases, the feedback strength needs to be 
much smaller which makes the zero spread strategy not prac- 
tical for medium and high oversampling ratios. For example, 
when M=8, 'a' needs to be 0.05925. 'a' is realized in SC mod- 
ulator by the capacitor ratio. This ratio of nearly 1/20 implies 
a big capacitor spread and large layout area. So in this system 
the feedback from the last stage to the third stage is only used 
when oversampling ratio is as low as 5 ,  which is the case of 
the WLAN mode. In WLAN mode, oversampling ratio of 5 
I11 -380 
TABLE I11 
OPTIMAL 'a' FOR DIFFERENT OVERSAMPLING RATIOS 
M Optimal 'a' 
0.05925 
16 0.01495 
is employed in this system and the optimal ratio of 0.1488 is 
rounded to 1/6 for circuit implementation. 
A programmable decimation filter is used to filter the out-of- 
channel noise and downsample the output to Nyquist rate. Fil- 
tering is accomplished in multiple stages. First stage is a Comb 
filter which is reconfigured for these three standards. In GSM 
mode, the comb filter is set to be third order and decimation 
is chosen to be 32; in WCDMA mode, the comb filter is re- 
configured to be the fifth order and decimated by 5; in WLAN 
mode, the order and the decimation are 6 and 5 respectively. 
Two halfband filter stages, each decimating by 2 are used for 
GSM and WCDMA modes. An FIR filter is used as the last 
stage in all standards to further suppress the quantization noise 
and the blockers. 
A Sirnulink@ behavioral model of the modulator which 
includes OTA non-idealities (finite DC gain, finite gain- 
bandwidth, finite slew rate and output swing), comparator non- 
idealites (offset and hysterisis), DAC non-linearity and co- 
efficient mismatch was simulated to obtain the specifications of 
the building-blocks. Based on the specifications obtained from 
this model, the peak SNR is 88 dB for GSM mode (M=128, 
L=2, B=l), 80 dB for WCDMA mode (M=20, L=4, B=1.5) 
and 60.8 dB for WLAN mode (M=5, L=5, B=3). 
111. CIRCUIT IMPLEMENTATION 
The multi-standard SC EA modulator is prototyped in TSMC 
0.1 Slim,, 1.8V CMOS technology and has been submitted for 
fabrication. The designs of important building blocks are dis- 
cussed in this section. 
A.  Design of the OTA 
Behavioral simulations indicate that at least 60 dB DC gain, 
more than 360 MHz gain-bandwidth and 200 V/ps slew rate is 
necessary in order to not degrade DR in WLAN mode. Thus 
gain boosting strategy is used to boost the DC gain without 
sacrificing the excellent frequency performance of the folded 
cascode topology. Fig. 3 shows the schematic of the folded 
cascode fully differential OTA with SC common mode feed- 
back. Performance of the designed OTA is summarized in Ta- 
ble IV. Scaling down the biasing currents of the second, third, 
and fourth OTA is possible and will lower the power consump- 
tion. However, due to time constraint, scaling is not performed 
in this prototype. 
B. Design of Comparators and the Quantizer 
Owing to the noise-shaping nature of EA modulators, the 
comparator specifications are much more relaxed for high over- 
sampling ratios, and for comparators in the latter stages. Thus 
in GSM and WCDMA modes, comparators with 5 mV-10 
mV offset and 10 mV-20 mV hysteresis are found to be ade- 
quate. However in WLAN mode, a more accurate compara- 
f -- 4, "e ,iJ 
r-i '  'h 
Fig. 3. Gain boosted OTA topology 
TABLE IV 
OTA PERFORMANCE 
Gain-bandwidth = 435 MHz, 
PSRR = 102 dB @DC, 85.6 dB 0 1  MHz, 
Power = 7.22 mW (excluding biasing). 
tor is needed for the first stage since its non-idealities are only 
shaped by 2nd order and not suppressed enough by the low 
oversampling ratio of 5. Behavioral simulations show that for 
the peak SNR to drop by less than 1 dB, the comparator should 
have an offset and hysteresis of less than 2 mV and 5 mV re- 
spectively. Hence two types of comparators are used in this sys- 
tem. A multi-stage comparator [6] as shown in Fig. 4 is used in 
the first stage; regenerative comparators [7] as shown in Fig. 5 
are used in the subsequent stages and flash ADC. Fig. 6 shows 
the 9 level quantizer that's used in the last stage for WLAN 
mode. The 2Vp, maximum output swing of OTAs limits the 
input range of this 9 level quantizer and thus bounds its nom- 
inal quantization step size to 125 mV. The regenerative com- 
parator provides enough resolution and consumes lower power 
than the multi-stage comparator when used in the flash ADC of 
this 9 level quantizer. R-ladder based DAC is used in this EA 
modulator for its simplicity. The INL. error due to 2% resistor 
mismatch is less than 5 mV. Because this INL error undergoes a 
4th order noise shaping, the 2% resistor mismatch leads to less 
than 2 dB loss in SNR. Thus no additional Dynamic Element 
Matching (DEM) circuit is used to reduce the DAC nonlinearity 
error. 
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS 
This EA modulator is implemented in TSMC 0.18prn 
CMOS technology and operates from 1.8V supply volta e. 
The simulated SNR versus input level is plotted in Fig. 7. Since 
The whole circuit is simulated using CADENCE-SPECTRE b . 
111-381 
Fig. 4. Multi-stage comparator 
Spectrew 
SNDR 
GSM: 
200kS/s. OSR=128, Order=2, 85 dB 
J I 
SNRkT,C Total 
SNDR 
88dB 83dB 
Fig. S. Regenerative comparator 
3-level feedback, Csl=0.3pF 
WLAN: 
20MS/s, OSR=S, Order=5, 
9-level feedback, Csl=0.2pF 
SPECTRE transient analysis does not include noise informa- 
tion, dominant noise - kT/C noise is hand calculated using (7), 
where Ni is the kT/C noise of the ith stage, M is the oversam- 
pling ratio, Ai is the gain between the modulator input and the 
ith integrator input. Considering the kT/C noise, the SNDR 
from SPECTRE simulation is 85 dB, 74 dB and 58 dB for 
GSM, WCDMA and WLAN respectively. Table V summarizes 
the simulated performance of this EA modulator. 
58 dB 69dB S8dB 
MASH EA modulators are sensitive to coefficient mis- 
matches. These coefficients are implemented in the switched- 
capacitor EA modulator by capacitor ratios. This necessitates 
the Monte-Carlo analysis for the capacitor mismatch. With a 
capacitor mismatch of 0.1 %, Monte-Carlo simulation reveals 
a variation of peak SNR by IdB, 0.73dB and 2.ldB for GSM, 
WCDMA and WLAN modes respectively. 
bits=l, Csl=O.SpF 
WCDMA: 
1 SMS/s.OSR=20.Order=4. 1 74dB 1 79dB I 73dB 1 
V. CONCLUSION 
A GSMWCDMAWLAN multi-standard EA modulator is 
proposed in this paper. Its SC implementation in a I .8V TSMC 
a) Flash ADC b) R-ladder DAC 
Fig. 6. Schematic of 9 level quantizer 
SNR CuNe - ~lmulatlon 
100 1 
Input Level (dBFS) 
Fig. 7. SNR Vs. Input level obtained from Circuit-level simulations 
0.1 8 - p ~  CMOS process uses gain-boosting strategy for OTA, 
offset cancellation strategy in comparator and multi-bit feed- 
back. The prototype achieves an SNDR of 83 dB for GSM 
mode, 73 dB for WCDMA mode and 58 dB for WLAN. 
REFERENCES 
H. Lim, “Beyond 3G,” IEEE Potenrials Oct-Nov 2002, pp. 18-23. 
R. Horn, P. Demian, “Cellular and WLAN Convergence,” Wireless Bruad- 
band Forum, Cambridge, UK, November 2002. 
A. Tabatabaei, K. Onodera, M. Zargari, H. Samavati, D. Su, “A 
Dual Channel EA ADC with 40MHz Aggregate Signal Bandwidth“, 
ISSCC’O3, San Francisco, USA, Feb 9-13,2003. pp. 66-67. 
K.Y. Tiew, A. J. Payne,P.Y.K. Cheung, “MASH AX Modulators for 
Wideband and Multi-Standard Applications,” ISCAS ’01, Sydney, Aus- 
tralia, May 6-9.2001. pp. 778 -781. 
T. Burger, Q. Huang, “A 13.SmW 185 MS/s EA Modulator for 
UMTS/GSM Dual-Standard IF Reception,” IEEE JSSC ,Dec 2001, 
pp. 1868- 1878. 
D. Jones, K. Martin, “Analog Integrated Circuit Design,” John Wiky and 
Suns Inc. 1997, pp. 312-314. 
G.M.Yin, F.O.Eynde, WSansen, “A high speed comparator with 8-bit res- 
olution,” IEEE JSSC. Feb 1992, pp. 208-2 11. 
I11 -382 
