Keynote Address 
Quo Vadis, VolVis? 
Hanspeter Pfister 
Mitsu bish i Electric Resea rch La boratories (MERL) 
ABSTRACT 
The discipline of volume visualization has come a long 
way. Real-time volume rendering on commodity hardware 
is now commonplace. Many theoretical aspects of volume 
modeling and volume visualization have been studied in 
detail. And the commercial impact of volume visualization 
is respectable, especially in medical and geophysical appli­
cations. Yet, many people share the feeling that the field is 
becoming stagnant, that too much research focuses on incre­
mental algorithmic improvements, and that we have become 
disconnected from the scientists, engineers, and doctors who 
need volume visualization. The question is: where do we go 
from here? 
In this talk I will first take stock of the achievements 
in volume rendering since 1992, when I attended my first 
VolVis sy mposium. I will focus on methods for hardware­
accelerated rendering of rectilinear volume datasets: ray 
casting, texture slicing, shear-warp rendering, and splatting. 
I will point out which problems could be overcome with 
progress in technology, and which problems have proven to 
be fundamentally harder to solve. 
The second part of my talk will focus on the future 
challenges in volume visualization. I will argue that real­
time volume rendering is - for all practical purposes - a 
solved issue. Instead, we need to focus on the principal goal 
of volume visualization: To convey information with graph­
ical techniques. This simple statement raises many useful 
questions: How do we convey information effectively ? How 
do we measure effectiveness? What are appropriate forms of 
visual abstraction? What forms of user interaction are most 
effective to gain insights? How can technological progress 
assist us in conveying information more effectively ? 
I do not to have any clear-cut answers to these ques­
tions. Instead, I will demonstrate the issues on some real-life 
applications and discuss potential areas for further research. 
My hope is to help foster a better understanding of the chal­
lenges ahead, and to provide points of discussion that can 
assist in making the next big steps in volume visualization. 
x 
BIO 
Hanspeter Pfister IS Associate Director and Senior 
Research Scientist at MERL - Mitsubishi Electric Research 
Laboratories - in Cambridge, MA. He is the chief architect 
of VolumePro, Mitsubishi Electric's real-time volume ren­
dering hardware for PCs. His research interests include com­
puter graphics, computer vision, scientific visualization, and 
graphics architectures. His work spans a range of topics, 
including point-based graphics, 3D photography, 3D televi­
sion, face modeling, face recognition, and volume graphics. 
Hanspeter Pfister received his Ph.D. in Computer Science in 
1996 from the State University of New York at Stony Brook. 
He received his M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Switzerland, 
in 1991. Dr. Pfister has taught courses at major graph­
ics conferences including SIGGRAPH, IEEE Visualization, 
and Eurographics. He has been teaching introductory and 
advanced graphics courses at the Harvard Extension School 
since 1999. He is Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions 
on Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG), chair of 
the IEEE Visualization and Graphics Technical Committee 
(VGTC), and has served as a member of international 
program committees of major graphics conferences. Dr. 
Pfister was the general chair of the IEEE Visualization 2002 
conference. He is senior member of the IEEE, and member 
of ACM, ACM SIGGRAPH, the IEEE Computer Society, 
and the Eurographics Association. 
