A cognition-based approach for querying personal digital libraries. 
A. Malizia 
Dept. of Computer Science, University "La Sapienza" of Rome 
Via Salaria 113, 00198 Rome, Italy
malizia @di.uniroma1.it
Abstract. 
The decreasing cost and the increasing availability of 
new technologies is enabling people to create their own 
digital libraries. One of the main topics in personal 
digital libraries is allowing people to select interesting 
information among all the different digital formats 
available today (pdf, html, tif, etc.). Moreover the 
increasing availability of these on-line libraries, as well 
as the advent of the so called Semantic Web [1], is 
raising the demand for converting paper documents into 
digital, possibly semantically annotated, documents. 
These motivations drove us to design a new system which 
could enable the user to interact and query documents 
independently from the digital formats in which they are 
represented. In order to achieve this independence from 
the format we consider all the digital documents 
contained in a digital library as images. Our system tries 
to automatically detect the layout of the digital 
documents and recognize the geometric regions of 
interest. All the extracted information is then encoded 
with respect to a reference ontology, so that the user can 
query his digital library by typing free text or browsing 
the ontology. 
This approach could help users, because they don’t need 
to know SQL since they could only recall visual hints 
about a document: like find me a document with a picture 
on the left side and a big title centered on top of the page. 
Introduction. 
The main goal of our system, OntoDoc, is to allow users 
to query their own personal digital libraries in an 
ontology-based fashion. An ontology [2] specifes a 
shared understanding of a domain of interest. It contains a 
set of concepts, together with its definitions and 
interrelationships, and possibly encodes a logical layer 
for inference and reasoning. Ontologies play a major role 
in the context of the so called Semantic Web [1], Tim 
Berners-Lee's vision of the next-generation Web, by 
enabling semantic awareness for online content. 
OntoDoc uses a reference ontology to represent a 
conceptual model of the digital library domain, 
distinguishing between text, image and graph regions of a 
document, providing attribute relations  for them, like 
size, orientation, color, etc. In order to classify a 
document, OntoDoc performs a first layout analysis 
phase, generating a structured, conceptual model from a 
generic document. Then the conceptual model goes 
through an indexing phase based on the features in the 
model itself. Finally, the user can query his digital library 
by typing free text or through composition of semantic 
expressions. The query system is particularly suited to 
express perceptual aspects of intermediate/high-level 
features of visual content, because the user does not have 
to bother thinking in terms of inches, RGB components, 
pixels, etc. Instead, the user can query the system with 
higher level, although accurate, concepts (e.g. medium 
size, black color, horizontal orientation etc.), moreover 
thanks to the use of the ontology the user domain could 
be taken into account in order to let the query expressions 
adapt to its knowledge. 
Fig. 1. The System window, with a matched digital 
document on the right, the query was: find me a 
document with an image region, two columns text and 
text region in english. 
The Reference Ontology. 
The reference ontology encodes all the required 
information about the digital library domain. Documents 
and Regions are represented as resources with a number 
of attributes in common, e.g. Orientation, Size, etc. The 
ontology encodes specific relations between subconcepts 
of Region, i.e. Text, Image and Graph Regions, and 
several attribute concepts, like Color, Size, Orientation, 
Reading Direction and so on (a snapshot of the concept 
Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human Centric Computing (VLHCC’04) 
0-7803-8696-5/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
taxonomy is shown in Figure 2). Encoding ontological 
concepts instead of numerical attributes is a peculiar 
feature of our system. The user can think of concepts 
instead of low level measures (e.g. inches, pixels etc.) and 
submit queries like "all the documents with a text region 
in the south part and an image region with 2 columns 
having an inner table". User can query the database also 
using keywords extracted from the content using digital 
indexes or OCR for scanned doccuments. 
Fig. 2. A portion of the reference ontology for digital 
libraries. 
Experimental results and Conclusions. 
We have tested our system over the UW-II database that 
is the second in series of document image databases 
produced by the Intelligent Systems Laboratory, at the 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
This database was particularly useful because it contains 
624 English journal document pages (43 complete 
articles) and 63 MEMO pages. All pages are scanned 
pages. Each document in the database has been taken 
from scientific journals and contains text, graphs and 
images. All the images were already annotated with 
labels for the region type (image, text, ...) and sizes. The 
experiments have been carried out in 2 phases: the first 
phase was to the test our layout analysis module over the 
UW database to verify the percentage of the automatic 
classification of the digital documents regions; while the 
second phase was performed on 10 users in order to 
measure the ability of the system in helping them to 
retrieve documents. 
For the first experiment, concerning the classification 
abilities of our system, we have tested it over the entire 
database (600 images) obtaining an 84% of correctly 
recognized regions, 14% of incorrectly recognized and 
2% to be defined. Of course, errors at this stage affect the 
querying precision. A method to overcome this 
inconvenience is an ongoing work. The 84% of correctly 
recognized regions could be subdivided into a 59% of 
entirely recognized and a 25% of partially recognized, 
which means that some regions were assigned to the right 
class and some others not, for example a single text 
region was interpreted as two text regions (this usually 
happens in titles with many spaces). For the second 
phase, all tests have been carried out using the relevant 
feedback process by which the user analyzes the 
responses of the system and indicates, for each item 
retrieved, a degree of relevant/non-relevant or the 
exactness of the ranking [3]. Annotated results are then 
fed back into the system, to refine the query so that new 
results are more fitting. The experiment was implemented 
showing to the users 10 different documents and then 
asking them to retrieve the documents from the entire 
UW database using our query module. On the qualitative 
side, our system proved to be highly effective because the 
users concentrated on the conceptual content of 
documents rather than on numerical information about 
them, allowing faster and more accurate retrieval of the 
desired documents with respect to keyword-based non-
ontological retrieval. A major improvement of OntoDoc 
may be in the classification phase. In fact, the system 
could classify shapes like subject images or specific 
geometry on the basis of their ontological descriptions 
(for instance, finding a document with an image of an 
apple, or with a pie-chart). 
References. 
[1] Berners-Lee, Weaving the Web, Harper, San Francisco, 
1999.
[2] B. Smith, and C. Welty, Ontology: towards a new synthesis, 
Proc. of Formal Ontology in Information Systems FOIS-2001,
ACM Press, October 2001. 
[3] G. Nagy, Twenty years of document image analysis, PAMI, 
IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 1/22 
pp: 38-62, 2000
Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human Centric Computing (VLHCC’04) 
0-7803-8696-5/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
