       
Abstract— Molecular imaging calls for imaging systems with 
both high resolution and high sensitivity. In small-animal SPECT 
high resolution is typically achieved using pinhole collimation. In 
order to improve the sensitivity of single-pinhole systems we 
employ a novel collimation approach called multi-pinhole 
imaging. This imaging technique extends conventional single-
pinhole collimation through the addition of pinholes on each 
collimator. An important feature of multi-pinhole imaging is the 
overlap of projections on the detector. This overlap results in a 
more efficient coverage of the detector and thus a considerable 
increase in sensitivity. In this contribution we report on the 
performance of two multi-pinhole imaging systems: a dual-
headed Siemens ECAM and a triple-headed Trionix TRIAD. The 
big-headed ECAM being upgraded with two 10-pinhole 
collimators, while the medium-sized detectors of the TRIAD were 
equipped with three 7-pinhole apertures. Image reconstruction is 
performed using a dedicated OSEM algorithm. Both systems are 
characterized by a series of phantom measurements and tested on 
numerous animal studies. We will show that both systems yield 
excellent image quality with a reconstructed resolution of 1.2mm 
and a sensitivity of up to 1600cps/MBq. In addition to regular 
semi-quantitative single-isotope studies, we will present data on 
dual-isotope imaging, absolute tracer quantification and the 
fusion of the SPECT images with MR data of the same animal. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
inhole SPECT employing conventional gamma cameras 
is known to provide high resolution and excellent image 
quality when the object is small compared to the available 
detector area. Thus, it can be very useful in pharmaceutical and 
pre-clinical research where new radio-pharmaceuticals have to 
be tested in small animal studies. Pinhole SPECT has also 
become a valuable tool in the emerging field of molecular 
imaging where small animal imaging experiments are carried 
out to study biochemical pathways and biological mechanisms 
or disorders on a more fundamental, i.e. molecular level. 
However, due to the poor geometric efficiency of the high-
resolution collimator the sensitivity in conventional single-
pinhole tomography is limited. In order to improve the system 
sensitivity without degrading spatial resolution we have 
                                                           
Manuscript received November 1, 2004. 
N. U. Schramm, C. Lackas, and J. Hoppin are with the ZEL, Research 
Center Juelich,  Germany  (n.schramm@fz-juelich.de).  
T. Schurrat, M. Béhé, and T. M. Behr are with the Dept. of Nuclear 
Medicine, University of Marburg, Germany (tmbehr@staff.uni-marburg.de). 
U. Engeland is with Scivis GmbH, Goetingen, Germany (engeland@sci-
vis.de). 
developed and tested a multi-pinhole collimation technique for 
high-resolution and high-sensitivity imaging of mice and rats.  
This novel collimation technique is an extension of single-
pinhole tomography to more than one pinhole per collimator. 
The pinholes are typically arranged in a way that each pinhole 
views only a certain part of the object with all pinholes 
together covering the whole field of view. To accomplish this 
the pinholes are tilted in the axial and transaxial direction. 
Another important feature of multi-pinhole imaging is that 
projections through different pinholes may overlap partially on 
the detector resulting in a more efficient coverage of the 
detector area and thus, leading to a considerable increase in 
system sensitivity. Compared to single-pinhole tomography the 
multi-pinhole system exhibits a more homogeneous sampling 
of object space and is less susceptible to inconsistencies arising 
from incomplete sampling of projection space and the 
violation of the data sufficiency condition. 
In this contribution we report on the performance of two 
multi-pinhole imaging systems: a dual-headed Siemens ECAM 
and a triple-headed Trionix TRIAD. The big-headed ECAM 
being upgraded with two 10-pinhole collimators, while the 
medium-sized detectors of the TRIAD were equipped with 
three 7-pinhole apertures. Both systems were characterized by 
a series of phantom measurements and tested on a variety of 
animal studies.is project deals with the upgrade of a 
commercial gamma camera with a dedicated multi-pinhole 
collimator (Fig. 1) for high-resolution and high-sensitivity 
single-photon imaging of mice and rats. 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The multi-pinhole collimator designs are based on 
conventional collimator frames and consist of a 12mm 
pyramidal lead shielding and an interchangeable multi-pinhole 
aperture made of 10mm tungsten alloy (HPM1850). The 
collimator depth, i.e. the distance from the image plane to the 
aperture plane, totals 140mm. The conical pinholes have an 
inner diameter of 1 to 2mm and an acceptance angle between 
40 to 60° depending on the application. For mouse studies both 
systems are operated at a radius of rotation of 30 to 35mm with 
corresponding magnifications between 4.7 and 4. A rat is 
typically measured at a ROR of 40 to 45mm yielding 
magnification values between 3.5 and 3.1. The overlap fraction 
in the multi-pinhole projections typically ranges from 40 to 
60%. 
On the Performance of two Multi-Pinhole 
SPECT Systems for Small Animal Research  
N. U. Schramm, C. Lackas, J. Hoppin, T. Schurrat, M. Béhé, U. Engeland, T. M. Behr 
P 
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 2823
 High-resolution pinhole imaging requires the exact 
knowledge of the geometrical imaging parameters, i.e. the 
collimator depth, the radius of rotation, the center of rotation 
shift, and the aperture offset in the axial and the transaxial 
direction. In order to determine these parameters we have 
developed a calibration method based on the SPECT 
acquisition of a three-point source phantom. This calibration 
estimates the geometric parameters to within ±0.2mm and is 
typically repeated every 6 to 12 month.  
The tomographical image reconstruction is carried out using 
a dedicated multi-pinhole algorithm. This iterative 
reconstruction is based on the maximum likelihood approach 
that solves the set of linear equations connecting the unknown 
activity distribution with the measured projections. The entries 
of the system matrix are pre-calculated numerically using a 
dedicated ray-tracing technique, thus, physical effects such as 
aperture penetration at the pinhole edges or varying photon 
transmission and absorption at different angles of incidence are 
incorporated in the system model. To speed up the 
reconstruction we have implemented the method of ordered 
subsets. The reconstruction is controlled by a robust and easy-
to-use graphical interface and is integrated into the clinical 
network environment via DICOM and Interfile data exchange. 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The imaging capabilities of the two multi-pinhole imagers 
were tested thoroughly on measured phantom and animal data. 
It was found that both systems yield excellent image quality 
with a reconstructed resolution of 1.2mm (see Fig. 1) and an 
average sensitivity of up to 1600cps/MBq. Depending on the 
tracer used in the mouse studies small anatomical details such 
as 2mm tumors, cortex versus medulla of the kidneys, the 
mouse striatum or small bone structures were clearly resolved. 
Even at very low doses (< 50µCi) and poor counting statistics 
(< 5kcts/view) the multi-pinhole systems provided remarkably 
good image quality. The acquisition time for a complete 
SPECT study ranges from 5 to 15min. while the reconstruction 
times vary from 10 to 15min. depending on the number of 
pinholes per collimator. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Multi-pinhole SPECT of a miniature Jaszczak phantom. 
Pinhole diameter 1.5mm.  
     We have also investigated the possibility of performing 
dual-isotope imaging with Tc-99m and In-111. Both isotopes 
are imaged simultaneously and their corresponding activity 
distributions are separated using energy discrimination. 
Further, as many imaging applications require the knowledge 
of the absolute tracer concentrations (µCi/ml) we have studied 
quantification capabilities of our multi-pinhole imagers. It was 
found that absolute activity quantification in small animals is 
feasible and that the error typically amounts to less than 3%. 
Finally, we have investigated the fusing of high-resolution 
SPECT data with MR images of the same animal. The MR 
data was acquired on a clinical 1 Tesla MR system using a 
miniature receive-only RF coil and a double-echo imaging 
sequence. Image fusion was carried out by a semi-automatic 
procedure employing a mutual information algorithm (see Fig. 
2). 
 
Fig. 2.  Fusion of a mouse tumor study with MR data of the same 
animal. Pinhole diameter 1.5mm.  
 
0-7803-8701-5/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE0-7803-8700-7/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE 2824
