The 301h Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, November 2 - 6,2004, Busan, Korea 
DATA LOGGER APPARATUS FOR STRAY CURRENT MEASUREMENT OF 
SUBWAY AND POWER LINE 
Jeong-Hyo Bae', Yoon-Cheol Ha, Tae-Hyun Ha, Hyun-Goo Lee, Dae-Kyeong Kim, Jae-Duck Lee 
Electric Power Research Laboratory 
Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute 
28-1, Sungju-dong, Changwon, Kyungnam 441-120, South Korea 
Phone: +82-55-280-1362 
E-mail : jhbne@keri.re.kr 
Fax.: +82-55-280-1476 
Absh-act- 
In present, most of metallic structures(gas pipeline, oil 
pipeline, water pipehe, etc) are running parallel with subway 
and power line in korea. Moreover subway system and power 
line make a stray current due to electrical corrosion on 
metallic structures. The owner of metalIic structures has a 
burden of responsibility for the protection o f  corrosion and 
the prevention against big accident such as gas explosion or 
soil pollution and so on. So, they have to measure and analyze 
the data about P/S(Pipe to Soil) potential, amplitude of stray 
current, point of source of stray current and so. 
In this paper, results of development about data logger 
apparatus for measurement stray current of subway and 
power line are presented. 
Keywords : Interference, Stray Current, Subway, Power Line, 
PIS Potential 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Underground metallic structures (gas, oil, and water 
pipelines, etc) are equipped with cathodic protection 
facilities to be protected from corrosion and to maintain 
longer life. 
However, the steady maintenance and inspection of such 
structure is difficult due to the interference of stray current. 
The existence of stray current signifies the loss of energy. 
And the stray current originated from a subway system or a 
power line promotes corrosion of underground metallic 
structures and thus results in environmental pollution and 
large accidents. Currently, P/S(Pipe to Soil) potential due to 
stray current is manually measured in general. 
We have developed an apparatus that can automatically 
measure this data. The data logger apparatus is capable of 
simultaneously measuring the stray current generated by a 
subway system or a power line and the PIS potential and 
analyzing the dab. The apparatus is introduced in this paper. 
11. The Mechanism of Stray Current Occurrence 
A, The mechanism of DC struy current occurrence due to 
a subway system 
In general, the load current of a subway system is 
designed to leave the substation, enter the train through the 
feeder, operate the train, and return to the substation 
through the rail. However, due to the resistance along the 
rail and imperfect insulation between the rail and the 
ground, the current strays from its intended path and 
escapes to the ground. It is called leakage current or stray 
current. 
Stray current enters an underground metallic stnrctures(gas, 
oil, and water pipelines) that work as a good conductor, 
flows through the structure, exits to the ground at a point 
where the soil resistivity is low or near the subway power 
substation area, and returns to the negative feeder of 
substation. And corrosion occurs most severely around the 
area where the current exits from ground metallic structures. 
This stray current induced corrosion in the subway system 
is called stray current corrosion or Electrolysis. [l]-[XI 
B. The mechanism of AC stray current occurrence due to 
apower line 
n general, 3 kinds of induced AC voltage occur on an 
underground metallic structure; capacitive induction, 
induction and resistive induction. In Korea, resistive 
induction accounts for the majority of induced AC 
voltage.[9]-[ 141 
The principle of resistive induction is as follows. Due to 
resistive coupling effect, energy in the form of AC or 
voltage can be transmitted between the grounding structure 
0-7803-8730-9104/$20.00 Q2004 IEEE 
1563 
of a power system and an underground structure that share 
the same electrolyte(soi1). In other words, on a power 
system with the grounded neutral conductor, unbalanced 
current flows to the neutral conductor due to system 
unbalance in 3 phase, or when the 3n(n=whole number) 
high fiequency of the system flows to the neutral conductor, 
this energy is transmitted to a nearby underground metallic 
structure through the soil and if the underground structure 
is coated with an insulator, resistive induction voltage 
occurs between the structure and the ground. 
0 
pwer&ede? cable 
I 
b u i d p i p u  
Figure I .  Diagram illustrating the occurrence of stray 
current due to a subway 
As shown in Figure 2, suppose the grounding conductor of 
the power system is a hemisphere with the radius of r and 
current I flows into the ground with the uniform resistivity 
of p , then, the induced voltage v from the center of the 
hemisphere 0 to point x is as follows. 
the grounding conductor that generates current 1 into the 
ground, the amplitude of voltage calculated by formula (2) 
is induced. 
As can be seen in formula (2), when the current discharged 
to the ground is constant, the magnitude of resistive 
induction voltage induced to the pipeline depends on the 
soil resistivity and the distance between the grounding 
conductor and the pipeline. 
Currently in Korea the most problematic AC stray current 
occurs due to multiple grounding wire of the neutral wire in 
22.9kV D/L(distribution line) system. As shown in Figure 
3, the primary voltage of power transmission system used 
in Korea is 22,9OO[V], 3 phase 4 wire system and multiple 
grounding wire of the neutral wire is used. This neutral 
conductor(4th wire) is grounded at certain intervals, and it 
is designed that normally the current of 60[Hz] can not 
flow through it. However, if a third high frequency occurs 
due to different load on 3 phase conductor, it flows through 
the neutral conductor and part of it enters the ground 
through the grounding. As the underground pipeline is a 
good grounding conductor, the 3rd high frequency that 
flowed into the ground enters the pipeline easily due to 
resistive coupling effect. The 3rd high frequency thus 
entered the pipeline depolarizes the polarization of pipeline 
surface or increase the consumption rate of Mg anode. Also 
it could give electric shock to operators or cause a huge 
explosion due to arc during a leakage accident. 
I 
Fig. 3. Diagram of 22.9kV power transmission system of 
KEPCO(3phase 4 wire system) 
Figure 2. Induced AC voltage due to resistive induction 
111. Development Background 
According to the Ohm's law, 
....................................................... v = IR (1) 
Where, R = dR = J p (dri2 x r2), 
Therefore, 
................................................. v =  p112xx (2) 
In other words, on the pipeline that is separated by x from 
To prevent big accidents caused by stray current, the 
pipe-to-soil voltage of a buried metallic structure is 
measured on a regular basis using a portable measuring 
instrument or a corrosion inspection system developed by 
the inventor of the present invention to inspect whether the 
metallic structure is protected from corrosion. 
Unfortunately, however, the apparatuses used for corrosion 
inspection were not capable of directly measuring the stray 
current and thus it was impossible to analyze the stray 
1564 
current. 
The existing oscilloscope can be used to measure stray 
current. But, to measure the current flowing on the rail, the 
oscilloscope has to be installed when the subway system is 
not in operation and the data needs to be collected the next 
day. 
As the oscilloscope is expensive and big, it is not easy to 
install it around the rail, and several oscilloscopes have to 
be installed simultaneously but the cost is prohibitive. 
As the analog meter and corrosion monitoring device 
installed in the corrosion protection measurement terminal 
analyze only the pipe to soil potential, it is not possible to 
find the location and magnitude of current leakage and 
therefore it is very difficult to mitigate the effect. 
As a result, it is imperative to develop a small, low cost, 
stand alone, data logger measurement device that cm 
measure the stray current originated from a subway system 
at rail impedance bonds and analyze the stray current by 
measuring the current at each point of the rail. 
IV. Research content 
I). System operation principle 
As can be seen in Figure 4, this system is a multiple 
function system that is capable of the following. It can 
measure the stray current on the negative feeder of subway 
by using the shunt, measure the current flowing through the 
grounding conductor, and measure the pipe to soil potential 
of an underground metallic structure at the measurement 
terminal. It receives an input from the measurement 
device(SCMS2, Stray Current Measurement System 
Version 2) and stores the data in the analysis computer 
through the communication box. The stored data is 
processed for desired outputs using programs. In the 
measurement device, each input signal enters into the A/D 
converter that is the signal input area, and the input data is 
converted into digital data and stored in the memory. 
2) System configuration 
Internal and external system configurations are as follows. 
2. I Infernal system 
- MPU(Main Processing Unit) 
- A/D converter(Analog to Digital) 
- Memory(For Data storage) 
- Recharge battery(Li-ion secondary battery) 
- RTC(Rea1 Time Clock) 
- Communication[USB communication) 
- DCiDC converter(For power supply) 
- Case(For SCMSZ and battery) 
2.2 External system 
communication and recharge) 
- Current sensor storage Box(Current sensor transportation 
- Communication and recharge Box(For SCMS2 
- Recharge Box(For battery pack recharge) 
and storage Box} 
transportation Box) 
- Transportation Box(SCMS2 and current sensor 
- Current sensor(For current measurement) 
- Current measurement Cable 
- Shunt measurement Cable 
- DC measurement Cable 
3) System specifications 
The system specifications are as follows. 
3. I RC Current Sensor 
1 j Product type : Capable of measuring up to 2,OOO[A] 
2jDimension.82 X 69 X 42 
3) Range : 0 - SOOA, Maximum: 2,000A 
4) Output : *4V/rated current, *lOV/maximum 
current 
3.2 Shunts Sensor 
1)Size: 50 X 200 
2) Range : 0 - 3,000A 
3)Output:O - 3v 
3.3 A/D Converter 
1) Resolution : 12-Bit 
2) Conversion Time(Conversion speed) : 35 us 
3) A/D method(Conversion type) : 12-Bit analog-to- 
digital converters 
4) Program Junction 
The system program functions are as follows. 
4.1 Applicah'on s/W function 
interval 
database(USB communication) 
- Setting the year, month, date, time and measurement 
- Store measured data and incorporate it into the 
- GUI type menu and graphic processing of data 
- Print reports 
V. Conclusions 
With the development of this device, it is possible to 
analyze the relationship between the stray current and the 
pipe to soil potentia1 of an underground metallic structure 
by measuring them simultaneously. It is also possible to 
measure the stray current generated by a subway system or 
a pipeline and pipe to soil potential of an underground 
metallic structure at multiple points at low cost, and to 
analyze the relationship between these. This system will be 
commercialized after it is applied in the field and the 
program is adjusted. 
1565 
Analyzing Canputer 
Fig. 4. System configuration 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  J.H. Bae and 2 el" A Study on the Mitigation Method for 
Stray Current on Underground Metallic Structures" , KXEE 
summer conference, 1998. 
[2] A Study on the Current and Potential Distribution of 
Cathodic Protection" 
131 '' A Study on the Corrosion Control for Underground 
[4] Michael JSzeliga, et al., "Stray Current 
Control Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority's 
A-Route" CCI, 1990. 
[5]  H.E. Bomar et al.,"Bay Area Rapid 
Transit System(BART)" Stray Current Corrosion, pp45- 
174, NACE, 1994. 
[6]  Robert J. Wilson et al., "Soild State Solutions to Stray 
Current Control - Toronto Transit Commission" Stray 
[7] John Morgan, "Cathodic Protection" NACE, January 
1993. 
[SI I' Cathodic Protection Interference Training Guide" , 
The Gas Company Bill Graves Local Distribution Services 
Technical Consultant. Februray 1996. 
[9]DIN 30676: PIanung und Anwending des Kathodischen 
Korrosionsschutzes fur den Aubenschutz, Ausg. Okt. 1985. 
[ lO]Stalder, F., "Pipeline Failures, Materials Science Forum", 
[ 1 l]Ragault, I., "AC Corrosion Induced by VHV Electrical 
Lines on Polyethylene Coated Steel Gas Pipelines", NACE 
International, Corrosion '98, Paper No. 557, 1998. 
[12] IEEE Guide for Satety in AC Substation Grounding, 
[ 1 3l"Principles and Practices of Electrical Coordination 
Between Pipelines and Electric Supply Lines", CAN/CSA- 
[14]"Cathodic Protection considerations for Pipelines with 
AC Mitigation Facilities" PRC International Corrosion 
Supervisory Committee. Jan. 1999. 
KOGAS Report, 1995. 5 
POF Cables" KEPCO Report, 1989.12 
Current Corrosion, ~ ~ 2 3 1 - 3 0 4 ,  NACE, 1994. 
Vol. 247 (1997) pp. 139-146. 
ANSIilEEE Std 80-1986 
C22.3 NO, 6-M91 
Fig. 5. External view of the measuring device 
1566 
