   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 Tracking  Desert Dust Devils with In-Situ Pressure 
Sensors and Imaging 
Ralph Lorenz
 JHU Applied Physics Laboratory 
11100 Johns Hopkins Road 
Laurel, MD 20723 
443-778-2903 
Ralph.Lorenz@jhuapl.edu 
 
Abstract—Desert dust devil phenomena on Earth and Mars are 
reviewed, and progress in studying them with novel 
unattended field sensors, and with timelapse imaging, is 
described. These new datasets present data analysis challenges 
which are familiar in other tracking/target identification 
applications.  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
 2. OUTSTANDING PROBLEMS ............................... 2 
 3. IN-SITU DATA ACQUISITION ............................. 2 
 4. TIMELAPSE IMAGING ....................................... 3 
 5. THE TRACKING PROBLEM ............................... 4 
 6. FORWARD MODELING ...................................... 5 
 7. SUMMARY ......................................................... 6 
 8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ..................................... 6 
 REFERENCES ......................................................... 6 
  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Dust devils (e.g. [1])  are dry convective vortices that loft 
dust into the air, usually as a result of strong surface heating. 
They are a familiar feature of terrestrial arid region 
meteorology, and play an important role in lofting dust into 
the atmosphere, with implications for air quality and 
sediment balance. Dust devils can be a nuisance for outdoor 
activities and can occasionally cause structural damage or 
fire. A review of air accident statistics [2] indicates some 
100 damaging - and in some cases fatal – incidents to 
aircraft that are attributable to dust devils. Dust devils are 
also the most prominent dynamic phenomena observed on 
the surface of Mars. They are major agents of surface 
change, forming tracks which not only are individually 
visible, but may lead to accumulated albedo changes over 
large regions. Additionally, in the thin Martian atmosphere, 
they are a principal mechanism of dust-raising, with a 
resultant influence on the entire Martian climate.  The 
operations of solar-powered vehicles on the Martian surface 
can be significantly affected both by the dust lofted 
planetwide, and by local dust removal events. Thus it is 
important that the  frequency and behavior of dust devils be 
understood. 
 
Figure 1.  Dust devil on Mars viewed from above by the 
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter HiRISE camera (image 
ESP_013545_1110). The devil appears as a bright cloud, 
with a dark trail to lower right, and shadow towards upper 
left.  
 
Figure 2.  Dust devil in Arizona during a Mars field analog 
campaign.  Note the high dust loading in the wall, and the 
wide basal skirt.  
 
 
 2
 2. OUTSTANDING PROBLEMS 
An interesting puzzle is whether the dust devil population is 
best described by a power law function [3] or an 
exponential, e.g [4,5].  Mars dust devil measurements seem 
best described by a power law ([6], truncated at the small 
size end, although low detection efficiencies for small devils 
may be partly responsible).  
A traditional approach to acquiring meteorological 
measurements inside a dust devil is to mount 
instrumentation on a vehicle.  This ‘stormchasing’ approach 
[e.g. 7] is fun and exciting to implement, and yields an 
efficient harvest of data in terms of encounters per day. 
However, it is restricted to certain trafficable areas and can 
lead to contamination of data by vehicle vibration [8] and 
the vehicle itself may act as a flow obstruction which may 
influence the wind and the evolution of the devil. More 
importantly for population surveys, it leads to severe 
sampling bias, since (much as with wildlife) the largest, 
slowest, most opaque devils are sampled preferentially. 
In addition to understanding dust devils as a phenomenon 
on Earth and Mars, there are practical applications. The 
frequency of dust devil encounters at Mars may be of 
interest in that dust devils may scour landers or rovers clear 
of accumulated dust (of particular importance for solar-
 powered vehicles), although encounters could also cause 
electrostatic discharge effects or sandblasting effects.  Dust 
devils may also introduce spurious signals in sensitive 
seismic measurements such as those to be conducted by the 
InSight mission [9].  
Similarly, in-situ sensors and motion-triggered imaging find 
application in perimeter security and surveillance operations 
on Earth. Dust devils may be a source of false alarms to 
such systems, although at present no statistics are available.  
 
3. IN-SITU DATA ACQUISITION  
New technology makes it possible to acquire statistics of in-
 situ variables such as pressure by miniaturized data 
acquisition systems. In particular, precision pressure sensors 
coupled to dataloggers using flash memory now enable the 
high cadence (~1/s or better) measurements to be made for 
weeks with a system the size of a marker pen e.g. [10]. 
 
Figure 3.   Internals of a Gulf Coast Data Concepts B1100-
 1 pressure logger. A USB connector is at the right end of 
the circuit board, which has clips for a AA battery  (wires 
retrofitted by the author are to larger batteries for extended 
operation [10]).  
These systems have been deployed for trials at El Dorado 
Playa (south of Boulder City, Nevada, about 20km from Las 
Vegas) and have already yielded over a hundred pressure 
profile signatures, an increase of almost an order of 
magnitude over the best terrestrial survey (19 devils, 
documented by chart recorder in 1964! [11]) and bringing 
the terrestrial dataset to a level comparable with the 82 
vortex passages recorded by Mars Pathfinder and the ~450 
recorded by the Phoenix lander, see [12].   
 
Figure 4.   Pressure drop recorded by a logger as above. 
Large devils, at least, can be detected by automatic methods 
(e.g. [13]). This profile deviates from the classic Lorentzian 
curveshape, presumably due to the devil having an arcuate 
track - see figure 5.  
 
 3
  
Figure 5.   Dust devil tracks observed in this HiRISE image 
(ESP_014426_2070), show arcuate - and in some cases 
trochoidal or cycloidal - paths. These can give a 
nonmonotonic pressure profile.  
 
Figure 6.  Another pressure recording, this time showing a 
distinct double-dip. This suggests either a dual-core vortex, 
or is a result of two close encounters of the same devil e.g. 
[14].  
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Some early statistics from a summer 2012 survey 
using the pressure logger described in section 2. These are 
raw statistics, without any attempt to identify multiple 
encounters of single devils etc. 
 
 
 
4. TIMELAPSE IMAGING 
Equipment 
Following the recognition [6] of the statistical challenges 
of surveying robust numbers of dust devils, experiments 
[15] were conducted near El Dorado playa [4], south-east of 
Las Vegas with various automatic timelapse cameras : the 
principal results here are from a modified Brinno 
‘Gardenwatchcam’ unit, with a custom housing and power 
supply (using alkaline D-cells instead of the AA capability 
with which they are manufactured). The camera records a 
sequence of ~2 megapixel color digital images acquired at 
set intervals (usually 1 or 5 minutes) as an .avi file on a 2GB 
USB memory stick.    
 
A significant advantage over a previously-used camera 
[16] is that a timestamp is automatically applied to each 
image (since the cameras are left for many days, and no 
images are recorded in darkness, the image frame number is 
not a completely deterministic indicator of acquisition time 
since varying cloud may alter light levels and thus the time 
and image number at which acquisition ceases and starts on 
a given day). 
 
Data Reduction 
 
An excellent visual impression of patterns of dust devil 
activity is obtained simply by watching the movie.  
However, timelapse imagery offers its most significant 
advantages for quantitative analysis.   
Of course, large datasets of this type lend themselves to 
automated analysis (e.g. [17]): future experiments are 
planned in this direction. At present a semi-automatic tool 
has been coded in IDL to perform the following steps, 
illustrated in figures 8-10. 
1. a running average image is subtracted from each 
frame, to highlight features that change between frames.  
Dust devils tend to be the most prominent features left, 
although vehicles and cloud motion also appear, as do 
crepuscular rays at sunset. 
2. if no features are observed, a mouse click on a GUI 
allows rapid progression to the next frame; if instead the 
operator identifies a dust devil, the cursor is set on that and a 
mouse click initiates step 3 
3. the feature is defined by recursively dilating a region 
(initially the point clicked), ANDing with the thresholded 
image, dilating again etc. until the region ceases to grow.    
4. the key parameters are written to a file. These include 
the image #, (x,y) positions of the base of the dust devil, its 
width, height and crude shape metrics, the total area in 
 
 4
 pixels and the total ‘brightness’ (integral of the pixel values) 
as a proxy for dust loading. 
The output file facilitates automatic re-analysis (e.g. 
using different thresholds. While not as rapid as a purely 
automated detection algorithm, the semiautomated approach 
is nonetheless efficient - one early test allowed 600 frames 
to be processed in only 20 minutes. 
 
 Figure 8. Example raw image in grayscale, dust devil at 
left.   Average pixel value is ~170 DN 
  Figure 9. Differenced image (stretched).  Peak intensity 
is ~15DN 
  Figure 10.   Dust devil feature identified by 
dilation/ANDing algorithm.  
 
A second approach that may be fruitful is to construct a 
‘waterfall chart’ : this has proven effective in condensing 
timelapse sequences of aeolian ripple movement [18] into a 
compact form from which ripple wavelengths and 
propagation speeds are readily extracted.  
The method is as follows : a horizontal subframe of each 
image is extracted and is collapsed into a single line of 
pixels with contrast stretching and/or thresholding. This line 
of pixels then encapsulates the presence and location of dust 
devils at a given instant.  The line of pixels is rotated to 
become a column of a new waterfall image.  Then, the next 
image in the sequence is processed in the same way, and the 
new line of pixels introduced just to the right of the last, and 
so on. The result is a composite wherein the horizontal axis 
defines time and the vertical defines position.  (NB the 
rotation step is not strictly necessary, it is just a matter of 
convenient presentation. Since the time axis is usually much 
longer than the spatial axis, long strips are better shown on a 
page as a stack of horizontal strips.) 
 
  
 
5. THE TRACKING PROBLEM  
Some interesting challenges arise in the interpretation of 
data from these measurement approaches. Dust devils may 
fade if they traverse an area with less available dust, hence a 
sequence of images may not detect a devil in every image. 
How should one then interpret a sequence of detections that 
has a gap - is it one devil with missing detections, or is it 
two different devils ?     Tracking by human observers 
acquiring synchronized stereo images has been reported [19] 
although track points are too widely-spaced to identify the 
arcuate paths that would be responsible for the pressure 
drops seen in figures 4 and 6. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  A sequence of images (one minute apart) - a 
bright devil moves at a steady speed - it is easy to identify 
this as one persistent feature translating across the scene.  
 
 
 
 
 
 5
  
 
 
Figure 12. A more challenging sequence - a fainter devil at 
left has a lower detection efficiency, and moves faster than 
the bright devil near center and thus is difficult to track, 
especially when close to the bright devil. 
A related consideration applies to the pressure sensor 
network. Given a detection at location A at time t1, and at B 
at time t2, should these be interpreted as a single devil 
moving from A to B, or as two independent detections? 
A complication arises when simply using overall occurrence 
rates (such as ~1 detection/day of 0.5 mbar pressure drops) 
since the phenomenon appears to be ‘bursty’ - groups of 
devils may occur together, with devil-free intervals between. 
(It has been suggested that activity may be pseudoperiodic). 
Also, once one accepts that the detection efficiency of devils 
may not be unity, one must accept the likelihood that it is 
dependent on the size of the devil, its contrast, and its 
position relative to the camera.  The interpretation of 
measured size-frequency statistics therefore requires 
caution.  
These problems are familiar in a range of fields : military 
applications such as air defense or submarine tracking are 
obvious examples. Another is wildlife monitoring.  In these 
situations, one is obliged to estimate the detection efficiency 
of a given sensor as well as the population of sensed objects.  
Bayesian methods (e.g. [20) have seen wide application in 
such settings. 
 
6. FORWARD MODELING  
Because we are dealing with rather disparate datasets the 
approach we plan to pursue is termed VEMOOSE (Vortex 
Evolution Model with Observation Operations Simulated 
Explicitly’) wherein a computational arena is defined and 
virtual dust devils are introduced with specified 
characteristics.  These dust devil entities (which can be 
specified to follow a power law in size, or any other 
function) will traverse the arena, possibly growing in 
intensity, possibly disappearing abruptly, and so on.  The 
observation process can be simulated to develop synthetic 
datasets  (e.g. an image from a groundbased platform would 
define a triangular wedge in the arena where dust devils are 
detected with some size/distance probability function).  This 
allows the distinction to be drawn between dust devils that 
decay while in the field of view, and those that merely 
translate out of sight.  Similarly, in-situ measurements of 
pressure at a single location can be interpreted as a central 
pressure drop that is constant with time and is moving - the 
maximum pressure drop will relate both to the intrinsic 
intensity of the devil, and the miss distance. Nonmonotonic 
paths or time-varying pressure drops can be resolved by 
multiple measurements. Again, a model of a devil can 
reconstruct the observations and account for nondetections. 
 
Figure 13. The durations of dust devils in four size 
categories recorded by Pathare et al. [4] at El Dorado by 
conventional field observation.  Clearly small devils tend to 
have a shorter observed duration. 
 
Figure 14. A simple model (see text) reproduces the overall 
characteristics of the observations, and can thus be used to 
generate a population with which to simulate observations.  
 
 
 6
 As an example, the crudely-binned aggregate observations 
of size vs longevity by Pathare et al. [4] can be fairly well-
 modeled (see figure 14)  by assuming that for a given 
diameter d (m), the longevity t (s) is given by  t=kdy,  where 
k=6.0 s/m, and y is an exponentially-distributed random 
variable (approximated here by y=1/x, with x a uniformly-
 distributed variable between 0 and 1).  
Among the datasets that a population/evolution model 
can be compared against are : 
? Statistics of the number of dust devils in Mars 
orbital images. This informs the ‘burstiness’ of 
dust devil activity 
? Pressure logger profiles, from multiple stations, 
may help resolve pressure-drop/miss-distance 
ambiguities, translation speeds, and 
burstiness/periodicity of activity. 
? Timelapse imaging  
? Statistics of the length and width of dust devil 
trails in Mars orbital images. This informs the 
longevity of devils as a function of diameter 
(subject to assumptions about wind) 
 
 
7. SUMMARY  
New methods in field studies of terrestrial dust devils have 
been described, and the challenges of interpretation noted.   
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was funded by NASA through the Mars 
Fundamental Research Program grant number 
NNX12AI04G.  Brian Jackson, Pete Lanagan and Jani 
Radebaugh are thanked for assistance in the field. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] Balme, M.  and R. Greeley, Dust Devils on Earth and 
Mars, Reviews of Geophysics, 44, RG3003, 
doi:10.1029/2005RG000188, 2006 
[2] Lorenz, R. and M. J. Myers, Dust Devil Hazard to 
Aviation: A Review of US Air Accident Reports, Journal 
of Meteorology, 30 (No.298) 178-184, 2005 
[3] Lorenz, R. D., Power Law  of Dust Devil Diameters on 
Earth and Mars, Icarus, 203, 683-684, 2009 
[4] Pathare, A. V., M. R. Balme, S. M. Metzger, A. Spiga, M. 
C. Towner, N. O. Renno and F. Saca, Assessing the 
power law hypothesis for the size-frequency distribution 
of terrestrial and Martian dust devils,  Icarus, 209, 851-
 852, 2010 
[5]  Kurgansky, M. Statistical distribution of atmospheric 
dust devils, Icarus 219, 556–560, 2012 
[6] Lorenz, R. D., On the Statistical Distribution of Dust 
Devil Diameters, Icarus, 215, 381-390, 2011 
[7] Sinclair, P. C., The Lower Structure of Dust Devils, 
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 30, 1599-1619, 
1973 
 [8] Tratt, D. M., M. H. Hecht, D. C. Catling, E. C. Samulon, 
and P. H. Smith. In situ measurement of dust devil 
dynamics: Toward a strategy for Mars. Journal of 
Geophysical Research (Planets) 108, 5116 , 2003 
[9] Banerdt, B. et al., InSight : An Integrated Exploration of 
the Interior of Mars, Abstract #2838, 44th Lunar and 
Planetary Science Conference, Lunar and Planetary 
Institute, Houston, TX, 2012 
[10] Lorenz, R. D. Observing Desert Dust Devils with a 
Pressure Logger, Geoscientific Instrumentation, Methods 
and Data Systems 1, 209–220, 2012 
[11] Lambeth, R.L., On the measurement of dust devil 
parameters. Bulletin of the American, Meteorological 
Society 47, 522–526, 1966 
[12] Lorenz, R. D., Pressure Drops in Dust Devils : Earth and 
Mars, Planetary and Space Science, 60, 370-375, 2012 
[13] Wagstaff, K.. Real-time detection of dust devils from 
pressure readings. NASA Tech Brief NPO-44724, NASA 
Tech Briefs, 6, 2009  
[14] Lorenz, R. D., Irregular Dust Devil Pressure Drops on 
Earth and Mars:  Effect of Cycloidal Tracks, submitted to 
Planetary and Space Science 
 
 7
 [15] Lorenz, R. D., Experiments in Timelapse Camera 
Observations of Dust Devil Activity at El Dorado Playa, 
Nevada, Abstract #1573, 42nd Lunar and Planetary 
Science Conference, Lunar and Planetary Institute, 
Houston, TX, 2011 
[16] Lorenz, R. D., B. Jackson and J. Barnes, Inexpensive 
Timelapse Digital Cameras for Studying Transient 
Meteorological Phenomena : Dust Devils and Playa 
Flooding, Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic 
Technology, 27, 246-256, 2010 
[17]  Castano, A., A. Fukanaga, J. Biesadecki, L. Neakrase, P. 
Whelley, R. Greeley, M. Lemmon, R. Castano, S. Chien, 
Automatic detection of dust devils and clouds on Mars, 
Machine Vision and Applications, 19, 467-482, 2008.  
[18] Lorenz, R. D. and A. Valdez, Variable Wind Ripple 
Migration at Great Sand Dunes National Park, Observed 
by Timelapse Imagery, Geomorphology, 133, 1-10, 2011 
[19]  Balme, M. R, A. Pathare, S.M. Metzger, M.C. Towner, 
S.R. Lewis, A. Spiga, L.K. Fenton, N.O. Renno, H.M. 
Elliott, F.A. Saca, T.I. Michaels, P. Russell, J. Verdasca. 
Field measurements of horizontal forward motion 
velocities of terrestrial dust devils: Towards a proxy for 
ambient winds on Mars and Earth, Icarus, 221, 632–645, 
2012 
[20] Koch, W. On Bayesian Tracking and Data Fusion: A 
Tutorial Introduction with Examples, IEEE Aerospace 
and Electronics Systems, 25, 29-51, 2010 
 
Biographies 
Ralph Lorenz is a planetary 
scientist at the Johns 
Hopkins University Applied 
Physics Laboratory, with 
interests in atmospheres, 
surfaces and their 
interactions, especially on 
Titan and Mars.  He worked 
for the European Space 
Agency on Phase B of the development of the Huygens 
probe to Titan, and subsequently built part of the 
instrumentation of the probe’s Surface Science Package 
(SSP). Prior to joining APL in 2006, he spent 12 years in 
various positions at the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory 
at the University of Arizona, where he led observation 
planning for the Cassini RADAR investigation, and 
served on the science team of the New Millennium DS-2 
mission to Mars. He is the author of several books, 
including ‘Spinning Flight’, ‘Titan Unveiled’, and ‘Space 
Systems Failures. He has a B.Eng in Aerospace Systems 
Engineering from the University of Southampton (UK) 
and a Ph.D. in Physics from the University of Kent at 
Canterbury (UK). He is the recipient of 5 NASA Group 
Achievement Awards.  
 
 
 8
  
