RT2M : Real-time Twitter Trend Mining System 
 
Min Song 
Dept. of Library and Information Science 
Yonsei University 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
min.song@yonsei.ac.kr 
Meen Chul Kim 
Dept. of Library and Information Science 
Yonsei University 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
andrewevans@yonsei.ac.kr
  
 
Abstract—The advent of social media is changing the existing 
information behavior by letting users access to real-time online 
information channels without the constraints of time and space. 
It also generates a huge amount of data worth discovering novel 
knowledge. Social media, therefore, has created an enormous 
challenge for scientists trying to keep pace with developments in 
their field. Most of the previous studies have adopted broad-
 brush approaches which tend to result in providing limited 
analysis. To handle these problems properly, we introduce our 
real-time Twitter trend mining system, RT?M, which operates in 
real-time to process big stream datasets available on Twitter. The 
system offers the functions of term co-occurrence retrieval, 
visualization of Twitter users by query, similarity calculation 
between two users, Topic Modeling to keep track of changes of 
topical trend, and analysis on mention-based user networks. We 
also demonstrate an empirical study on 2012 Korean presidential 
election. The case study reveals Twitter could be a useful source 
to detect and predict the advent and changes of social issues, and 
analysis of mention-based user networks could show different 
aspects of user behaviors. 
Keywords—social media mining; real-time Twitter trend 
miming system; topic modeling; network analysis; Korean 
presidential election 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Social media is a representative form of the Web 2.0 
services which has undoubtedly contributed to the emergence 
of Big Data, based on voluntary and active participation of 
users. Throughout the world, social media receives spotlights 
by a lot of Web users because of the benefits in that 1) no 
professional knowledge and skills are required to produce and 
share contents in real-time and 2) social network among users 
with similar interests can be easily formed [2]. Facebook and 
Twitter, representative social media services, have estimated 
users of each 850 million and 500 million people all over the 
world [30]. 
On the other hand, a variety of research areas such as social 
network analysis, opinion mining, and so on has paid attention 
to extract the meaningful information among vast amounts of 
data daily produced in social media. For example, the 
presidential election camp which led U.S. President Barack 
Obama to be successfully re-elected recruited many data 
experts for the analysis of social media data while preparing 
the last presidential election. Like this instance, social media 
has been main foci to the field of Information Retrieval and 
Text Mining from its first advent because not only it produces 
massive unstructured textual data and user relations in real-
 time but also it could be used as an influential channel for 
opinion leading such as agenda-setting and public opinion 
formation. This creates an enormous challenge for scientists 
trying to keep pace with developments in their field. 
Until now, however, most of the previous studies have 
focused on somewhat limited approaches including 1) 
retroactively designed experimental conditions which give 
dynamic queries to static data collection [6][12][15][22], 2) 
generic issue modeling [6][15][30], and 3) social network 
analysis based on simply visible connectivity such as 
follow/following relationship in Twitter [3][13]. These 
approaches could face with following daunting challenges in 
finding and analyzing new information. First, enormous social 
media data is being generated in real-time. It could be, 
therefore, ineffective for using static data to detect 
continuously changing social trends such as users’ interests and 
public issues. Second, a specific issue is likely to be composed 
of several subordinate events. Thus, it needs to examine 
formation and extinction of the related events, and users’ 
reaction for effective analysis of the issue from various angles. 
Finally, user network in Twitter has different characteristics 
from those of other social media. In other words, users in 
Twitter can make relations with others by sending-receiving 
mentions. Hence, only concentrating on the follow/following 
connection cannot properly reflect the trait of the user networks 
in Twitter. In addition, there is a growing need to identify 
dynamic changes of user networks accompanied by those of 
social issues in the real world. 
Therefore, our study aims at designing and developing the 
RT2M (Real-time Twitter Trend Mining) system which allows 
in real-time to 1) crawl and store every textual data (“tweets”) 
generated in Twitter into a local database, 2) keep track of 
social issues by temporal Topic Modeling, and 3) visualize 
mention-based user networks. We also demonstrate a case 
study related to 2012 Korean presidential election carried by 
the RT?M system. 
The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section 2 
surveys on related works. Section 3 provides the detailed 
descriptions of the proposed methodology. Section 4 reports a 
case study, and Section 5 concludes the paper. 
 
This study was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grant 
funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2012-2012S1A3A2033291). 
2013 International Conference on Social Intelligence and Technology
 978-0-7695-4998-9/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
 DOI 10.1109/SOCIETY.2013.19
 64
II. RELATED WORKS 
Social media draws every attention from 
communities for it offers a whole new
 understand the social practices. Diverse acad
 therefore, focus on various methodologies su
 network analysis, opinion mining, and etc. w
 discover unrevealed knowledge and informa
 backdrop, initial studies on social media focu
 understand user behavior in social media an
 community [8][11]. They, however, simply f
 connectivity represented by follow/followin
 could not properly take a view of user ne
 because those in Twitter can make relation
 sending-receiving mentions without visibl
 addition,  other studies revealed that 
connection could not be a useful indicator to
 [3][13], and contents and sending-receiving
 be considered to properly calculate distan
 among users [14][22]. We, therefore, a
 mentioned-based user networks to tackle t
 proper manner. In other words, we concentr
 thematic coherence among users resided 
sending-receiving mentions. Meanwhile, rese
 employ various approaches for mining unrev
 from social data. Among them, LDA is of g
 field of Text Mining for modeling lat
 unstructured textual data such as the Web 
[5][30]. Contrary to its sound mathema
 however, it has a fatal limit that there do
 validated method for evaluation. In this study
 LDA to compare and analyze relationship
 extracted from tweets on 2012 Korean presid
 related events in the real world. At the same
 that modeled topics based on term co-occurr
 time twitter trend mining system emplo
 occurrence retrieval technique to trace ch
 occurred terms to compensate the limita
 suggesting double-layered Topic Modeling.  
In addition, , the SCAN [28] algorithm
 techniques than other community detectio
 identifying hub nodes connecting commu
 removing outliers that play any significant ro
 In reality, a hybrid approach combining To
 community detection was devised for identi
 between research topics and scholarly comm
 work also employs modularity and 
algorithm to detect invisible community exist
 On the one hand, some studies regarded b
 as forum and opinion channel where users
 issues, and evaluated their political po
 Recently, not only researches on how micro
 the actual political events [7][25] but al
 utilizing social media for predicting th
 presidential elections [15][18][24] w
 Nonetheless, they failed to make valid 
appropriate prediction, because they d
 influential variables such as temporal factor
 features [12][15][23]. In the present study, w
 temporal changes of topical trends in Twitte
 various scholastic 
 opportunity to 
emic community, 
ch as text mining, 
ith social media to 
tion. Against this 
sed on attempts to 
d structure of user 
ocused on generic 
g relations which 
tworks in Twitter 
s with others by 
e connection. In 
follow/following 
 find an influencer  
 messages should 
ce and similarity 
im at analyzing 
his problem in a 
ate on identifying 
in the action of 
arch communities 
ealed information 
reat interest in the 
ent issues from 
and social media 
tical foundation, 
es not exist any 
, we hire temporal 
 between topics 
ential election and 
 time, like a study 
ence [6], our real-
 ys the term co-
 ronologically co-
 tion of LDA by 
 suggests faster 
n approaches in 
nities as well as 
les in the network. 
pic Modeling and 
fying relationship 
unities [29]. Our 
Voltage-clustering 
ing among users.  
log and microblog 
 discuss political 
tentials [10][26]. 
bloging affects to 
so studies about 
e results of the 
ere conducted. 
explanation and 
id not consider 
 and length of the 
e also demonstrate 
r on 2012 Korean 
presidential election by using R
 tried to explain user’s behavi
 media, and make prediction 
indicated that supporting for a c
 could be an indicator to pre
 sentiment analysis with socia
 voter’s political disposition [1
 addressing temporal change
 presidential election with real-t
 with mention-based social netw
  
III. MET
 In this section, we introdu
 RT?M, which operates in re
 datasets available on Twitter
 Twitter data on 2012 Kore
 demonstrate the usefulness of 
specifically focus on topic tren
 to examine presidential issues e
  Figure 1 shows the system o
 system description is provided i
 Fig. 1. System Overview of RT2M  
A. Twitter Mining System & D
 As aforementioned earlier,
 develop a real-time Twitter tre
 collection and various text ana
 collects tweets on Twitter in K
 user ID, and time stamps with 
Twitter4J. We store keywords,
 user and a set of mentions, pair
 in Redis DB. Redis is an ope
 database (http://redis.io). The 
memory so it is extremely fast
 store because it provides a high
 multiple processes, multiple ap
 T2M. Various studies also have 
or on political issues in social 
by mining social data. [24] 
ertain candidate in social media 
dict a result of election, and 
l data would properly explain 
8][24]. We, therefore, focus on 
s of topical trend on the 
ime data streaming basis along 
ork analysis. 
HODOLOGY 
ce our Twitter mining system, 
al-time to process big stream 
. By utilizing RT?M to mine 
an Presidential Election, we 
RT?M. For demonstration, we 
d analysis and network analysis 
mbedded in Twitter data. 
verview of RT?M. The detailed 
n Section A. 
 
ata Collection 
 the goal of this system is to 
nd mining system by effective 
lysis of big stream data. RT?M 
orea (http://www.twitter.com/), 
Twitter Stream API provided in 
 mentions, as well as pairs of a 
s of a user and a set of keywords 
n source based key-value store 
entire data set is stored in-
 . We chose Redis as key-value 
ly scalable data store shared by 
plications, and multiple servers. 
65
Along with Redis, we employ the My-SQL relational database 
to store tweets and time stamps information in disk for further 
analysis. Redis makes it easier to do the real-time Twitter 
mining, term co-occurrence retrieval, mention-based Twitter 
network visualization, and TFIDF-based user similarity. To 
store keywords, we use the KTS (http://kldp.net/projects/kts/), 
a probability based Korean morphological analyzer, for 
spotting important terms. The main reason to use KTS is 
because it provides sophisticated, well-defined probabilistic 
rules. However, since tweets contains idiosyncratic terms or 
jargons, we build a customized lexicon. 
The main page of RT?M is shown in Figure 2. Functions 
provided in RT?M are as follows: 
 
Fig. 2. RT2M System  
1) Term Co-occurrence Retrieval: Given a query, the 
system retrieves the list of terms co-occurred with the query 
term. Once the list is obtained, it sorts co-occurred terms by co-
 occurrence frequency and can display the result with an option 
of 100, 500, 1,000, and 2,000 terms. Like other functions 
provided in the system, co-occurred terms are dynamically 
updated and displayed as more Twitter stream data is received. 
Figure 3 below shows one part of the result of term co-
 occurrence retrieval. 
 
Fig. 3. Term Co-occurrence Retrieval with the Query Term “Guen Hae Park” 
2) Visualization of Twitter Users by Query: Upon the query 
term, the system visualizes the social network graph of Twitter 
users mentioned together with the query term. The visualized 
graph is bidirectional. The social network analysis for the 
mention-based Twitter users is provided in the next section. 
Figure 4 below shows one part of the result of visualizing 
Twitter users by query. 
 
Fig. 4. Visualization of Twitter Users by the Query Term “Jae In Moon” 
3) Similarity Calculation between Two Users: It computes 
cosine similarity between two users comparing terms they use 
in their tweets, weighted by their tf-idf index. TF-IDF, which 
stands for term frequency multiplied by inverse document 
frequency, is a well-received weighting scheme in information 
retrieval to produce a composite weight for each term in each 
document [20]. The tf-idf weighting scheme assigns to term t a 
weight in document d given by   	 
  	   . In 
our work, we count a raw frequency of every term t in one 
tweet posting, excluding stopwords. Then, we calculate the tf-
 idf weighting of a certain term, multiplying a tf by an idf 
dividing the total number of tweets by the number of tweets 
containing the term, and then taking the logarithm of that 
quotient. 
4) Topic Modeling: The system generates N topics 
specified by a user along with topical terms for the time period 
that the user selects. For the topic modeling technique, we 
employ the Multinomial Latent Dirichlet Allocation technique. 
The detailed description of the technique is provided in the 
next section. Figure 5 below shows one part of the result of 
temporal Topic Modeling. If a start time and end time are 
entered, the system returns chronological topic trends related to 
queries which were used upon data crawling. 
 
Fig. 5. Multinomial Topic Modeling Result  
To examine the performance of RT?M, we collect 
1,737,969 tweets with the query term “Geun Hae Park”, “Jae In 
Moon”, “Chul Su Ahn”, and “Presidential Election” for one 
month from October 1, 2012 to October 31, 2012. 
66
B. Text Mining Techniques 
This section describes text mining tec
 integrated into RT?M. Some basic minin
 explained in Section III.A and henceforth, 
important mining techniques of RT?M: M
 Modeling and Community Detection for
 Analysis. 
1) Multinomial Topic Modeling: Docum
 information retrieval or text mining is 
expresses an individual document and t
 documents in terms of term appearing in 
modeling is one of the document modelin
 LDA, standing for Latent Dirichlet Alloca
 Blei at al. [1], is one of the earliest topic mo
 that is based on a graph model with an assum
 prior-based topic distribution. In other word
 documents as mixtures of topics that spit
 certain probabilities. The topic modeling tech
 paper is Dirichlet-multinomial regression (D
 Mimno and McCallum [16]. DMR is an ex
 Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) proposed by B
 allows conditioning on arbitrary docum
 including a long-linear prior on document-
 that is a function of the features of the d
 author, publication venue, references, and
 document d, let 	 be a feature vector repre
 Given the prior distribution of  and hy
 the generative process for documents and 
follows: 
(1) For each topic t, draw t~Dir() notin
 distinct Dirichlet distribution with the
 the topic-word distribution (a.k.a. hyp
 (2) For each document d,  
a) Draw 		 
 
 noting that a per-document 	 , the
 Dirichlet distribution and 	 is a co
 	  where 	  is the observed 
document d and  is a vector of me
 b) For each word w, 
- Draw 	 !"	 noting t
 assignment of a word  and 	 i
 of a document d 
- Draw #	 !"$%&  noting 
word of a document d and   i
 topic t over the vocabulary with '
  
For DMR topic modeling, we set three 
2, the variance of the prior on parameter
 distribution; , the Dirichlet prior on 
distributions; and |T|, the number of topi
 representation of the aforementioned descr
 generative model shows in Figure 6. 
hniques that are 
g techniques are 
we describe two 
ultinomial Topic 
 Social Network 
ent modeling in 
a technique that 
he collection of 
documents. Topic 
g techniques, and 
tion proposed by 
deling techniques 
ption of Dirichlet 
s, LDA represents 
 out words with 
nique used in this 
MR) proposed by 
tension of Latent 
lei et al. [1], and 
ent features by 
topic distributions 
ocument such as 
 dates. For each 
senting metadata. 
per-parameters , 
their words is as 
g that Dir() is a 
 Dirichlet prior on 
er-parameters),  
	()	 *  
 parameters of a 
variance function 
attribute vector of 
tadata 
hat 	  is topic 
s topic proportion 
that #	  is w-th 
s preference of a 
++ 
 , 
fixed parameters: 
 values for prior 
the topic-word 
cs. The graphical 
iption of a DMR 
Fig. 6. Graphical Representation of D
 2) User Network Analys
 (SNA) has been widely used 
individuals, groups, or societie
 or a group is represented as a
 dependent relationship with ea
 since the inter-dependent rel
 service, extensive studies have
 However, the majority of stud
 conduit of social media
 follow/following as the analy
 Twitter has different characteri
 media. In other words, us
 relationship by acting “follow
 interests in their own without 
Hence, only concentrating on t
 cannot properly reflect the t
 Twitter. In addition, dynam
 accompanied by those of social
 be identified. To this end, we u
 and their directness for the ana
 and visualization, we use an 
JUNG standing for Java Unive
 http://jung.sourceforge.net/), an
 for detecting user community.  
In graph theory, meanwhil
 group of nodes, any of which
 other node. In our mention-ba
 that there are 1,537 component
 and 136,754 nodes. The com
 carry great scientific and practi
 correspond to behavior or fu
 such as social groups in a soc
 densely connected subset of no
 to the remaining network. Com
 valuable tool to analyze n
  
MR Generative Process Model 
is: Social Network Analysis 
to analyze the relationship of 
s in terms of network. A person 
 node, and each node has the 
ch other (tie). In social media, 
ationship is the core of the 
 been done in the field of SNA. 
ies on Twitter, a representative 
, have adopted Twitter’s 
sis unit. The user network in 
stics from those of other social 
ers in Twitter can make a 
” with others whom they have 
the consent of the other party. 
he follow/following connection 
rait of the user networks in 
ic changes of user networks 
 issues in the real world need to 
tilize mentions by Twitter users 
lysis unit. For network analysis 
open source visualization tool, 
rsal Network/Graph Framework 
d Voltage-clustering algorithm 
e, a weak component means a 
 would be reachable from any 
sed twitter network, we found 
s consisting of 4,668,343 edges 
munities from large networks 
cal value because they typically 
nctional units of the network, 
ial network. A community is a 
des that is only sparsely linked 
munity detection provides us a 
etwork structure and better 
67
understand complex networks as well as provide better 
exploration and browsing tools for very large collections. In 
this paper, we employ the Voltage-clustering algorithm, which 
is suitable for a large social network. This algorithm is based 
on a priori that the clusters are of approximately the same size, 
and uses a more complex method than k-means for 
determining cluster membership based on co-occurrence data 
[27]. 
 
IV. CASE STUDY: 2012 KOREAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 
In this section, we discuss our case study related to 2012 
Korean presidential election carried by the RT?M system. By 
utilizing RT?M to mine Twitter data on 2012 Korean 
Presidential Election, we demonstrate the usefulness of RT?M 
as a real-time text miner. The demonstration is made by 
comparison of term co-occurrence by query, topic trend, and 
mention-based user network analysis for presidential issues 
embedded in Twitter data. 
A. Comparison of Term Co-occurrence by Query 
Table 1 below compares the partial results of term co-
 occurrence retrieval by using influential candidates’ name, 
“Geun Hae Park”, “Jae In Moon”, and “Chul Su Ahn” as query 
terms. 
TABLE I.  TERM CO-OCCURRENCE COMPARISON BY QUERIES 
RK 
Query Term and Frequency1) 
‘Park’ TF ‘Moon’ TF ‘Ahn’ TF 
1Presidential Election 634,540Moon 143,663Moon 62,770
 2Declaration 
of Support 589,728
 Presidential 
Election 92,062Ahn 53,554
 3Park 530,307Declaration 
of Support 62,766Park 38,750
 4Opinion Poll 492,762Ahn 57,420
 Presidential 
Election 35,468
 5Support 82,428Opinion Poll 54,494
 Declaration 
of Support 11,672
 6Declaration 80,904Park 49,785Opinion Poll 10,630
 7Ahn Nonparty 52,990
 Democratic 
United Party 8,552
 Democratic 
United Party 6,858
 8Moon 46,614Saenuri Party 7,818Saenuri Party 6,752
 9Ahn 40,078Moon’s Camp 7,796
 Moon’s 
Camp 6,540
 10SNS Page 38,748Extension of Voting Time 7,192Moon’s Wife 5,740
 11Park’s Mother 20,326Moon TV 5,916
 Down 
Contract 4,678
 12Park’s Father 13,059Moon’s Wife 5,768
 Single 
Candidate 3,240
 13Park’s Policy 10,210
 Single 
Candidate 4,140
 Discerning 
Interview 2,702
 1) The query terms ‘Park’, ‘Moon’, and ‘Ahn’ stand for presidential candidates“Geun Hae Park”, “Jae 
In Moon”, “Chul Su Ahn”. 
Across the board, general terms related to the event of the 
presidential election such as ‘Presidential Election’, 
‘Declaration of Support’, ‘Opinion Poll’, and each candidate’s 
counterparts’ names were occurred in common and frequently. 
On the other hand, unique terms by queries also appeared - 
they are bolded above. Terms such as ‘Park’s Father and 
Mother’ from the query ‘Guen Hae Park’, ‘Extension of Voting 
Time’ and ‘Single Candidate’ from the query ‘Jae In Moon’, 
and ‘Down Contract’ and ‘Single Candidate’ from the query 
‘Chul Su Ahn’ are the distinct features. In reality, events 
related to these unique key-words were main issues to each 
candidate. In particular, what is worth observing carefully is 
that in tweets which mentioned ‘Jae In Moon’ and ‘Chul Su 
Ahn’, each other’s name was occurred with higher frequency 
and ranking than those on postings which mentioned ‘Guen  
Hae Park’.  This is because ‘Jae In Moon’ and ‘Chul Su Ahn’ 
have discussed single opposition candidacy.  
B. Social Issue Trend Analysis with DMR 
Temporal topic trend on 2012 Korean presidential election 
shows in Figure 7 and Table II (t = 10, n = 20). Depending on 
the change of the probability distribution, each topic shows two 
types of patterns: 1) Rising tendency - topic #1, 2, and 2) 
Falling tendency - topic #3, 4.  
 
Fig. 7. Topic Trends on the Presidential Election Overview 
68
TABLE II.  TOPIC ANALYSIS 
Topic 
Description 
Label Terms Type1) 
01 Jeongsu Foundation Park, Jeongsu Foundation, MBC, Pillip Choi R 
02 Candidate Park, Moon, Ahn, Candidate, Election R 
03 Park’s Approval Rating Park, Single Candidate, Approval Rating F 
04 Suspicion on Ahn Dissertation, Plagiarism, Down Contract F 
1)’ Type’ indicates ‘R’ising or ‘ F’alling tendency of a specific issue. 
To identify relationship between topical trend in Twitter 
and changes of social issues in the real world, we compared the 
topic #1 and #3, with actual events for the same period.  
First, related to the topic #1 labeled as ‘Jeongsu 
Foundation’, scandals on ‘Jeongsu Foundation’ and resignation 
of its board of directors received with media coverage on 
October 15. At increasing pace, the probability distribution of 
the topic in Twitter also changes, and even grows faster from 
October 10. Based on this observation, it indicates that 
controversial issues are propagated faster in Twitter than other 
media, and Twitter shows a predictive nature. 
Second, during this period, suspicion on ‘Chul Su Ahn’ 
(Oct. 1), and Ahn’s elucidation for the truth were covered by 
mass media. This social issue, however, evened out soon 
because of the explanation of the Ahn’s election camp. The 
topic #3 also shows falling tendency. Based on this, we 
identified that Twitter would be useful for keeping track of 
changes of topical influence.  
C. Mention-based User Network Analysis 
User network in Twitter has different characteristics from 
those of other social media because users in Twitter can make a 
relationship by sending-receiving mentions between them. This 
study, therefore, aims at visualizing and analyzing content-
 based networks of 136,754 users. Mention-based user network 
is analyzed by the following process. First, we use a query such 
as ‘Geun Hae Park’ to retrieve tweets that contain the query 
term. Then, we extract the list of users who posted those tweets. 
Finally, directed user network is visualized, based on the list of 
users who mentioned them or were mentioned by them. 
Network Visualization by Queries ‘Guen Hae Park’ shows 
in Figure 8. Based on analysis of user profiles and mentions, it 
turns out that A and B clusters of Park’s network are a set of 
users who have political leaning toward conservation. The 
other clusters consist of progressive ones. This result reveals 
that unlike a certain candidate’s political identity, users in 
Twitter also mention about those who are different from their 
political dispositions. In addition, conservative-minded users 
interact with each other, consisting of a few large communities, 
while the counterparts forming several small groups are 
connected by some nodes with high betweenness.  
 
 
Fig. 8. Network Visualization by Queries ‘Park’ 
In addition, we examine how strongly the groups of the 
mention-based network are structured. To this end, we use 
modularity. Networks with high modularity tend to show a 
dense connection between the nodes within groups where a low 
modularity indicates sparse connections between nodes in 
different groups [17]. Modularity calculation for the entire 
network by JUNG and detected communities by the Voltage-
 clustering algorithm are shown in Table III. 
TABLE III.  RESULT OF COMMUNITY DETECTION 
No Community Size Modularity1) 
01 33,393 
1.25E-04 
02 27,666 
03 38,987 
04 32,648 
05 3,760 
06 208 
07 20 
08 15 
09 16 
10 1 
11 1 
12 3 
13 1 
14 35 
1) The value of the modularity lies in the range between -0.5 and 1 
As shown above, we generated fourteen distinguished 
communities by the Voltage-clustering algorithm where the 
entire network has the value of 1.25E-04 in terms of 
modularity. This community structure reveals that 1) the user 
communities on the issue of the presidential election are quite 
densely connected with a few sparse connections between 
groups and 2) the network of social interests divides naturally 
into subgroups. This result also indicates that detecting 
B 
C A 
D 
E 
F 
G 
69
community structure is a useful approach of as a data analysis 
technique used to shed light on the structure of large-scale 
network data sets. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this study, we empirically developed the Real-time 
Twitter Trend Mining (RT2M) system that is designed for in 
real-time to 1) crawl and store every tweet produced in Twitter, 
2) keep track of topical trend, and 3) visualize mention-based 
user networks. The major contribution of the study is making it 
possible to mine dynamic social trends and content-based 
networks generated in Twitter through adequate integration of 
state-of-the-art techniques. We also demonstrated the case 
study on 2012 Korea presidential election. Our empirical study 
revealed some new findings. First, based on the observation of 
the temporal Topic Modeling, we identified that Twitter would 
be a useful medium for keeping track of topical trends. In 
particular, we found that controversial issues could be 
propagated faster in Twitter than other media. Second, the 
mention-based user network provides a basis for identifying 
any nodes with high betweenness because users in Twitter tend 
to send/receive mentions each other, not depending on their 
positive/negative attitude towards a certain issue. This 
behavioral trait also affects to density of the user community. 
Through additional sentiment analysis on tweets and sent-
 received mentions, however, we need to properly measure 
connectivity among users which could vary based on personal 
leaning or attitude on a certain issue in Twitter. 
In the future, we will study how to apply sentiment analysis 
to Twitter data to observe changes in public opinion and the 
formation process of a certain issue, and ultimately design the 
prediction model of social issues on social media. In addition, 
by applying the concept of citation to Twitter, we may be able 
to discover content-based influencers and opinion leaders. We 
will also explore whether the community structure detected is 
co-related with the results of topic modeling reported in this 
paper. In addition, it is one of the interesting research problems 
to examine the social network patterns varying with the change 
of different terms over time that we hope to tackle in the future. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This study was supported by National Research Foundation 
of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2012-
 2012S1A3A2033291). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Blei, D., Ng, A., and Jordan, M. 2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3: 993-1022. 
[2] Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. 2007. Social network sites: definition, 
history, and scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 13(1). Available at 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol13/issue1/boyd.ellison.html 
[3] Cha, M., Haddadi, H., Benevenutoz, F., and Gummadi, K. P. 2010. 
Measuring user influence in Twitter: the million follower. Proceedings 
of the 4th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. 
[4] Chaney, A., Blei, D. 2012. Visualizing topic models. Proceedings of the 
6th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.  
[5] Chang, J., Boyd-Graber, J., Wang, C., Gerrish, S., and Blei, D. 2009. 
Reading tea leaves: how humans interpret topic models. Neural 
Information Processing Systems. 
[6] Choi, D., Min, M., Kim J., and Lee, J. 2011. A Study on topic tracking 
using microblog. Proceedings of KIIS Spring Conference 2011, 21(1): 
80-82. 
[7] Drezner, D. W., and Henry F. 2007. Introduction - blogs, politics and 
power: a special issue of public choice. Public Choice, 134(1-2): 1-13. 
[8] Huberman, B. A., Romero, D. M., and Wu, F. 2008. Social networks 
that matter: Twitter under the microscope. Available at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1313405 
[9] Jansen, B. J., Zhang, M., Sobel, K., and Chowdury, A. 2009. Twitter 
power: tweets as electronic word of mouth. JASIST, 60: 1-20. 
[10] Jansen, H. J., and Koop. R. 2005. Pundits, Ideologues, and Ranters: the 
british columbia election online. Canadian Journal of Communication, 
30(4): 613-632. 
[11] Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., and Tseng, B. 2007. Why we twitter: 
understanding microblogging usage andcommunities. Proceedings of the 
9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and 
socialnetwork analysis, 56-65. 
[12] Kim, Y. 2011. Prediction of structure of spread of public opinion at 
Twitter with special emphasis on by-election for Seoul mayor. Political 
communucation, 23: 103-139. 
[13] Kwak, H., Lee, C. Park, H., and Moon. S. What is Twitter, a social 
network or a news media? Proceedings of the 19th International 
conference on WWW, 591-600. 
[14] Lee, K., Namgoong, H., Kim, E. H., Lee, K., and Kim, H. 2010. 
Analysis of multi-dimensional interaction among SNS users. Journal of 
Korean Society for Internet Information, 12(2): 113-122. 
[15] Livne, A., Simmons, M., Adar, E., and Adamic, L. 2011. The party is 
overhere: Structure and content in the 2010 election. Proceedings of 5th 
ICWSM. Available at http://bit.ly/q9lSu 
[16] Mimno, D. M. and McCallum, A. 2008. Topic models conditioned on 
arbitrary features with Dirichlet-multinomial regression. UAI 2008, 411-
 418. 
[17] Newman, M. E. J. 2006. Modularity and community structure in 
networks. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 103(23): 
8577–8696. 
[18] O'Connor, B., Balasubramanyan, R., Routledge, B. R., and Smith, N. A. 
2010. From tweets to polls: linking text sentiment to public opinion 
timeseries. Proceedings of 4th ICWSM, 122-129. 
[19] Hong, L., Davison, B., D. 2010. Empirical study of topic modeling in 
Twitter. SOMA '10 Proceedings of the First Workshop on Social Media 
Analytics, 80-88.  
[20] Sakaki, T., Okazaki, M., and Matsuo, Y. 2010. Earthquake shakes 
Twitter users: real-time event detection by social sensors. WWW '10 
Proceedings of the 19th WWW, 851-860.  
[21] Salton G., McGill M. J. 1986.Introduction to modern information 
retrieval. NY: McGraw-Hill. 
[22] Seol, k., Ki, J., Lee, C., and Baik, D. 2012. Intimacy measurement 
between adjacent users in social networks. Journal of KIISE, 39(4): 335-
 341. 
[23] Tamer, A. Wang, N., Hale, S., and I Graham, M. 2012. Obama wins the 
election! (on Twitter). Available at 
http://www.zerogeography.net/2012/11/obama-wins-election-on-
 twitter.html 
[24] Tumasjan, A. Sprenger, T. O., Sandner, P. G., and Welpe, I. M. 2010. 
Predicting elections with Twitter: what 140 characters reveal about 
political sentiment. Proceedings of the 4th International AAAI 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 178-185. 
[25] Williams, C., and Gulati, G. 2008. What is a social network worth? 
Facebook and vote share in the 2008 presidential primaries. In Annual 
Meeting of the American Political Science Association, 1-17. 
70
[26] Woodly, D. 2007. New competencies in democratic communication: 
blogs, agenda setting and political participation. Public Choice, 134(1-
 2): 109-123. 
[27] Wu, F., Huberman, B. A. 2004. Finding communities in linear time: a 
physics approach. The European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter 
and Complex Systems, 38(2): 331-338. 
[28] Xu, X., Yuruk, N., Feng, Z., Schweiger, T., A., J. 2007. SCAN: a 
structural clustering algorithm for networks. KDD '07 Proceedings of the 
13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining, 824-833.  
[29] Yan, E., Ding, Y. and Sugimoto, R. 2012. Topics in dynamic research 
communities: an exploratory study for the field of information retrieval. 
Journal of Informetrics, 6(1): 140-153. 
[30] Yoon, M., Lee, J. 2012. Antecedents of social media use, actual use, and 
social capital: an analysis of a mediation model. Broadcasting and 
Communication, 13(2): 5-44. 
[31] Zhao, W., X., Jiang, J. et al. 2011. Comparing Twitter and traditional 
media using topic models. ECIR '11 Proceedings of the 33rd European 
conference on Advances in Information Retrieval, 338-349.
  
71
