Modeling Photovo
 M
 Heba N. Mohamed 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dep
 Khalifa University 
Abu Dhabi, UAE 
Heba.abunahla@kustar.ac.ae 
Abstract— This paper proposes accurate 
simulate different types of commercial p
 modules. The main component of the new 
channel enhancement-mode MOSFET. Th
 simplifies the I-V output equation of PV modu
 exponential term exists in the well-known dio
 provides the ability to represent the whole PV
 one MOSFET which decreases the simulatio
 run a big system. Fast, simple and accur
 proposed based on the new circuit model. The
 validated with experimental data of co
 crystalline silicon, poly-crystalline silicon an
 diselenide (CIS) PV modules. The obtained I-V
 accuracy of the new N-MOSFET Model. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Solar cells are represented using diode
 Figs. 1-3; single diode model [1]-[3], two dio
 and three diode model [9]. In general, singl
 the most used model as it offers a good com
 simplicity and accuracy compared to the ot
 In the two diode model, extra diode is used
 effect of the recombination of carriers. A thr
 used to take into account the influence of 
and large leakage current through the 
characteristic of PV cell is described by no
 that is complicated to be solved by the ordin
 methods. 
In this work a new approach is propos
 simulate PV modules at different tempera
 enhancement-mode MOSFET is used to 
output equation of PV module. The new m
 number of unknowns needed to be calculated
 and   simplifies the   modeling   algorithm   b
 exponential term. Fast and accurate algorith
 find the missing parameters of the quadra
 using the three key points which are 
commercial modules datasheets: open circu
 maximum power point, and short circuit cur
 these three points, the method finds the best
 the N-channel MOSFET PV model and w
 ltaic Modules Using  N
 OS Transistor  
 
artment 
Soliman A. M
 Electrical and Electronics E
 University of
 Sharjah, U
 Solimanm@sh
  
 
circuit model to 
hotovoltaic (PV) 
model is the N-
 e new approach 
le by avoiding the 
de model. Also it 
 module by only 
n time needed to 
ate algorithm is 
 proposed work is 
mmercial mono-
 d copper indium 
 curves prove the 
 models show in 
de model [4]-[8] 
e diode model is 
promise between 
her models [10]. 
 to represent the 
ee diode model is 
grain boundaries 
peripheries. I-V 
nlinear equation 
ary mathematical 
ed to model and 
tures. N-channel 
simplify the I-V 
odel reduces the 
 in diode models 
y   avoiding   the 
m is proposed to 
tic I-V equation 
provided by all 
it voltage point, 
rent point. Given 
 I-V equation for 
arranties that the 
maximum power of the model mat
 power of the real module.  
Figure1. Single diode model 
Figure2. Two diode model o
 Figure3. Three diode model o
 This paper is organized as follow
 proposed modeling approach by pr
 model and explaining the mathem
 find the best I-V equation to sim
 section III, the simulation results obt
 proposed approach with experimen
 Kyocera KC200GT and Shell S
 presented. Finally, conclusions are st
 -Channel 
ahmoud 
ngineering Department 
 Sharjah 
AE 
arjah.ac.ae 
ches with the maximum 
 
of solar cell. 
 
f solar cell. 
 
f solar cell. 
s. Section II details the 
esenting the new circuit 
atical algorithm used to 
ulate a PV module. In   
ained from validating the 
tal data of Shell SP70, 
T40 solar modules are 
ated in section IV. 
978-1-4799-2452-3/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 743
II. PROPOSED APPROACH
 Although that the diode models p
 preceeding section are the best translations 
solar cells, it’s difficult to propose a fast and
 algorithm that can give accurate results for
 modules at different temperaturs. This is  du
 of the exponential term and the big numbe
 parameters needed to be calculated. In ad
 there is no accurate method to define
 coefficient of (a) for each type of PV mod
 come this problem, this work proposes new
 simulate photovoltaic modules easily and acc
 A. N-MOSFET Circuit Model 
The basic component of the new model s
 the N-channel enhancement-mode MOSFE
 gate and drain terminals. The threshold 
0.25µm CMOS technology used in this work
 which is too small to simulate a PV module.
 to body bias (Vsb) is used to increase the 
range of the I-V output characteristic based
 PV module I-V carves provided by manufact
 Figure4. N-MOSFET model of PV m
 Due to non-ideality of the practical PV 
source resistance (Rds) is used to increase th
 new circuit model. Fig. 5 shows norma
 characteristic of a PV module modeled wit
 Rds (solid line) and with the existence of R
 Figure5. Normalized I-V characteristic of ideal and p
 B. Modeling Algorithm 
To simulate a PV module, the behavior o
 model should be analyzed and understood. 
the gate terminals of the N-MOSFET 
transistor will be ON in the saturation mode
 the new approach represented in Fig. 
Ideal PV Module 
 
resented in the 
of the physics of 
 simple modeling 
 the different PV 
e to the existance 
r of the missing 
dition, currently 
 a temperature 
ule [11]. To over 
 circuit model to 
urately. 
hown in Fig. 4 is 
T with shorted 
voltage (VT) of 
 is around 0.5 V 
 Thus, the source 
obtained voltage 
 on the modeled 
uring datasheet.  
 
odule. 
modules, drain to 
e accuracy of the 
lized I-V output 
h the absence of 
ds (dashed line). 
 
ractical PV modules. 
f the new circuit 
As the drain and 
are shorted, the 
 only. By testing 
4 in modeling 
commercial PV modules, it was dem
 value of Rds to 100 ? is a suitable ap
 accurate results and simplifies the 
proposed approach depends on the
 key points of the PV module. At 
point of the PV module, the transist
 model can be redrawn as shown in
 can be related to the other param
 following equation. 
 
1sc
 V
 II +=
 Figure6. N-MOSFET model of PV modul
 For the maximum power and 
points, the transistor is passing curre
 It’s important to approximate the val
 at which the N-MOSFET of the ne
 ON. Based on the proposed approach
 of a commercial PV module was
 transistor starts working approxim
 shown in Fig. 7. Thus, the equa
 saturation drain current can be appro
 ( ) ,
 2
 2
 sbgd VV
 kI ?=
 Where Id is the N-MOSFET drain cu
 transconductance parameter. 
Figure7. I-V curve of PV module plo
 Equation (3) can be extracted from 
analysis. The value of I from (1) ca
 shown in (4) and then the value of th
 (Id) can be calculated. Equations (2) 
maximum power and the open circui
 with two equations and two unknow
 (6). Thus, the value of Vsb can b
 consequently the value of I can be de
 onstrated that setting the 
proximation which gives 
modeling algorithm. The 
 availability of the three 
the short circuit current 
or is OFF and the circuit 
 Fig. 6. It’s clear that Isc 
eters as shown in the 
00
 sb .                               (1) 
 
e at short circuit current point. 
the open circuit voltage 
nt in the saturation mode. 
ue of the gate voltage (Vg) 
w circuit model becomes 
, the output characteristic 
 traced to find that the 
ately when Vg > Vsb as 
tion of the N-MOSFET 
ximated as follows: 
)( Tsb VV >>                   (2) 
rrent and k is device  
 
tted with normalized Vsb. 
Fig. 4 by applying nodal 
n be substituted in (3) as 
e transistor drain current 
and (4) can be used at the 
t voltage points to end up 
ns as shown in (5) and 
e easily calculated and 
monstrated from (1).    
744
100100
 sbo
 do
 VV
 III ?++=                            (3) 
Where Io is the output current of the PV module and Vo is the 
output voltage of the PV module.
  
100
 o
 dosc
 V
 III ++=                               (4) 
( ) )(,
 2100
 2
 Tsbsbm
 m
 msc VVVV
 kVII >>?=??           (5) 
( ) )(,
 2100
 2
 Tsbsboc
 oc
 sc VVVV
 kVI >>?=?               (6) 
As the drain current equation of MOSFET is quadratic, 
two solutions will be available for Vsb. The smaller solution 
must be chosen because the value of Vsb should be smaller than 
the value of the maximum power point voltage.  
C. Curve Fitting 
The proposed algorithm tends to use the minimum 
channel length (L) of the used technology in order to 
minimize the required width (W) needed to simulate the PV 
module. It’s known that the value of the material 
transconductance parameter (k’) is provided by manufacturing 
datasheet; however, this value can be slightly affected 
according to the number of LEVEL used in the simulator. 
Thus, to add more accuracy to the proposed algorithm, curve 
fitting is used as shown in Fig. 8 to demonstrate the value of 
W that’s suitable to simulate the PV module.  
 
 
Figure8. I-V curves plotted for different values of W. 
III. VALIDATING THE MODEL 
The new circuit model presented in Fig. 4 was validated 
using PSPICE. Commercial poly-crystalline silicon, mono-
 crystalline silicon and Copper Indium Diselenide (CIS) PV 
modules were simulated based on the proposed approach to 
validate their output characteristics with the ones mentioned 
in manufacturing datasheets. N94S MOSFET model provided 
by TSMC (0.25 micron) [12] was used for all simulated 
modules.  
A. Ploy-Crystalline Silicon PV Module 
KC200GT is a highly efficient poly-crystalline PV 
module. It consists of 54 series connected solar cells. 
Manufacturing datasheets [13] provide I-V curves at different 
temperatures. Fig. 9 shows the simulated I-V curves of the 
KC200GT solar module plotted with the experimental data. 
The circular markers in the graphs represent experimental 
(V,I) points extracted from the datasheet. It’s clear that the 
proposed model is exact at the key points and sufficiently 
accurate for other points. For this module, the model 
proposed in this paper is compared with the modeling 
methods of [1] and [2] at two different temperatures. The 
errors presented by the three models are plotted on the same 
graph. It’s clear from Figs. 10 and 11 that the maximum 
absolute error for the proposed PV model is approximatly 
equal to the results obtained by [1] at T = 25oC (5.4% of Isc) 
and it’s reduced at T = 75oC (2.9% of Isc). 
 
Figure9. I–V model curves and experimental data of the KC200GT solar 
module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2. 
 
 
Figure10. Absolute errors of the model proposed in this paper (curve A), 
computed with the work given in [1] (curve B) and in [2]      
(curve C) for the Kyocera KC200GT solar array at STC. 
 
 
Figure11. Absolute errors of the model proposed in this paper (curve A), 
computed with the work given in [1] (curve B) and in [2]      
(curve C) for the Kyocera KC 200GT solar array at 75 ?C, AM1.5, 
1000 W/m2. 
745
B. Mono-Crystalline Silicon PV Module 
Shell SP70 PV module contains 36 series connected mono 
crystalline silicon solar cells [14]. Fig. 12 shows the I-
 V curves of Shell SP70 module obtained based on the 
proposed approach plotted with the experimental data at four 
different temperature conditions. TABLE I summarizes the 
calculated values of Vsb and W for Shell SP70 solar module at 
different temperatures.  
  
Figure12. I–V model curves and experimental data of Shell SP70 solar 
module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2. 
C. CIS PV Module 
The proposed approach given in this paper was validated 
for Shell ST40 solar module. This module is composed of a 
monolithic structure of series CIS based solar cells [15].         
Fig. 13 shows the I-V curves obtained from modeling Shell 
ST40 solar module plotted with the experimental data at four 
different temperatures. It’s clear that the proposed model 
results match accurately the commercial datasheet points 
presented by the circular markers. 
 
 
Figure13. I–V model curves and experimental data of Shell ST40 solar 
module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2. 
TABLE I. PROPOSED MODEL PARAMETERS OF SHELL SP70 SOLAR MODULE 
AT SOLAR IRRADIATION = 1000 W/M2, AM1.5. 
Temperature 30 oC 40 oC 50 oC 60 oC 
Vsb (V) 14.4 13.6 12.73 11.9 
W (µm) 144 151 153 159 
IV. CONCLUSION 
This paper has proposed a novel circuit model to represent 
PV modules. The basic component of the new model is the         
N-channel MOSFET. The new approach simplifies the 
modeling algorithm used to be followed in diode models. Fast 
and accurate modeling algorithm has been proposed to solve 
for the missing parameters (I and Vsb) in the new circuit 
approach. Then, curve fitting is used to find the best value of 
W needed to model the PV module. The new circuit model 
presented in this work was validated for Shell SP70, Kyocera 
KC200GT and Shell ST40 PV modules at different 
temperatures to prove the accuracy of the proposed approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Gradella, J. Rafael, and E. Ruppert, “Comprehensive Approach to 
Modeling and Simulation of PV Arrays,” IEEE Transitions On Power 
Electronocs, Vol. 24, pp. 1198 - 1208, 2009. 
[2] G.Walker, “Evaluating Mppt Converter Topologies Using a Matlab PV 
Model”, Journal of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Vol. 21,  
No. 1, 2001, pp. 45-55. 
[3] S. Mahmoud and H. Mohamed, “Novel Modeling Approach For 
Photovoltaic Arrays”, 55th Int'l Midwest Symposium on Circuits & 
Systems, 2012, pp. 790-793.  
[4] N. Pongratananukul and T. Kasparis, “Tool for automated simulation of 
solar arrays using general-purpose simulators,” in Proc. IEEE 
Workshop Comput. Power Electron., 2004, pp. 10–14.  
[5] S. Chowdhury, G. A. Taylor, S. P. Chowdhury, A. K. Saha, and Y. H. 
Song, “Modelling, simulation and performance analysis of a PV array 
in an embedded environment,” in Proc. 42nd Int. Univ. Power Eng. 
Conf. (UPEC), 2007, pp. 781–785.  
[6] M. Taherbaneh, G. Farahani and K. Rahmani, “Evaluation the 
Accuracy of One-Diode and Two-Diode Models for a Solar Panel 
Based Open-Air Climate Measurements”, Solar Cells – Silicon Wafer-
 Based Technologies. pp. 201-227. 
[7] J. A. Gow and C. D. Manning, “Development of a photovoltaic array 
model for use in power-electronics simulation studies,” IEE Proc. 
Elect. Power Appl., Vol. 146, No. 2, 1999, pp. 193–200. 
[8] J. A. Gow and C. D. Manning, “Development of a model for 
photovoltaic arrays suiTable for use in simulation studies of solar 
energy conversion systems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Power Electron. 
Variable Speed Drives, 1996, pp. 69–74. 
[9] K. Nishioka, N. Sakitani,Y. Uraoka, and T. Fuyuki, “Analysis of 
multicrystalline silicon solar cells by modified 3-diode equivalent 
circuit model taking leakage current through periphery into 
consideration,” Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, Vol. 91, No. 13, 2007, 
pp. 1222–1227. 
[10] S. Mahmoud, M. Al Sari, E. Ibrahim and R. Mohamed, “Matlab/Pspice 
Hybrid Simulation Modeling in a PV System,” 55th Int'l Midwest 
Symposium on Circuits & Systems, USA, 2012. 
[11] A. Mahrane , A. Guenounou, Z. Smara, M. Chikh and M. Lakehal, 
“Test Bench for Photovoltaic Modules”, International Symposium on 
Environment Friendly Energies in Electrical Applications, 2010. 
[12] Mosis Parameter Test Results [online]. Available: 
https://www.mosis.com/cgi-bin/cgiwrap/umosis/swp/params/tsmc-
 025/n94s-params.txt.  
[13] KC200GT High Efficiency Multicrystal Photovoltaic Module 
Datasheet Kyocera. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.kyocera.com.sg/products/solar/pdf/kc200gt.pdf.  
[14] Shell SP70 Photovoltaic Solar Module [Online]. Available: 
http://www.solarcellsales.com/techinfo/docs/Shell_SP70.pdf . 
[15] Shell ST40 Photovoltaic Solar Module [Online]. Available: 
http://www.physics.arizona.edu/~cronin/Solar/TEP%20module%20spe
 c%20sheets/ShellST40_US.pdf.  
 
746
