255978-1-4673-5517-9 ©2013 IEEE
 23th Conference Radioelektronika 2013, April 16-17, Pardubice, Czech Republic
 Astronomical Image Denoising using  
Curvelet and Starlet Transform 
 
Elena Anisimova, Jan Bednar, Petr Pata 
FEE CTU in Prague 
Department of Radioelectronics 
Prague, Czech Republic 
anisiele@fel.cvut.cz 
 
 
Abstract—Astronomical image data acquisition under low light 
conditions causes higher noise occurrence in these data. There 
are a lot of noise sources including also the thermally generated 
noise (dark current) inside used astronomical CCD sensor and 
the Poisson noise of the photon flux. There are specific image 
quality criteria in astronomy. These criteria are derived from the 
algorithms for astronomical image processing and are specific in 
the field of multimedia signal processing. Astrometric and 
photometric algorithms provide information about stellar 
objects: their brightness profile (PSF), position and magnitude. 
They could fail because of lower SNR. This problem can be 
solved by subtraction a dark frame from a captured image 
nowadays. However, this method couldn't work properly in 
systems with shorter shutter speed and nonlinear sensitivity, such 
as for example the system MAIA (Meteor Automatic Imager and 
Analyser). Image data from these system could not been 
processed by conventional algorithms. Denoising of the 
astronomical images is therefore still a big challenge for 
astronomers and people who process astronomical data. 
Therefore usage of other denoising algorithms is proposed in this 
paper. We describe our experiences with astronomical image 
data denoising based on Curvelet and Starlet transform. Novel 
algorithms have been tested on image data from MAIA system. 
Their influence on important photometric data like stellar 
magnitude and FWHM (Full Width at Half Maximum) has been 
studied and compared with conventional denoising methods.  
Keywords—image denoising, astronomy, curvelet transform, 
starlet transform, MAIA 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Many discrete wavelet transform algorithms have been 
recently developed [1, 2]. The most widely-known one is 
certainly the orthogonal transform, proposed by Mallat [3] and 
its bi-orthogonal version [4]. Using the orthogonal wavelet 
transform, digital signal s can be decomposed as follows [5] 
where ?  and ? are respectively the scaling function and the 
wavelet function. J is the number of resolutions used in the 
decomposition, wj are the wavelet (or detail) coefficients at 
scale j, cJ is a coarse or smooth version of the original signal s, 
k represents time axis and l is a time shift. Thus, the algorithm 
outputs J+1 subband arrays. The indexing is such that j = 1 
corresponds to the finest scale (high frequencies). 
While the bi-orthogonal wavelet transform leads to 
successful implementation in image compression techniques, 
results are not convenient for data analysis (e.g., denoising, 
deconvolution, object detection). This is mainly due to the loss 
of the translation-invariance property in the discrete wavelet 
transform (DWT) realized by the Mallat algorithm [1], leading 
to a large number of artifacts when an image is reconstructed 
after modification of its wavelet coefficients. 
For this reason, astronomers and physicists have generally 
preferred to work with the continuous wavelet transform, even 
if the cost to be paid is a considerable amount of redundancy in 
the transformation and there is no reconstruction operator [5]. 
For some application, such as fractal analysis or object 
detection, these drawbacks have no impact because there is no 
need to apply a reconstruction. For other applications, in which 
reconstruction is needed, some researchers have chosen an 
undecimated version of the wavelet transform implemented by 
a very efficient way using so called À trous algorithm [5,6], 
where this French term means “with holes”. This kind of the 
isotropic undecimated wavelet transform is also called the 
Starlet transform [7]. 
A series of recent papers [8,9], however, argued that 
wavelets and related classical multiresolution ideas deal with a 
limited dictionary made up of roughly isotropic elements 
occurring at all scales and locations. Moreover, these 
dictionaries do not exhibit highly anisotropic elements (e.g. 
curves and edges). Following on this topic, Candès and 
Donoho introduced new multiscale systems like curvelets [7] 
and ridgelets [8]. Curvelets and ridgelets take the form of base 
elements which exhibit very high directional sensitivity and are 
highly anisotropic. In two-dimensions, for instance, curvelets 
are localized along curves, in three dimensions along sheets, 
etc. 
II. METHODS USED FOR IMAGE DENOISING 
As was mentioned above, two methods the curvelet 
transform and the starlet transform were used for image 
denoising. First, we would like shortly to describe some 
important properties of these transforms and algorithms for 
their realization. After that, we will introduce applied 
s?l?=? cJ,k?J,l?k?+???j,l?k?wj,k
 J
 j=1kk
 , 
 
(1) 
256
 thresholding techniques used for noise supp
 astronomical image data.  
A .  Th e Sta rlet Tra nsform  
If the digital wavelet transform rea
 algorithm is applied to image data, a large n
 will occur inside these data after modificati
 coefficients [5]. This fact is not convenient 
suppression inside the processed imag
 astronomical image denoising, these arti
 important scientific information about 
magnitude and FWHM (Full Width at Half M
 magnitude (i.e. total flux) corresponds to brig
 object and FWHM (Fig. 1) corresponds to 
shape. Therefore, the wavelet transform i
 À trous algorithm ("with holes") for astrono m
 in other words, instead of the wavele
 undecimated starlet transform is used (starle
 trous algorithm for wavelet transform realizat
 computational procedure [5, 7]). 
Starlet transform implementation involve
 input image with a 2D convolution kernel re
 dimensional scaling function, which imitate
 (Point Spread Function) shape in case of as
 processing. It could be a spline of degree 3, w
 dimension to the filter h = (1/16,1/4,3/8, 1
 point of the starlet transform is that at each de
 j, one subband wj containing the wavel
 obtained, which has the same number of p
 image. To imitate the subsampling proce
 details of various sizes from the input imag
 has been changed for each next decompositi
 way that 2j- 1 zeros are inserted between the
 (j corresponds to the ordinal number of dec
 A summary of the starlet algorithm is as follo
 • During the first decomposition le
 original image s0  is convolved wi
 filter h 0 , and the result is the smoothe
 • Subtracting s1 by s0  we get the wave
 the first decomposition level corr
 finest details w1 = s0  ? s1. 
• j = j + 1. 
• Expand the filter by 2j ? 1 zeros w
 between the filter coefficients. 
• Calculate the smoothed matrix s2  = s
 convolution) and the wavelet coe
 second decomposition level: w2  = w
 stop here, the original image s0  is the
 and w2  (see Fig. 2). 
B .  T h e Cu rv elet Transfor m 
Before describing the curvelet transform
 mention about the Radon transform and R
 relating to it. 
ression inside the 
lized by Mallat 
umber of artifacts 
on of the wavelet 
in terms of noise 
es. In case of 
facts can distort 
stellar object’s 
aximum). Stellar 
htness of a stellar 
the general stellar 
s realized by the         
ical purposes. Or 
t transform the 
t transform and À 
ion have the same 
s convoluting the 
presenting a two-
 s the stellar PSF 
tronomical image 
hich leads in one 
/4,1/16) [5]. The 
composition level 
et coefficients is 
ixels as the input 
ss and to extract 
e, the filter length 
on level in such a 
 filter coefficients   
omposition level).     
ws.  
vel (j = 0), the 
th an unmodified 
d matrix s1. 
let coefficients for 
esponding to the 
hich are inserted 
1*k 1 (* represents 
fficients for the 
1 ? w2 , etc. If we 
n the sum of s2 , w1 
 it is necessary to 
idgelet transform 
Figure 1.  Full Width at Half Ma
 1)  Th e Ra d on Tra nsform 
The Radon transform of a 
integrals indexed by (?, t ) ? [0, 
 
where ? is the Dirac distributio
 transform maps the spatial dom
 (?, t ), and each point in the Rad
 in the spatial domain. The Rado
 applying the one-dimensional i
 two-dimensional Fourier trans
 lines going through the origin o
 2 )  Th e Rid g elet Tra nsform 
The ridgelet transform can b
 lines of the size of the image [9
 partitioning has to be introduc
 into smoothly overlapping blo
 such a way that the overlap b
 blocks is a rectangular array of
 used for avoiding the blocking 
is therefore optimal for detectin
 the block size.  
It has been shown in [5] and
 is precisely the application 
transform to the slices of the Ra
 Figure 2.  Computational di
 3 )  T h e Cu rv elet Transfor m
 This transform opens the p
 within blocks of different size. 
curvelet transform is to decom
 wavelet bands and to analyze 
Rs ??,t ?=? s? x 1,x 2 ???x 1c
  
ximum (FWHM) of a stellar object 
signal s is the collection of line 
2π) ? R given by  
n. The two-dimensional Radon 
ain ( x, y ) to the Radon domain 
on domain corresponds to a line 
n transform can be obtained by 
nverse Fourier transform to the 
form space restricted to radial 
f the signal’s spectru m [5, 10].  
e an optimal method to finding 
, 10]. To detect line segments, a 
ed. The image is decomposed 
cks of side-length B  pixels in 
etween two vertically adjacent 
 size B ? B / 2. The overlapping is 
artifacts. The rigdelet transform 
g lines of a given size, equal to 
 [10] that the ridgelet transform 
of a 1-dimensional wavelet 
don transform.   
 
agram of the Starlet transform 
 
ossibility to analyze an image 
The idea of the first-generation 
pose the image into a set of 
each band with a local ridgelet 
os ?+x 2 sin ? - t ?d x 1 dx 2 , (2) 
257
 transform. The block size can by changed at each 
decomposition level. A sketch of the discrete curvelet 
transform algorithm is as follows [10]. 
• Apply the starlet transform with J decomposition 
levels (scales) to the processed image and get the set of 
the starlet coefficients w = {w 1,…,w J, cJ }. 
• Set B 1 = B min , where B  is a block size (B m in =16 in [11]). 
• For j = 1,…, J   do: 
o partition the subband wj with a block size B j   
and apply the digital ridgelet transform to 
each block, 
o if j modulo 2 = 1 then B j+1 = 2B j , 
o else B j+1 = B j .  
 
III. MAIA SYSTEM  
MAIA (Meteor Automatic Imager and Analyzer) system is 
an evolution of current analog solution of system for double 
station observation of the meteors, which is equipped with the 
gigabit Ethernet camera JAI CM-040 with 1/2" progressive 
scan CCD sensor, image intensifier and Pentax SMS FA 1.4/50 
mm lens as the input element of the optical system [12]. All 
these components (Fig. 3) contribute to the optical aberrations 
and non-uniform noise occurrence, which is especially caused 
by non-uniform sensitivity of the image intensifier. 
Conventional algorithms for image denoising could be used in 
this case, but they are not efficient enough. Therefore, the 
novel denoising methods are proposed.    
 
IV.  ASTRONOMICAL IMAGE DENOISING  
A .  Co n v e n tio n al algorith m in astro n o m y 
Denoising of captured astronomical images is generally 
performed by subtracting so called dark frame from these data. 
Dark frame is an image acquired with the sensor in the dark 
(when the input aperture is closed), essentially just an image of 
noise inside the image sensor. This noise consists almost of the 
thermally generated noise inside the CCD sensor.  
 
 
Figure 3.  MAIA system design 
 
Another image called flat field could be used in addition to 
the dark frame. Noise suppression is not a general purpose of 
acquired image, flat field is used to correct pixel-to-pixel 
variations in the CCD response as well as any nonuniform 
illumination of the detector itself.  In our case, we will divide 
the captured image by the normalized flat field to avoid the 
microchannel structure of the image intensifier.  
However, the collection of dark frame and flat field couldn't 
work properly in systems with shorter shutter speed and 
nonlinear sensitivity, such is our system MAIA. Denoising 
methods based on starlet and curvelet transform were therefore 
tested. 
B .  D e n o ising using Sta rlet and Cu rv elet tra nsform  
The way to remove noise from image data is to perform the 
thresholding of starlet or curvelet coefficients of the processed 
image after corresponding transform. Thresholding is a method 
which determines significance of the coefficients. If 
appropriate coefficient is larger than a threshold, it is 
significant, otherwise it is not.  
Let us see on the hard coefficients thresholding. Let 
suppose, that CCD sensor receives more than 40 photons 
during image acquisition, thus the Poisson noise distribution 
accumulate inside the sensor becomes almost indistinguishable 
from the Gaussian [13]. Given stationary Gaussian noise, it 
suffices to compare the wavelet coefficients wj,l (j – 
decomposition level, l – index of pixel) to the Gaussian noise 
standard deviation ?j :   
 
 Often k is chosen as 3 because of empirical rule which 
states that for a normal distribution, nearly all values (about 
99.7%) lie within 3 standard deviations of the mean. If wj,l is 
small, it is not significant and could be due to noise. If wj,l is 
large, it is significant and is due to the useful signal.  
So, it is necessary to estimate, in the case of Gaussian noise 
models, the noise standard deviation at each decomposition 
scale j. The appropriate value of ?j in the succession of the 
starlet or curvelet is assessed from the standard deviation of the 
noise ?s in the original data s, and from study of the noise in the 
starlet / curvelet space. This study consists of simulating a data 
set containing Gaussian noise with a standard deviation equal 
to 1, and taking the starlet / curvelet transform of this data set 
[5]. Then the standard deviation ? e j is computed at each 
decomposition level. Due to the properties of the 
multiresolution approach, the noise standard deviation at scale j 
of the data is equal to the noise standard deviation of the 
original image ?s multiplied by the noise standard deviation at 
scale j of the simulated data ?j = ?s ?e j . Table I gives the ? e j 
values for the 2D starlet transform using the cubic B3 spline 
scaling filter [5].  
TABLE I.  D EPE NDENCE O F SIMULATED G AUSSI AN NOISE STANDARD 
DEVIA TION ON DECOM POSITION LEVE L  
Decomposition level   j  1 2 3 4 5 
2D image 0.889 0.200 0.086 0.041 0.020 
 
wj,l= ?
 0, if wj,l≥k?j
 wj,l, if wj,l <k ?j (3) 
258
  
Figure 4.  Testing image (left), dark fra
 The noise standard deviation of the origin
 estimated from the starlet coefficients contain
 decomposition level using the median ab
 MAD. MAD gives an estimation of th
 deviation [5]:  
 
where MED is the median function and w
 coefficients containing the finest details o
 noise estimate of the original signal ?s is then
 ?s=
 ? m
 ?1e
 .  
Estimation of the Gaussian noise standar
 was proposed by Donnoho and Johnston [14
 was as follows: if { u n }  are N  independent 
variables of zero mean and varian
 E ?Median(| u n |) 0≤ n< N ? ≈ 0.6745 ?. 
V.  IMAGE PROCESSING
 In terms of image denoising we 
astronomical image (one frame from an acqu
 frame and a flat field all captured by MAIA
 4). At the beginning of image processing, the
 captured stellar field was divided by the fla
 correct the CCD camera response on incident
 the microchannel structure of the image i
 shows the testing astronomical image before 
correction.  
Within the next step we performed denoi
 image using all three methods:  dark frame 
transform and curvelet transform with follo
 thresholding implemented in MATLAB. A 
purposes) downloaded CurveLab Toolbox [
 the curvelet transform realization. Table I
 effectiveness of each method presented by
 Mean Square Error (MSE) and Peak Sign
 (PSNR). An average image calculated from t
 sequence was considered to be the original im
 presence.    
Finally, objective astronomical image
 describing changes of scientifically significa
 stellar magnitude m  and FWHM were monito
 software IRAF (Image Reduction and Analys
 ? m =MED ( |w 1|)/ 0.6745 , 
 
me (center) and flat field (right) acquired by MAIA system display
 al signal could be 
ed inside the first 
solute deviation, 
e noise standard 
1 are the starlet 
f the signal. The 
 obtained by:  
(5) 
d deviation ? m  (4) 
]. The motivation 
Gaussian random 
ce ?? , then 
 
chose a testing 
ired video), a dark 
 system (see Fig. 
 image containing 
t field in order to 
 light and to avoid 
ntensifier. Fig. 5 
and after flat field 
sing of the testing 
subtraction, starlet 
wing coefficients 
free (for scientific 
15] was used for 
I then shows the 
 objective criteria 
al to Noise Ratio 
he acquired video 
age without noise 
 quality criteria 
nt information as 
red. Astronomical 
is Facility) [16] 
TABLE II.   CALCULATED MSE
 IMA
 Denoising method 
Dark frame subtraction 
Starlet transform 
Curvelet transform 
 
was used for this purpose. Tab
 photometry for 7 selected stella
 area of the testing image.   
VI. RESULTS EVAL U
 The curvelet transform h
 according to MSE and PSN
 Tab. II. On the other hand, the
 reconstructed image after cur
 (Fig 6). Moreover, it was found
 stars was lost after denoising
 confirmed by failure of the ape
 could not calculate magnitude
 Tab. III).  This is probably d
 astronomical data do not cont
 necessary for effectiveness of
 decided that the curvelet tra
 processing of astronomical ima
 If FWHM deviations in im
 than 1, stellar objects will not 
software. It will evaluate these
 Concerning to magnitude, devi
 to depreciate scientific inform
 IRAF incapability of stellar o
 represented by INDEF in Tabl
 subtraction method is also no
 denoising because of short shut
 that the dark frame does not a
 about the noise.  
 
Figure 5.  Captured image before (le
 (4) 
 
ed in inverted grayscale
  AND PSNR CRITERIA FOR DENOISED 
GES  
MSE PSNR [dB] 
14.4 36.55 
9.87 38.2 
4.95 41.18 
le III shows results of aperture 
r objects located over the entire 
ATION AND DISCUSSION 
as the best denoising results 
R parameters as is shown in       
re are many artifacts inside the 
velet coefficients thresholding 
 out, that a large amount of fine 
 procedure. It could be also 
rture photometry routine, which 
 of several stellar objects (see 
ue to the fact, that processed 
ain appropriate curved features 
 this transform. Therefore, we 
nsform is not convenient for 
ges captured by MAIA system.   
ages after denoising are greater 
be detected using astronomical 
 stars as non-star shape objects. 
ation above 0.3 is large enough 
ation. Astronomical software 
bject magnitude calculation is 
e III. Therefore, the dark frame 
t appropriate for MAIA image 
ter speed (1/60 s) due to the fact 
lmost contain any information 
 
ft) and after (right) flat field correction 
259
   
TABLE III.  ASTRONOMICAL IMAGE QUALITY CRITERIA AS MAGNITUDE (M) AND FWHM OF 7 SELECTED STARS INSIDE THE DENOISED IMAGES
 Method 
Stellar object 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
m FVWM m FVWM m FVWM m FVWM m FVWM m FVWM m FVWM 
Image 
without 
noise  
18.19 1.30 18.67 1.74 19.71 1.56 18.98 1.53 17.35 2.14 18.92 1.25 19.29 2.5 
Dark 
frame 
subtraction 
18.24 1.33 INDEF 2.15 19.43 6.95 19.21 2.98 17.45 2.12 INDEF 22.8 19.45 10.58 
Starlet 
transform 18.13 1.29 18.45 2.06 19.47 1.34 19.05 1.19 17.37 2.16 19.29 1.65 19.34 31.11 
Curvelet 
transform 18.39 1.09 INDEF 2.40 19.61 5.8 INDEF 3.9 15.51 2.04 19.76 142.6 19.89 10.32 
 
Practically, all pixels equal to zero inside the captured dark 
frame as you can see in the Fig. 4. Shutter speed used in MAIA 
system is 1/60 s which is a very short period of time. Longer 
exposure times however could not be used because the main 
purpose of the MAIA system is to precisely record trajectory of 
meteor’s fall, which could take just fraction of second.   
There is image processing using the starlet transform left. 
Its denoising properties are better than in case of dark frame 
subtraction method and worse than in case of the curvelet 
transform. Nevertheless, if we look at the Tab. III, we can 
affirm that the Starlet transform damages scientific 
astronomical data least than other two techniques.  Magnitude 
and FWHM deviations of almost all selected stellar objects are 
within the allowed range (1 for FWHM and 0.3 for magnitude).   
Artifacts caused by starlet coefficients thresholding are not as 
strong as artifacts contained in reconstructed image after 
curvelet transform denoising (Fig. 6).  Thus, the Starlet 
transform is the most suitable method for noise suppression in 
astronomical images acquired by our nonlinear system with 
shorter shutter speed.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work has been supported by the project of the Grant 
Agency of the Czech Republic No. 205/09/1302 “Study of 
sporadic meteors and weak meteor showers using automatic 
video intensifiers cameras” and by the project of the Student 
grant agency of the Czech Technical University in Prague 
SGS13/212/OHK3/3T/13 “Advanced Algorithms for 
Processing and Analysis of Scientific Image Data”.  
Authors would like to thank Pavel Koten from 
Astronomical Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech 
Republic and Stanislav Vítek from FEE CTU in Prague for 
supply of the testing videos from MAIA system and their 
conversion into appropriate video format. 
 
 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Figure 6.  Original image without noise (a), noised image (b) which almost corresponds to denoised image after dark frame subtraction, denoised  image using 
the starlet transform (c) and the curvelet transform (d)  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. G. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, 3rd ed., Academic 
Press, 2008. 
[2] J. L. Starck, F. Murtagh, A. Bijaoui, Image Processing ans Data 
Analysis: The Multiscale Approach, Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
[3] S. G. Mallat, “A Theory for Multiresolution Signal Decomposition: The 
Wavelet Representation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, vol. 11, no. 7, July 1989. 
[4] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania : 
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992. 
[5] J. L. Starck, F. Murtagh, Astronomical Image and Data Analysis, 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2002. 
[6] M. J. Shensa, “The discrete wavelet transform: wedding the a trous and 
Mallat algorithms”, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 40, 
no. 10, pp. 2464-2482, October 1992.  
[7] J.L. Starck, F. Murthagh, M. Bertero, Starlet Transform in Astronomical 
Data Processing, Handbook of Mathematical Methods in Imaging, 2011. 
260
 [8] E. J. Candès, D. L. Donoho, “Ridgelets: a key to higher-dimensional 
intermittency?” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, vol. 
357, no. 1760, pp. 2495–2509, 1999. 
[9] E. J. Candès, D. L. Donoho, “Curvelets - a surprisingly effective 
nonadaptive representation for objects with edges,” Curve and Surface 
Fitting: Saint-Malo, 1999. 
[10]  J. L. Starck, D. L. Donoho, E. J. Candès. “Astronomical image 
representation by the curvelet transform,” Astronomy & Astrophysics, 
398, pp. 785–800, 2003.  
[11] J. L. Starck, F. Murtagh, J. M. Fadili, Sparse Image and Signal 
Processing,Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[12] P. Koten, K. Fliegel, S. Vítek, P. Páta, “Automatic Video System for 
Continues Monitoring of the Meteor Activity,” Earth Moon Planets, vol. 
108, pp. 69-76, 2011. 
[13] R. C. Gonzalez, R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, Prentice Hall, 
2007. 
[14] D.L. Donoho, I.M. Johnstone, “Ideal spatial adaptationby wavelet 
shrinkage”, Biometrika, no. 8, pp. 425–455, 1994. 
[15] CurveLab Toolbox [online], webpage of the toolbox, [cit. 2013-03-03], 
available from WWW:  http://www.curvelet.org.  
[16] IRAF - Image Reduction and Analysis Facility [online], software is 
written and supported by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories 
(NOAO), [cit. 2013-03-03], official web site: http://iraf.noao.edu.  
 
 
