AXIe Local Bus architecture delivers unprecedented 
bus speed and flexibility 
 
Larry Desjardin 
Modular Methods LLC 
Steamboat Springs, CO, USA 
larry@modularmethods.com 
Lauri Viitas 
Guzik Test and Measurement 
Mountain View, CA, USA 
lauriv@guzik.com
  
 
Abstract—AXIe is commonly referred to as the "big brother" 
of PXI. This is because it shares many of the features of PXI 
(open modular structure, PCI Express fabric, similar software) 
while deploying a large board size, power, and cooling matching 
that found in high performance instruments. However, it also 
adds one very unique aspect: the AXIe local bus. In this paper 
the authors describe the local bus, and compare it to other 
common bus topologies. The authors describe local bus 
capabilities, and real world implementations and applications 
that demonstrate breakthrough system performance utilizing the 
local bus. These capabilities include real time streaming and 
processing in excess of 40GB/s per link, with up to 12 links per 
chassis. Real time high-speed streaming enables a number of 
applications previously unrealized. Radar system evaluation and 
simulation is an example, where data is streamed indefinitely 
from high-speed digitizers into a data processing module or 
RAID array. High-energy physics is another example where data 
is recorded for long periods, to be triggered by an event that is 
detected by a digital processor unit. Indeed, there is a broad 
range of data acquisition applications where long data streams 
need to be recorded or processed while searching for an 
intermittent event. The AXIe local bus enables this capability at 
previously unattainable speeds. 
Keywords—AXIe; PXI; PXI Express; PCI Express; PXIe; 
PCIe; ATCA; AdvancedTCA 
I. INTRODUCTION TO AXIE 
AXIe is a modular instrument standard, abbreviated from 
AdvancedTCA Extensions for Instrumentation and Test.  Like 
VXI (VMEbus Extensions for Instrumentation) and PXI 
(CompactPCI Extensions for Instrumentation), AXIe is based 
on an industrial bus architecture with extensions for 
instrumentation, AdvancedTCA.  AdvancedTCA itself is high 
peformance modular architecture focused at telecom 
applications requiring high power, high performance, 
scalability, and long deployment life.  AdvancedTCA and 
CompactPCI are managed by PICMG (PCI Industrial 
Computer Manufacturers Group), a standards body.  Like PXI 
and VXI, AXIe has added timing, synchronization, and 
triggering capabilities to make it suitable for test applications.  
AXIe module size is approximately 14% larger than VXI, 
which is itself several times larger than a PXI module.  AXIe 
modules are 3cm wide, as is VXI, but with a taller height 
(322mm vs. 233mm) and shallower depth (280mm vs. 
340mm).  AXIe has a little more than eight times the volume of 
a 3U PXI module.  AXIe modules typically are mounted 
horizontally in a chassis,  allowing very short chassis heights 
and maximum rack density.  The availability of 2-slot and 5-
 slot horizontal chassis  allows system integrators to deploy 
AXIe either as the principal modular architecture in a system, 
or complementing a PXI or VXI subsystem.  In particular, 
small horizontal chassis avoid the typical “two half-filled” 
chassis drawback of deploying two vertically-oriented 
architectures in a single system.  A single 48V backplane 
power supply enables modules up to 200W (200 watts) to be 
powered from just over four amperes, supporting high power 
components found in high-speed digital and data converters.  
Airflow moves unobstructed across a horizontal chassis to 
effectively cool high power densities.  A 5-slot 4U AXIe 
chassis can support up to 1000W of instrumentation, which 
compares favorably to other architectures.  14-slot AXIe 
systems are vertically mounted, similar to PXI and VXI.   
AXIe is often refered to as the “big brother” of PXI 
because, despite its much larger module envelope, it acts 
logically as a PXIe (PXI Express) system.  Communication is 
preformed over a 4-lane PCIe  (PCI Express) bus on the 
backplane either through external or embedded controllers.  
The AXIe-2 specification adopts the software structures from 
PXI.  To a controller, an AXIe system is just another PXI 
chassis, though one with much larger board area and power 
capability.  The continued viability of VXI demonstrates the 
need for large module formats. 
II. BUS TOPOLOGIES 
A. Backgound 
A modular backplane, such as VXI, PXI, or AXIe, consists 
of a PCB (printed circuit board) with copper paths creating 
buses between the various slots.  In this sense a modular 
backplane is not a single bus, but several buses, all bringing 
unique functionality.  The geometric pattern of each bus is 
called its topology.  There are three common bus topologies in 
a modular standard: parallel, star, and local.  
These topologies are critical to modular instruments and are 
the basics that enable many of the unique features that modular 
instrumentation brings to the marketplace.  A quick review of 
each is given below. 
978-1-4673-5683-1/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE
 
Fig 1.  The figure shows three bus topologies common in c
 instrumentation systems.  Slot 1 acts as a hub for the star b
 spans all slots.  The local bus is segmented, connecting on
 slots.  In some cases, such as VXI and AXIe, the local bus 
the hub slot (Slot 1 in the diagram), but connects between 
 
B. Parallel Bus (also called multidrop) 
Until recently, this was the most common
 structure where the same pin on each slo
 connected to the similar pin on all other slots
 computer data buses used this topology ubiq
 the early 2000s, before the advent of serial b
 PXI-1 (pre PXI Express) use a parallel bus for
 a parallel bus the data is present across a
 address determines which slot is being written 
Parallel buses are also used for many tr
 lines.  Here, a signal from one device can trig
 other devices, since all devices have access 
lines.  Clock signals can be routed in this 
VXI, PXI, and AXIe all have some number o
 lines.  In the case of AXIe, 12 MLVDS (
 Voltage Differential Signaling) paths span
 parallel topology is a very useful topology, bu
 defect: speed.  The large number of loads plus 
at each slot limit the top bus speeds to the 
100MHz. Even if 100Mhz can be achieved
 ramps make parallel buses largely unsuitab
 timing.  This was a fundamental limit for comp
 which led the industry to embrace serial desig
 topology. 
C. Star Bus (also called radial bus) 
In a star topology, one device is a “hub” a
 dedicated line going to each slot.  Visually, th
 coming from a star, thus the name “star”.  Th
 differential pairs, called lanes.  Since each 
point, it can be operated at much higher sp
 clock is encoded within the data pattern itself
 as a serial bus.  Very high speeds are possib
 point serial buses.  Gen 1 (Generation 1) of P
 for VXI 4.0, PXI Express, and AXIe) enab
 Gigabit per second) on each lane.  Using a com
 (a link is a bundle of lanes), PCIe can transf
 (One Gigabyte per second, where each byte i
  
omputer and 
us.  The parallel bus 
ly between adjacent 
does not connect to 
all other slots. 
 bus topology: a 
t is electrically 
.  Instrument and 
uitously through 
uses.  VXI and 
 data transfer.  In 
ll slots, and the 
to. 
igger and clock 
ger one or more 
to these parallel 
manner as well.  
f parallel trigger 
Multipoint Low 
 all slots. The 
t suffers one key 
the stubs created 
neighborhood of 
, the slow edge 
le for precision 
uter backplanes, 
ns that use a star 
nd has a separate 
ese are like rays 
ese are typically 
lane is point-to-
 eeds. When the 
, it is referred to 
le with point-to-
 CIe (the data bus 
les 2.5Gb/s (2.5 
mon 4-lane link 
er data at 1GB/s 
s 8 bits).  Due to 
the high speeds to be discussed, th
 GB/s going forward. 
PCIe Gen 2 essentially doubl
 generation PCIe.  Many PXIe and A
 PCIe Gen2, doubling the speed of a 
chassis support 8-lane links, doubli
 these speeds are impressive, and m
 LAN interfaces found on traditiona
 match the speed of ultra-fast data co
 third topology, the local bus, makes 
It should be noted that the hub s
 the same between instrument system
 Slot 0, while PXI and AXIe (which
 have hubs at Slot 1.  PXI may also 
timing module slot, which has ded
 for precision timing.  In AXIe, Slot
 PCIe communication and the precisi
 D. Local Bus (also called segmente
 The local bus is a unique bus 
hidden benefits.  Local buses are a s
 that connect pins between adjacent 
called “local” buses.  For example
 connected to the left side of slot 3.  T
 is connected to the left side of slot 4
 copper path lengths are short, onl
 high-speed signals can be routed fro
 enable high-speed private commu
 modules of an instrument set.  Sinc
 ends between the modules of an ins
 modules may use their local buses c
 way, instrument sets from different v
 same chassis, each exploiting the 
local bus.   
Local buses are not new to mod
 deployed a 12-line local bus (12 c
 adjacent slot). The Agilent 81250 P
 of how it was used to extend pri
 modules to create a modular bit erro
 13-line local bus, and some digita
 Unfortunately, these pins conflicted
 PXIe standard, leaving only a singl
 For this reason, the local bus is ra
 systems. 
AXIe reintroduced the local bus
 match its high performance missi
 consists of 124 lines organized as 
pairs.  With 60 pairs dedicated to a
 common FPGA (field programma
 (Serializer/Deserializer) technolog
 bandwidth totals 40GB/s from one 
order of magnitude beyond other b
 only defines the topology of the
 bandwidth will increase proportion
 speeds deployed.  
is paper will use units of 
es the speed of the first 
XIe products now deploy 
4-lane link to 2GB/s.  PXIe 
ng the speed again. While 
uch higher than USB or 
l instruments, they do not 
nverters.  This is where the 
a disruptive contribution. 
lot might not be numbered 
s.  The hub slot for VXI is 
 have no slots numbered 0) 
designate another slot as a 
icated star bus to each slot 
 1 includes the hub for the 
on timing buses. 
d or daisy chain bus) 
structure that brings many 
et of short copper segments 
slots. This is why they are 
, the right side of slot 2 is 
hen the right side of slot 3 
, and so forth.  Because the 
y a few centimeters, very 
m slot to slot.  Local buses 
nication between related 
e the local bus begins and 
trument set, another set of 
ompletely differently.  This 
endors may co-exist in the 
unique capabilities of the 
ular instrumentation.  VXI 
opper paths between each 
arBERT is a good example 
vate timing signals to all 
r rate tester.  PXI adopted a 
l products exploited this.  
 with pins defined in the 
e remaining local bus line. 
rely, if ever, used in PXIe 
 concept, but at the scale to 
on.  The AXIe local bus 
62 high-speed differential 
 data path, and using fairly 
ble gate array) SERDES 
y, the aggregate bus 
slot to the next.  This is an 
us structures.  Since AXIe 
 local bus, the aggregate 
ally with the interface bus 
Figure 2.  This diagram demonstrates the high-speed d
 enabled by the AXIe local bus.  Using current techno
 transfer data up to 40GB/s to the slot to its right.  Th
 generate another data stream for the slot to its right up to
 data path on the local bus is independent, the aggregate 
multiplied by the number of links.  As technology im
 attainable link speed. 
 
Newly announced FPGA SERDES speed
 the aggregate bandwidth to 80GB/s, with 
doubling it again to 160GB/s.  Since this is t
 segment between slots, and each segment acts
 large AXIe system can support aggregate ch
 into the TB/s (Terabyte/second) range. 
It should be noted that the AXIe local bus 
to Slot 1, but between all other slots. 
 
III. LOCAL BUS REALIZATIO
 There are two key methods of exploiting th
 is that of a multidrop bus, where each module
 towards it right by connecting the copper p
 This may be used by modules that need to sha
 or utilize complex handshakes between the 
local bus enables private communication b
 within an instrument set, there is no requireme
 the protocols used.   
The second common method of exploiting 
daisy chain data flow architecture that flows fr
 the left to a module on the right, as demonstra
 Useful modules in such a system include dig
 DSP (digital signal processing), and A
 waveform generators).  
 
Figure 3.  ADCs (Analaog to Digital Converters) will ge
 the left, AWGs to the right, and DSP or memory in between
  
ata flow architecture 
logy, each link may 
at slot, in turn, may 
 40GB/s.  Since each 
bandwidth is 40GB/s 
proves, so will the 
s should double 
the next wave 
he speed of each 
 independently, a 
assis bandwidths 
does not connect 
NS 
e local bus.  One 
 extends the bus 
aths electrically.  
re timing signals 
modules.  Since 
etween modules 
nt to standardize 
the local bus is a 
om a module on 
ted in Figures 2.  
itizers, memory, 
WGs (arbitrary 
 
nerally be placed to 
. 
Since data flow is commonly lef
 other sources of data would genera
 and other data sinks on the rig
 somewhere in between, as shown 
DSP modules could also have the
 external storage devices off-board. 
This paper will focus on this lat
 enabled by the local bus. 
A. Real World Speeds 
The sections above give a the
 local bus.  The Guzik family of digi
 Measurement were the first product
 capabilities. The Guzik ADC6000 s
 of high-fidelity 8-bit digitizers base
 sampling rate.  Single-slot AXIe pro
 digitizing combinations: 
• 1 channel x 40Gs/s 
• 2 channel x 20Gs/s 
• 4 channel x 10Gs/s 
Each product hosts 64GB of m
 shot waveform capture of greater tha
 Since the aggregate data generation 
the local bus interface was designed
 time data transfer to the adjacent 
claim.  This is an order of magn
 fastest PCIe-based digitizers found i
 achieved using the Altera Strat
 implement the local bus. 
While digitizers are perceived t
 the Guzik digitizers can also acce
 source it to the right as shown i
 digitizers to be chained together, u
 between digitizers in order expan
 window proportionally.  Indeed, ha
 digitizers, AWGs, DSP, and memor
 long as the aggregate bandwidth of
 exceed the 40GB/s limit, multiple in
 be used. 
  
Figure 4.  Two Guzik ADC6000 digitizers s
 cards on the right.  These may be other AD
 dedicated memory or DSP modules.  As lon
 any one link does not exceed 40GB/s, multipl
 used.  This architecture is particularly valua
 or DSP module, or a DSP module is calcula
 across channels that span more than one mod
 t to right, digitizers and any 
lly be on the left, AWGs 
ht, and memory or DSP 
in Figure 3.  Memory and 
 capability to connect to 
ter “data flow” architecture 
oretical description of the 
tizers from Guzik Test and 
s to exploit AXIe local bus 
eries is essentially a family 
d on an aggregate 40Gs/s 
ducts include the following 
emory, allowing a single 
n one second at full speed.  
of each digitizer is 40GB/s, 
 to support full speed real-
 slot, proving the 40GB/s 
itude faster than even the 
n PXIe or AXIe.  This was 
ix family of FPGAs to 
o be only sources of data, 
pt data from the left, and 
n Figure 4.  This allows 
seful for sharing memory 
d the single shot capture 
ving multiple instances of 
y is a key requirement.  As 
 any local bus link doesn’t 
stances of any module may 
 
ource data on the left to memory 
C6000s configured as memory or 
g as the aggregate bandwidth of 
e instances of any modules may be 
ble when there is a single memory 
ting measurements based on data 
ule, such as radar applications. 
Figure 5. If the aggregate bandwidth exceeds 40GB/s on 
Figure 4 example, a user may configure the ADCs and me
 systems within the same chassis, thus keeping each link to
 aggregate speed is 80GB/s. 
In situations where link speed may excee
 aggregation an alternative is to disaggregate b
 independent data flow systems, as shown in
 number of independent systems deployed in an
 only limited by the number of slots. 
Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the diversit
 architectures enabled by the local bus.  
B. Digital Signal Processing 
While the above digitizers show proof 
AXIe’s 40GB/s rates over the local bus, 
introduction of a digital processing module t
 the powerful capabilities enabled by the AXI
 Guzik DP6000 Digital Processor Module is a 
module that is local bus enabled. The DP 600
 user-configurable Altera Stratix V FPGAs, 
3,550 multipliers and 583,000 logic elemen
 64GB of on-board memory.  This product hig
 of the advantages of the AXIe local bus archi
 digitizers, it accepts data from the left, and 
right, at the full 40GB/s bandwidth.  Additiona
 8-lane PCIe Gen 3 links on the front panel t
 25.6GB/s data transfers to or from an external 
RAID array for continuous streaming. 
 
Figure 6.  The Guzik DP6000 DSP module can acc
 from one of more digitizers.  It can send the processed da
 to its right, or result data over the standard AXIe PCIe 
memory for additional storage.  For applications where co
 needed, its external PCIe ports can forward data at 25.6G
 external host or RAID array. 
 
the middle link in the 
mory as two separate 
 40GB/s, though the 
d 40GB/s due to 
y deploying two 
 Figure 5.  The 
 AXIe chassis is 
y of data flow 
by example of 
it is the recent 
hat demonstrates 
e local bus.  The 
single-slot AXIe 
0 hosts two large 
each delivering 
ts, and includes 
hlights a number 
tecture.  Like the 
sources it to the 
lly, it sports four 
hat allows up to 
host computer or 
 
ept data from its left 
ta at full 40GB/s rate 
bus.  It has 64GB of 
ntnuous streaming is 
B/s indefinitely to an 
Figure 7.  To achieve an aggreagate 40GB
 DP6000 may be cascaded.  This enables ind
 rate. 
Readers may note that the 25.6
 rate is less than the 40GB/s maximu
 pragmatic limitation of the DP6000
 current PCIe speed at Gen 3.  In man
 rate is sufficient, and is already supe
 Nevertheless, the AXIe local bus 
modules, as shown in Figure 7.  Her
 the data stream at its full 40GB/s r
 data and streams it out over its ex
 25.6GB/s limit.  The other half, no
 right to another DP6000.  That 
remaining data to its own external p
 stream can now be streamed indefin
 a host computer.  This is a good exa
 bus architecture overcomes an appar
 The DP 6000 is useful in its
 connecting to an external RAID 
module can perform fast real-time 
time capture into its 64GB of memo
 essentially increases the number 
same data stream, or expands the am
 Typical applications include user 
filtering, and triggering.  Of particu
 trigger on the data, or some mathem
 In any of the figures, multiples o
 processors, or waveform generators
 alternatives show the powerful 
architecture.  As long as any one l
 40GB/s, there are nearly an infinite 
digitizers, DSP modules, and exter
 that may be configured.  While th
 single instrument sets where modu
 left and right, the local bus arc
 adjacent instrument sets, operating 
Figure 5. 
C. Future Capabilities 
The digitizer and digital proces
 the breakthrough capability promis
 bus in particular.  As noted earlier,
 specifies the backplane paths fo
 particular semiconductor technology
 allows AXIe local bus speeds to 
Doubling the device speed, for exa
  
/s off-board streaming rate, two 
efinite streaming at a full 40GB/s 
GB/s off-board streaming 
m local bus rate.  This is a 
 faceplate connectors and 
y applications, a 25.6GB/s 
rior to current alternatives.  
allows cascading of DSP 
e the first DP6000 receives 
ate.  It removes half of the 
ternal port, well within its 
w at 20GB/s is sent to its 
DP6000 can stream the 
ort.  The complete 40GB/s 
itely to two RAID arrays or 
mple where the AXIe local 
ent module limitation. 
 own right, even without 
or host computer.  Each 
digital processing or real-
 ry.  Adding more modules 
of FPGAs processing the 
ount of real time memory.  
defined signal processing, 
lar interest is the ability to 
atical element of the data. 
f digitizer modules, digital 
 may be deployed.  These 
flexibility the local bus 
ink may be constrained to 
number of combinations of 
nal PCs or RAID systems 
e figures principally show 
les communicate on their 
hitecture allows multiple 
independently as shown in 
sor modules show some of 
ed by AXIe, and the local 
 the AXIe standard merely 
r the local bus, not the 
, speed, or protocol.  This 
grow with Moore’s Law. 
mple, allows 80GB/s data 
transfers on each local bus link.  While the examples showed 
digitizers, the architecture is equally applicable to AXIe 
arbitrary waveform generators deploying the local bus.  In this 
case, memory, data processing and massive external waveform 
storage may all be deployed to drive one or more wide-
 bandwidth arbitrary waveform generators.  
IV. APPLICATIONS 
In general, the AXIe local bus is optimized for data 
streaming applications where high bandwidth and long records 
are needed simultaneously.  Mil/aero communication and radar 
systems are excellent examples of applications that require 
both.  This is particularly useful for searching for intermittent 
or transient signals over long periods of time.  Here, a signal 
may be recorded nearly indefinitely until the DSP module 
detects an event, which serves as a trigger.  Long records can 
supply critical information leading up to an event, and the 
reaction of the system later.   
The AXIe local bus also has applications in high energy 
physics, where DSP modules are searching for events that 
coincide with particle collisions, and subsequently decide to 
keep or delete recent data.   
Each of these applications has a twin application, where a 
long data stream is sent to one or more AWGs to simulate an 
environment.  Sometimes this is recorded information, or 
information that has been digitially processed in some manner.   
Finally, the DSP modules may be used in non-test 
applications as powerful computational accelerators.  Here, 
data is streamed by a host PC to one or more DSP modules in 
an AXIe chassis.  These modules have powerful number 
crunching capabilities embedded in their FPGAs, and can 
coordinate between modules via the AXIe local bus.  The result 
data may be retrieved over another PCIe link. 
Each of the applications above assume that the local bus is 
being exploited as a data flow architecture.  As mentioned 
earlier, the local bus may also be used to coordinate timing 
signals between modules, or a combination of data flow and 
timing. 
V. SUMMARY 
AXIe delivers the board area, power, cooling and tight 
timing synchronization required by very high performance 
digital instrumentation and data converters.  With the addition 
of the AXIe local bus, AXIe systems can now deploy real time 
streaming and digital processing performance an order of 
magnitude beyond traditional techniques. The speed and 
flexibility is unprecedented, and not achievable through 
traditional bus architectures.  These features enable new 
applications in aerospace, defense, and high-energy physics.  
The unique local bus topology allows this to be accomplished 
in an open-system architecture that allows new levels of 
flexibility and scalability.  Recent products from Guzik Test 
and Measurement show that these breakthrough performance 
levels may be achieved using today’s technologies.  As 
technology advances, so will the attainable speeds of the local 
bus. 
