   978-1-4673-1813-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 
 1
 Configurable Test bed Design for Nanosats to Qualify 
Commercial and Customized Integrated Circuits  
William Guareschi, José Azambuja, 
Fernanda Kastensmidt,  
Ricardo Reis 
UFRGS 
PGMICRO - PPGC 
Av. Bento Gonçalves 9500 
Porto Alegre, RS – Brazil 
{wnguareschi, jrfazambuja, fglima, 
reis}@inf.ufrgs.br 
Otavio Durão1, Nelson Schuch2
 Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
Espaciais 
1Av. dos Astronautas 1758 
São José dos Campos, SP – Brazil 
2Av. Roraima 1000, INPE-CRS 
Santa Maria, RS – Brazil 
durao@dir.inpe.br, 
njschuch@lacesm.ufsm.br  
Gustavo Dessbesel
 Santa Maria Design House 
Av. Roraima 1000, INPE-CRS 
Santa Maria, RS – Brazil 
gustavo.dessbesel@smdh.org 
 
Abstract—The use of small satellites has increased substantially 
in recent years due to the reduced cost of their development 
and launch, as well to the flexibility offered by commercial 
components. The test bed is a platform that allows components 
to be evaluated and tested in space. It is a flexible platform, 
which can be adjusted to a wide quantity of components and 
interfaces.  This work proposes the design and implementation 
of a test bed suitable for test and evaluation of commercial 
circuits used in nanosatellites. The development of such a 
platform allows developers to reduce the efforts in the 
integration of components and therefore speed up the overall 
system development time. The proposed test bed is a 
configurable platform implemented using a Field 
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) that controls the 
communication protocols and connections to the devices under 
test. The Flash-based ProASIC3E FPGA from Microsemi is 
used as a control system. This adaptive system enables the 
control of new payloads and softcores for test and validation in 
space. Thus, the integration can be easily performed through 
configuration parameters. It is intended for modularity. Each 
component connected to the test bed can have a specific 
interface programmed using a hardware description language 
(HDL). The data of each component is stored in embedded 
memories. Each component has its own memory space. The 
size of the allocated memory can be also configured. The data 
transfer priority can be set and packaging can be added to the 
logic, when needed. Communication with peripheral devices 
and with the Onboard Computer (OBC) is done through the 
pre-implemented protocols, such as I2C (Inter-Integrated 
Circuit), SPI (Serial Peripheral Interface) and external 
memory control. In loco primary tests demonstrated the 
control system’s functionality. The commercial ProASIC3E 
FPGA family is not space-flight qualified, but tests have been 
made under Total Ionizing Dose (TID) showing its robustness 
up to 25 krads (Si). When considering proton and heavy ions, 
flash-based FPGAs provide immunity to configuration loss and 
low bit-flips susceptibility in flash memory. In this first version 
of the test bed two components are connected to the controller 
FPGA: a commercial magnetometer and a hardened test chip. 
The embedded FPGA implements a Single Event Effects (SEE) 
hardened microprocessor and few other soft-cores to be used 
in space.  This test bed will be used in the NanoSatC-BR1, the 
first Brazilian Cubesat scheduled to be launched in mid-2013. 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 
2. THE DEVELOPED CONFIGURABLE TEST BED 
DESIGN .................................................................. 2 
3. THE NANOSATC-BR1 MISSION AND THE 
PAYLOAD DEVELOPMENT DESCRIPTION ............. 3 
4. CURRENT DEVELOPMENT STATUS OF 
NANOSATC-BR1 .................................................... 4 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK ........................... 5 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT ............................................ 5 
REFERENCES ......................................................... 6 
BIOGRAPHIES ........................................................ 6 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The use of small satellites has increased substantially in past 
years due to the reduced cost of their development and 
launch, as well to the flexibility offered by commercial 
components. Furthermore, the standardization of Cubesat 
systems and the development of devices that are easier to 
integrate, such as the Space Plug-and-play Architecture 
(SPA) set of circuits, are decreasing significantly the time of 
spacecraft development [1]. The use of Field Programmable 
Gate Arrays (FPGAs) in nanosatellite design contributes to 
save time and costs, due to their flexibility and 
reprogrammability, either for the test and validation stages 
or for the satellite flight. In addition, modern high 
performance FPGAs can implement a complete system for 
spacecraft onboard computation. A System-On-Chip (SOC), 
composed of hard microprocessors, high density embedded 
memories, analog and digital components can be mapped in 
the programmable architecture of a FPGA, benefiting the 
subsystems integration and reducing design complexity. 
Another benefit is that FPGAs are a less expensive option 
than traditionally utilized devices such as Application 
Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) [2] in small series. 
This work aims at reducing the complexity of the validation 
of new custom integrated circuits and to make easier the 
integration and the control of new commercial devices in the 
payload board. In order to achieve this goal a configurable 
 
 2
 test bed platform, based in a flexible FPGA architecture, is 
proposed. 
It is well known that FPGAs working in space are affected 
by damages due to long term ionizing and by transient 
ionization, due to their interaction with the spectrum of 
radioactive particles [3,4]. The options of protected devices 
for space application are several times more expensive than 
Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) components, which 
sometimes are unavailable for purchase. Protected devices 
are expensive for using in nanosatellites. Considering the 
radiation dose that satellites operating at Low Earth Orbit 
are facing [5,6], in many cases it is possible to use robust 
prequalified COTS circuits and radiation hardening 
techniques. 
This work is designed and implemented in a configurable 
test bed platform, using a commercial Flash-based 
ProASIC3E FPGA Family from Microsemi. This FPGA 
family is not space-flight qualified, but tests have been 
made under Total Ionizing Dose (TID) showing its 
robustness up to 25 krads (Si) [7]. When considering 
neutron and alpha particle hitting, Flash-based FPGAs 
provide immunity to configuration loss due to Single Event 
Effects (SEE) [8]. 
The test bed platform allows components to be evaluated 
and tested in space and is a flexible system. It can be 
adjusted to a wide quantity of components and interfaces, 
suitable for test and evaluation of different commercial 
circuits for use in nanosatellite missions. The development 
of such a platform allows developers to reduce their efforts 
in the integration of components and therefore speed up 
overall system development time. 
This adaptive system eases the control of new payloads and 
softcores for test and validation in space, and integration can 
be readily performed, through configuration parameters and 
modularity. Each component connected to the test bed can 
have a specific interface programmed using a hardware 
description language (HDL). The data for component is 
stored in embedded memory and each component has its 
own memory space. The size of the allocated memory can 
be also configured. The data transfer priority can be set and 
packaging can also be added to the logic, when needed. 
Communication with peripheral devices and the onboard 
computer is done through pre-implemented protocols, such 
as I2C, SPI and external memory control. 
In the first application of the test bed, two components were 
connected to the controller FPGA: a commercial 
magnetometer and a hardened test chip. The FPGA has 
embedded a microprocessor and a few other soft cores to be 
used in space.  This test bed will be used in the NanoSatC-
 BR1, the first Brazilian Cubesat scheduled to be launched in 
mid-2013. 
 
2. THE DEVELOPED CONFIGURABLE TEST BED 
DESIGN  
The ProASIC3E from Microsemi is a Flash-based family of 
FPGAs, which offer a low-power and low-cost COTS 
solution. This FPGA is based on a nonvolatile technology 
that is far less susceptible to radiation-induced failures than 
Static Random Access Memories (SRAM) based FPGAs. 
Several studies demonstrated the vulnerabilities of SRAM-
 based FPGAs, such as the highly used Xilinx Virtex-4 
FPGA, when applied in space applications [9]. Moreover, 
the Flash-based devices retain their configuration when 
power is removed from the FPGA, whilst the SRAM-based 
lose their data and configuration and need to be 
reprogrammed during power-up. Despite the configuration 
retaining of the ProASIC3E FPGA, it has some blocks of 
radiation unhardened embedded SRAM available for user 
applications. For this reason fault detection techniques were 
applied to some cores implemented inside the device. 
Test Bed Adaptability 
The Microsemi Corporation provides some IP (Intellectual 
Property) Cores within their Libero IDE development tool 
which implements different features, like bus interface 
controllers, clock management, digital signal processors 
(DSP), memory controllers, error detection and correction 
(EDAC) blocks, peripheral communication protocols, soft 
processors, etc. 
Some of the Microsemi IP Cores were implemented for the 
control, management and communication with different 
commonly used nanosatellite payloads. Customized cores 
can be incorporated into the FPGA to test and validate new 
payloads before flight. By applying these Microsemi IP 
Cores and the implemented configurable blocks, modularity 
is achieved, since the functionality configuration of each 
module is done through parameters, and can be altered to 
comply with new project objectives. 
The FPGAs has its structure adaptable, and with the use of 
IP Cores and the blocks developed to control the Microsemi 
Cores and interfaces with other payloads, it is possible to 
attach almost every electronic device (e.g. sensors) in the 
test bed board. These devices are easily controlled with 
common communication protocols already implemented, or 
by developing a specific control for a payload with a 
specific interface. 
Memory Space Allocation 
Several modules perform different tasks, and memory 
spaces can be configured for each module. The size of the 
memory is configurable (within the range of available 
SRAM) from module to module. The reading and writing of 
data can be done either by the module or by a central 
control. Memory space division improves the reliability of 
the system, so that a transient fault in one module’s memory 
should not affect other modules. 
 
 3
 Handling With the Integration of Various Components 
The central block controls and communicates with the 
remaining modules present in the FPGA. The changing of 
functionalities or addition of new payloads to the project is 
done by altering these configuration parameters, in the top 
module of the circuit and in the central block. Occasionally 
some features are added into the specific modules (Fig. 1). 
In next section, the development of the NanoSatC-BR1 
payload will be described. The payload contains various 
devices and IP Cores. Different teams were commissioned 
with the development the payloads, and at the moment of 
the development of the configurable test bed platform, not 
all the devices and Cores were completely described. In the 
first phase of the design, were defined the main 
functionalities of the payloads. When a payload was 
designed and integrated to the platform, changes were 
necessary in former implementations. The attachment could 
be more easily done, since just few parameters needed to be 
altered in the controller FPGA. 
 
3. THE NANOSATC-BR1 MISSION AND THE 
PAYLOAD DEVELOPMENT DESCRIPTION 
The NANOSATC-BR is the first Brazilian Scientific 
Nanosatellite. The goal is to monitor in real time, the 
Geospace, the particle precipitation and the disturbances at 
the Earth's magnetosphere over the Brazilian Territory, and 
the determination of their effects on regions such as the 
South Atlantic Magnetic Anomaly (SAMA) and the 
Brazilian sector of the Ionosphere Equatorial Electrojet [10]. 
In order to monitor the disturbances at the SAMA region, 
 
Figure 2 – The NanoSatC-BR1 functional blocks and payload board interconnections 
 
Figure 1 - An example of the configurable test bed platform 
 
 4
 the satellite’s first payload will consist of a magnetometer, 
the XEN1210 from Xensor Integration (Fig. 2). It is 
expected to create a global magnetic profile. The 
magnetometer control interface is digital. It performs the 
readout and programming via SPI protocol.  
The second payload will consist of a Brazilian radiation-
 hardened test chip, entirely designed by Santa Maria Design 
House (SMDH). It is intended to both validate the in-flight 
functional correctness and to check the sensitivity of this 
specific circuit to TID and SEEs. After the validation of this 
circuit, it will be used in other Brazilian satellites. 
Finally, the last payload in the flight model to be mentioned 
is the ProASIC3E, the FPGA from Microsemi. The FPGA 
will centralize the control of other payloads, configuring the 
test bed design for such end. 
The payload board contains some other circuits: sensors for 
housekeeping, electrical connection regulators, analog to 
digital converters and a clock generator. 
Besides the previously cited payloads and circuits present 
onboard, the FPGA will also embed a fault-tolerant MIPS 
(Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipeline Stages) 
softcore for in-flight validation. This custom softcore is a 
32-bit microprocessor adapted version of the well-known 
MIPS architecture, with a non-intrusive hybrid fault 
detection approach that combines hardware and software 
techniques to detect transient faults in the microprocessor. 
Fault injection tests show the efficiency of this method in 
detecting 100% of faults, as well as minimal memory area 
and execution time overhead compared to original MIPS 
architecture [11]. 
The detailed modules of the FPGA are presented in Fig. 3. 
 
4. CURRENT DEVELOPMENT STATUS OF 
NANOSATC-BR1  
The case study payload test bed for NanoSatC-BR1 was 
partially developed and synthesized for the part A3PE1500-
 PQ208, and includes the controllers for magnetometer, 
SMDH ASIC, MIPS and I2C slave interface. It resulted in 
the occupation of 21,281 Versatiles (55% available in this 
part, which implement approximately 831,269 equivalent 
logic gates), 51 user Inputs/Outputs (34.7% of available 
IOs), 1 PLL (out of 2 Phase-Locked Loops) and 39 blocks 
of embedded SRAM (from 60 4,608-bit blocks).  
A clock source of 10MHz for the payload is supplied and it 
is compliant with the NanoSatC-BR1 requisites. 
Nevertheless, a maximum frequency of more than 20MHz is 
achievable for the entire payload system. But this higher 
frequency is not necessary and not desired for the sake of 
energy reserve. 
The post-place and route simulation was performed through 
Modelsim, with a simulation model emulating a OBC 
requisition and I2C data transmissions, magnetometer 
readouts, MIPS computations and SMDH ASIC 
transactions, all running in parallel. The generated vsim file 
was used as input into the SmartPower tool, to calculate the 
power consumed by the device. The result is 152mW of 
total power consumption with a temperature of 70 degrees 
Celsius.  
Downlink Bandwidth 
The launch is still under negotiation and it is expected that 
the NanoSatC-BR1 will be deployed at an orbital height of 
700km with a declination angle of 98 degrees. In this 
condition, the nanosatellite will do an average of 14 orbits 
per day. For a low data volume case is considered a 
downlink rate of 1.2kbps and a reasonable 25% of overhead 
protocol losses and will result in 0.09MB data volume per 
 
Figure 3 – The ProASIC3E Cores and interfaces implemented for NanoSatC-BR1 
 
 5
 day. As a high data volume case, a downlink rate of 9.6 
kbps and a 25% of overhead protocol losses, resulting in 
1.96MB of data volume per day, is considered.  
Analysis of battery capacities and mission data volume 
requisites are still needed for the sake of energy saving and 
downlink bandwidth. The preliminary results are not 
consistent in this moment, since other subsystems power 
consumption analysis is not available so far.  
The complete placement and floorplanning of the designed 
payload is illustrated in the Fig. 4. 
 
Figure 4 – The ProASIC3E complete placement and 
floorplaning for the NanoSatC-BR1 payload 
 
5. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
The test bed platform operation was demonstrated by using 
a prototype board. Several functional tests were performed 
connecting the test bed platform to the magnetometer 
payload, and interfacing the ProASIC3E test bed to other 
FPGA through I2C bus. The second FPGA simulates the 
NanoSatC-BR1 onboard computer. The SMDH ASIC 
behavior was emulated inside the ProASIC3E (since the test 
chip was not available during the test setup). The FPGA 
OBC requested data from FPGA slave (test bed platform) 
through I2C bus, the same way the NanoSatC-BR1 OBC 
will request the data when its development is completed. 
After the request acknowledgment, the ProASIC3E starts to 
send data from MIPS, SMDH ASIC tests and magnetometer 
measurements, following a prescribed priority.  
The data are received in the FPGA OBC and sent back to a 
computer, and logged for later analysis (Fig. 5). The results 
from MIPS and SMDH ASIC are conformed to the golden 
model, while the readouts from the magnetometer are 
compared to other measured sensors in the same 
environment. These were equivalent during all test 
conditions. 
As near future work, the missing modules will be 
implemented to control the housekeeping circuits. New 
functional tests need to be performed with the real OBC and 
the SMDH test chip, and new consumption analysis needs to 
be remade, considering orbital patterns and battery 
capacities. 
A more generic central block is intended to simplify the 
integration, configuration and control of new payloads and 
soft cores. The inclusion of different power modes can 
optimize battery capabilities and/or increase performance. A 
second nanosatellite mission project is under analysis, and 
the application of the test bed platform is been considered 
since the initial stages, to facilitate the partial integration of 
the payloads, and even to be embedded in the flight model. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors acknowledges the Brazilian Institutions: 
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível 
Superior – CAPES/MEC (for the schollarship), the 
Microeletronics Graduate Program of Universidade Federal 
do Rio Grande do Sul – PGMICRO/UFRGS, for financial 
support, and the Brazilian Space Agency. 
 
Figure 3 – The experimental setup hardware 
 
 6
 REFERENCES  
[1] C. Kief et al., “The Advent of the PnP Cube Satellite”, 
IEEE Aerospace Conference, March 2012. 
[2] M. Berg et al., “A Comprehensive Methodology for 
Complex Field Programmable Gate Array Single Event 
Effects Test and Evaluation”, IEEE Transactions on 
Nuclear Science, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 366-374, April 
2009. 
[3] T. Oldham, F. McLean, “Total Ionizing Dose Effects in 
MOS Oxides and Devices,” IEEE Transactions on 
Nuclear Science, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 483–498, December 
2003. 
[4] H. Barnaby, “Total-Ionizing-Dose Effects in Modern 
CMOS Technologies”, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear 
Science, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 3103–3121, December 2006. 
[5] J. Barth, “Modeling Space Radiation Environments”, 
IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference, 
Short Course, July 1997. 
[6] E. Stassinopoulos, “Radiation Environment in Space”, 
IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference, 
Short Course, 1990. 
[7] J. Tarrillo et al., “Analyzing the Effects of TID in an 
Embedded System Running in a Flash-Based FPGA”, 
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 58, no. 6, 
pp. 2855-2862, December 2011. 
[8] Microsemi Corp., “FPGA Reliability and the Sunspot 
Cycle”, white paper, September 2011. 
[9] H. Quinn et al., “Flight Experience of the Xilinx Virtex-
 4 FPGA”, Proceedings of the RADECS 2012, 
September 2012. 
[10] N. Schuch et al., “Progress in the NanoSatC-Br – 
Cubesats Development”, 62nd International 
Astronautical Congress, October 2011. 
[11] J. Azambuja et al., “Detecting SEEs in 
Microprocessors Through a Non-Intrusive Hybrid 
Technique,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 
vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 993–1000, December 2011. 
Biographies 
William Guareschi received a B.S. 
in Computer Science from 
Universidade Federal de Santa 
Maria, Santa Maria in 2011. He is a 
M.S candidate in Microelectronics 
at UFRGS, Porto Alegre. His main 
research interests are FPGAs, 
computer architectures, fault 
tolerant systems and small 
nanosatellites systems. William is an IEEE student 
member, participating in the Circuits and Systems 
Society. 
José Rodrigo Azambuja received a 
B.S. in Computer Engineering and 
M.S. in Computer Science from 
Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre in 
2008 and 2010. He is a Ph.D. 
candidate at the UFRGS. His main 
research interests are computer 
architectures and fault tolerant systems.  
Fernanda Kastensmidt received a 
B.S. in Electrical Engineering and 
M.S. and Ph.D. in Computer 
Science from Universidade Federal 
do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
in 1997, 1999 and 2003, 
respectively. She joined the Instituto 
de Informática faculty as a 
professor in 2005. Her current 
research focuses on soft error mitigation techniques for 
SRAM-based FPGAs and integrated circuits, such as 
microprocessors, memories and network-on-chips 
(NoCs), and the analysis and modeling of radiation 
effects in those circuits. She currently advises M.S. and 
Ph.D. theses at the Computer Science Graduation 
Program (PPGC) and at the Microelectronics Program 
(PGMICRO). Fernanda has published the book Fault-
 Tolerance Techniques for SRAM-based FPGAs in 2006. 
She is an IEEE member.  
Ricardo Reis received a B.S. in 
Electrical Engineering (1978) and 
M.S. in Computer Science (1979) 
from Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre. He 
received a DEA in Electronics and 
Radio communications and Ph.D. in 
Informatics at Institut National 
Polytechnique (INPG), Grenoble, in 1980 and 1983. His 
Postdoctoral work was at Laboratoire TIM3-
 IMAG/INPG, 1986. He is a professor at UFRGS and the 
Graduate Program in Microelectronics Coordinator. His 
main areas of research are Microelectronics, CAD, 
Physical Design, VLSI Design, VLSI CAD and radiation 
tolerant ASIC projects. Ricardo is a former IEEE Circuits 
 
 7
 and Systems Society Vice-President and former Brazilian 
Computer Society President. He is an IEEE Senior 
Member. 
Otavio Durão received a B.S. in 
Civil Engineering from 
Universidade Católica do Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, in 1974, 
M.S. in Industrial Automation and 
Operational Research (1980) and 
Ph.D. in Industrial Automation 
(1986) from Pennsylvania State 
University. At INPE, he is the Deputy Planning 
Coordinator, the former Head of the Space Mechanics 
and Control Division, and Engineer since 1986. Otavio is 
also the coordinator of the Space Politics Committee 
from Brazilian Aerospace Association, and a founding 
member of the Association. Committee member at 
Brazilian Space Agency representing INPE for two R&D 
programs. He is currently engaged in projects of 
development of small satellite in cooperation with 
Brazilian universities.  
Nelson Schuch received a Lic.es 
Sci. in Physics from Universidade 
Federal de Santa Maria, Santa 
Maria, in 1972, M.S. in 
Astrophysics from Universidade 
Presbiteriana Mackenzie, São 
Paulo, in 1975, Ph.D. (1979) and 
Pos Doctor (1980) in Physics – 
Astrophysics from University of Cambridge, England. He 
is the mentor of the actions for the development and 
construction of the INPE’s Southern Regional Space 
Research Center and the Southern Space Observatory. 
His activities are related to high energy astrophysics, 
Sun-Earth interactions, space weather, geomagnetic 
storms and spatial geophysics. He leads nanosatellite 
developments project. Nelson is consultant and counselor 
of Brazilian Aerospace Association. 
Gustavo Dessbesel received a B.S. 
in Computer Science from 
Universidade Federal de Santa 
Cruz do Sul, Santa Cruz do Sul, in 
2003, and M.S. in Electrical 
Engineering from Universidade 
Federal de Santa Maria, Santa 
Maria, in 2008. His work is related 
to electronic circuits, and the main topics are FPGAs, 
image processing, computational view, digital filters, 
embedded systems and digital ASICs design. Gustavo is 
currently an ASIC designer and Project Leader at Santa 
Maria Design House.   
 
