Learning sensors usage patterns in mobile
 context-aware systems
 Szymon Bobek?, Krzysztof Porzycki , Grzegorz J. Nalepaà
 AGH University of Science and Technology
 Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059, Krakow, Poland
 ?szymon.bobek@agh.edu.pl,  kporzyck@student.agh.edu.pl, àgjn@agh.edu.pl
 AbstractÑContext-aware mobile systems have gained a re-
 markable popularity in recent years. Mobile devices are equipped
 with a variety of sensors and become computationally powerful,
 which allows for real-time fusion and processing of data gathered
 by them. However, most of existing frameworks for context-aware
 systems, are usually dedicated to static, centralized architectures,
 and those that were designed for mobile devices, focus mainly
 on limited resources in terms of CPU and memory, which in
 nowadays world is no longer a big issue. Mobile platforms require
 from the context modelling language and inference engine to be
 simple and lightweight, but on the other hand Ð to be powerful
 enough to allow not only solving simple context identification
 tasks but also more complex reasoning. These, with combination
 of a large number of sensors and CPU power available on mobile
 devices result in high energy consumption of a system. The
 original contribution of this paper is a proposal of an intelligent
 middleware for mobile context-aware frameworks, that is able
 to learn sensor usage habits, and minimize energy consumption
 of the system.
 I. INTRODUCTION
 RESEARCH in the area of pervasive computing andambient intelligence aims to make use of context infor-
 mation to allow devices or applications behave in a context-
 aware, thus ÒintelligentÓ way. Dey [1] defines context as Òany
 information that can be used to characterize the situation of
 an entity. The information in DeyÕs definition may be: (1)
 location of the user (spatial context), (2) presence or absence
 of other devices and users nearby, or collaboration with other
 users (social context), (3) time (temporal context), (4) user
 behavior or activity, and possibly (5) any other environmental
 data gathered by microphones, light sensors, etc.
 The variety of sensors available on nowadays mobile de-
 vices allow for complex contex-based reasoning, but at the
 same time requires a lot of resources and energy.
 Although there are many frameworks and middlewares
 developed for context-aware systems [2], [3], [4], they do
 not provide full support for all of the challenges that we
 believe are crucial for mobile computing (e.g. smartphones
 or tablets), with respect to the context modelling and context-
 based reasoning. Those are:
 Energy efficiency Ð most of the sensors, when turned on
 all the time, decrease the mobile device battery level very fast.
 This reflects on usability of the system and ecological aspects
 regarding energy saving.
 Data privacy Ð most of the users do not want to send
 information about their location, activities, and other private
 data to external servers. Hence, the context reasoning should
 be performed by the mobile device itself.
 Resource limitations Ð although mobile phones and tablets
 are becoming computationally powerful, the context aware
 system has to consume as low CPU and memory resources
 as possible in order to be transparent to the user and other
 applications.
 System responsiveness Ð in mobile environment context
 changes very fast. Hence, no delays are admissible in pro-
 cessing contextual data.
 Context data distribution Ð in mobile pervasive envi-
 ronments many devices produces huge amount of contextual
 information, hence the quality measures should be developed
 and distribution methods designed to fit characteristics of such
 unstable and dynamic network [5].
 All of these require from the modelling language and
 inference engine to be simple and lightweight. On the other
 hand, the model should be powerful enough to allow not
 only solving simple context identification tasks but also more
 advanced context processing and reasoning.
 This gives motivation for developing a solution that will
 allow for using advanced reasoning and modelling techniques,
 with as low energy cost as possible. The original contribution
 of the paper is a proposal of an intelligent middleware for
 mobile context aware frameworks, that is able to learn sensor
 usage habits, and minimize energy consumption of the system.
 The rest of the article is organized as follows: In Sec-
 tion II an existing context aware systems and frameworks
 are presented, and the motivation of the paper is given. The
 architecture that can be used in combination with our approach
 is presented in Section III. The Section IV discusses the learn-
 ing algorithm used for intelligent middleware and Section V
 presents an evaluation of the algorithm. Finally, summary and
 directions for future work are given in Section VI.
 II. STATE OF THE ART AND MOTIVATION
 In recent years, a lot of development was devoted to
 build applications that use mobile devices to monitor and
 analyse various user contexts. The availability of application
 distribution platforms for common mobile operating systems,
 e.g. Google Play for Android stimulated the popularity and
 adoption of such solutions. However, most of them focus
 only on a very narrow application area of context awareness.
 Most of them are end user applications, and not more generic
 Proceedings of the 2013 Federated Conference on
 Computer Science and Information Systems pp. 993Ð998
 978-1-4673-4471-5/$25.00 c© 2013, IEEE 993
frameworks. Some selected representative cases are briefly
 described below.
 A. Context aware systems
 The SocialCircuits platform [6] uses mobile phones to
 measure social ties between individuals, and uses long- and
 short-term surveys to measure the shifts in individual habits,
 opinions, health, and friendships influenced by these ties.
 Jung [7] focused on discovering social relationships (e.g.,
 family, friends, colleagues and so on) between people. He
 proposed an interactive approach to build meaningful social
 networks by interacting with human experts, and applied the
 proposed system to discover the social networks between
 mobile users by collecting a dataset from about two millions
 of users. Given a certain social relation (e.g., isFatherOf), the
 system can evaluate a set of conditions (which are represented
 as propositional axioms) asserted from the human experts, and
 show them a social network resulted from data mining tools.
 Sociometric badge [8] has been designed to identify human
 activity patterns, analyse conversational prosody features and
 wirelessly communicate with radio base-stations and mobile
 phones. Sensor data from the badges has been used in various
 organizational contexts to automatically predict employeeÕs
 self-assessment of job satisfaction and quality of interactions.
 Eagle and Pentland [9] used mobile phone Bluetooth
 transceivers, phone communication logs and cellular tower
 identifiers to identify the social network structure, recognize
 social patterns in daily user activity, infer relationships, iden-
 tify socially significant locations and model organizational
 rhythms.
 Beside research projects, there exist also a variety of
 application that are used for gathering information about
 context from mobile devices, like SDCF [10], AWARE 1,
 JCAF [11], SCOUT [12], ContextDriod [13], Gimbal 2. These
 are mostly concerned with low-level context data acquisition
 from sensors, suitable for further context identification. On
 the other hand, they do not provide support nor methodology
 for creating complex and fully customizable context-aware
 systems and do not provide any mechanisms for limiting
 energy consumption of the system.
 What is more, all of the approaches described above use
 their own dedicated methods for gathering and maintaining
 context. These methods are mostly not applicable for reuse,
 or their functionality is limited to simple context matching.
 Some of the systems do not provide any support for context
 modelling nor context reasoning, limiting their functionality
 only to identifying and collecting contextual information.
 B. Context aware frameworks
 To solve the issue of reusability of the system, a lot of
 frameworks were designed. These frameworks are based on
 many different architecture paradigms which pros and cons in
 terms of energy efficiency, responsiveness, and privacy were
 presented in this Section.
 1http://www.awareframework.com
 2https://www.gimbal.com/
 The system described in [14] uses direct sensor access
 architecture which is usually not very energy efficient, however
 it preserver privacy issues, since no communication with
 external servers is usually needed, and the interpretation of
 the sensor data as well as reasoning is performed directly on
 the host device
 The CoBrA system [15] was build on centralized context
 server architecture. This approach is especially useful when
 a context-aware system is composed of many mobile devices
 with limited resources. The server relieves mobile agents from
 performing reasoning tasks. On the other hand, one has to
 consider privacy issues connected with sending private contex-
 tual data to remote server, quality of service issues, etc. This
 approach is also characterized with rather low responsiveness
 that stems from a possible lack of network connection or
 communication delays.
 Service oriented architecture with combination of dis-
 tributed architecture was used in SOCAM [16] system. In
 context-aware applications this architecture is used mainly in
 pervasive environment, where variety of context information
 from many different sources has to be processed. This architec-
 ture usually does not preserves privacy nor energy efficiency
 issues since usually it assumes communication over the web
 between each of its elements. Although SOCAM provides
 architecture for distributed mobile systems, it mostly solves
 problems of a low memory and CPU power of mobile agents,
 which nowadays is no longer a big issue for most of the mobile
 devices like smart-phones or tablets. On the other hand, energy
 efficiency issue is still a big problem, which was not addressed
 by none of the solutions described in this Section.
 This gives motivation for developing an architecture that
 will allow for advanced context-based reasoning and mod-
 elling, but at the same time allow for minimizing energy
 usage costs of sensors that are needed in such reasoning. An
 overview of the proposed system is presented in following
 Section.
 III. INTELLIGENT MIDDLEWARE APPROACH
 The proposed solution incorporates an idea of a mobile
 device as an autonomous context-aware entity, equipped with
 intelligent middleware layer and context-based inference layer.
 The intelligent middleware act as a proxy between context
 sources and inference layer. It is able to learn sensor usage
 patterns and thus adjusting sampling rates to significantly
 improve energy consumption of the system (See Section IV).
 The architecture of a system that may use intelligent mid-
 dleware approach should consist of three main elements:
 1) sensors layer Ð responsible for gathering data from
 sensors and performing initial preprocessing of them,
 2) inference layer Ð responsible for context based reasoning
 and knowledge management, and
 3) intelligent middleware layer Ð acting as an intelligent
 proxy between sensors layer and the inference layer.
 The Sensor Layer gathers data directly from mobile device
 sensors. Due to the different possible sensor types (GPS,
 Accelerometer, Bluetooth), different methods for interpreting
 994 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. KRAK «OW, 2013
Sensor 1
 Interpreter
 Intelligent Middleware 
TCP/IP 
Interface
  
Inference 
EngineModel
 Model
 Inference Layer
 Sensors Layer
 Sensor n
 Interpreter
 Context-aware mobile applications
 ...
 Figure 1. Architecture of the mobile context aware framework
 these data are required. Hence, each sensor has its own inter-
 preter module that is responsible for initial preprocessing of
 the raw data. Data preprocessing is triggered by the intelligent
 middleware.
 The Inference Layer is responsible for performing reason-
 ing, based on the model (knowledge base) and the working
 memory elements (facts). The inference engine may be a rule
 engine, first-order logic reasoner, probabilistic inference mod-
 ule, or any other custom approach. However, we argue, that to
 allow more complex reasoning tasks than just simple context
 classification, the best choice is lightweight rule engine [17].
 The Intelligent Middleware is responsible for exchanging
 information between sensors layer and inference layer. The
 working memory is shared between all models stored within
 the inference layer, acting as a knowledge cache. Therefore,
 it minimizes the number of required requests to the sensors
 layer, improving power efficiency of the entire system.
 The idea of separating Intelligent Middleware from infer-
 ence layer is that it is able to learn sensors usage habits, and
 in consequence adapt itself to the individual device charac-
 teristics. It automatically generates a model of usage habits
 from historical data and based on that model data it adjusts
 the sampling rates for the sensors appropriately. It improves
 power efficiency of the system, since sampling rates are not
 fixed, but leaned from the usage patterns. On the other hand it
 may help in increasing responsiveness of the system, since the
 learned model allows predicting not only future sensor activity,
 but also context-aware application needs. Hence, it is possible
 to get the desired context in advance, before the application
 actually requests it. It can be especially useful in cases when
 context cannot be obtained by the middleware directly from
 the sensor layer, but has to be for example downloaded over
 the internet. However in this paper we focus only on the power
 efficiency advantage of the usage of the intelligent middleware
 approach.
 The following sections describes in details the learning
 algorithm used, and provide an evaluation on a simple use
 case scenario.
 IV. LEARNING ALGORITHM
 Input data. The algorithm takes as an input a vector of
 m percepts. Each percept is described by a pair (Xi, Yi)
 interpreted respectively as time of percept and sensor activity
 state. Such a notation results in two vectors X, Y of size
 m such that ?i<m0 ² Xi ² 24 ? (Yi = ?1 ? Yi = 1).
 Time equals numbers of hours passed since last midnight and
 percept is:
 Yi = {?1 for inactive state1 for active state
 Learning objective. Sensor activity depends largely on
 its stochastic and inaccessible environment. Being so, it is
 impossible to predict it with absolute certainty, however, often
 some part of its variance can be explained by time of a day.
 The algorithm proposed aims to exploit that possibility by
 finding a function determining probability of sensor usage
 given time of a day F (t) = P (X = 1|t). Problems of learning
 conditional probability are often addressed in Machine Learn-
 ing by using logistic regression. The following paragraphs
 define necessary concepts and present the problem in terms
 of logistic regression with accordingly chosen parameters.
 Hypotheses set. Finding objective function F (t) is achieved
 by searching a hypotheses set H . Each function h in hypothe-
 ses set has to have the following properties:
 1) be continuous,
 2) be defined in range < 0; 24 >,
 3) h(0) = h(24),
 4) return values in range < 0; 1 > (probability).
 To perform search it is necessary to represent each function
 in H in a general form parametrized by some vector w of
 length 2n+1, such that every combination of parameters in w
 will yield in a proper hypothesis h = Hw. Such representation
 allows to transition from searching a set of functions to
 searching a linear space R2n+1.
 A representation that has the first three of required proper-
 ties is given below:
 S (?, t) = ?0+
 n?1·
 i=0
 (
 ?2i+1 cos
 (
 i ? t ? 12
 ?
 ))
 +
 n?1·
 i=0
 (
 ?2i+2 sin
 (
 i ? t ? 12
 ?
 ))
 It may be understood as a sum of some first terms of
 Trigonometric Fourier Series parametrized by vector ?. Using
 only low frequency components is desirable because they are
 SZYMON BOBEK, KRZYSZTOF PORZYCKI, GRZEGORZ J. NALEPA: LEARNING SENSORS USAGE PATTERNS 995
most likely to describe habits of usage that usually occurs in
 long sequences of same actions. The only requirement left, that
 is Ð unbound return values, can be addressed by composing
 function S(?, t) with sigmoid function:
 ?(x) = 1
 1 + e?x
 The resulting and correct hypotheses set parametrized by
 vector w is given by formula:
 H? (t) = ?(S(?, t))
 Interpreting hypothesis as probability
 Assumed interpretation that P (y = 1|x) = h(x) implies
 that P (y = ?1|x) = 1?h(x). Because h(x) = ?(s(?, t)), and
 the properties of ?: ?(?s) = 1??(s), the resulting probability
 formula is drawn:
 P (y|x) = ?(y ? S(?, t))
 This formula is based on the assumption made earlier, that
 y takes 1 for active and ?1 for inactive state.
 Learning input data Out of all possible functions in the
 hypotheses set one has to be chosen in terms of its lowest cost.
 In order to perform such a selection a cost measure has to be
 defined. The suggested measure is a combined probability of
 all the observations in a learning set. The higher the combined
 probability the better a hypothesis describes the user habit
 that gave rise to such sensor readings. Derivation of final
 formula to be optimized: max?
 ¸m?1
 i=0 P (Yi|Xi) Maximizing
 an expression is equivalent to maximizing its logarithm:
 max
 ?
 ln
 m?1¸
 i=0
 ?(Yi ? S(?,Xi))
 max
 ?
 1
 m
 ln
 m?1¸
 i=0
 ?(Yi ? S(?,Xi))
 min
 ?
 ?
 1
 m
 ln
 m?1¸
 i=0
 ?(Yi ? S(?,Xi))
 min
 ?
 ?
 1
 m
 m?1·
 i=0
 ln( 1?(Yi ? S(?,Xi)) )
 Formula in such a form is then subject to optimization. The
 optimization algorithm used in this case was gradient descend
 with initial ? coefficients set all to 0. Fast convergence to
 unique value is always achieved thanks to minimized formula
 being always convex.
 V. EVALUATION
 We implemented a prototype of an intelligent middleware,
 that learns user habits based on the usage of device sensors (in
 this case a GPS sensor). We assumed that the GPS sensor is
 active if the speed of the device exceeds some fixed threshold,
 otherwise the sensor was assumed to be inactive. This reflects
 to the cases where someone was moving or not.
 The learning and evaluation process is presented in Figure 2.
 We first performed an acquisition of the GPS sensor data
 Se
 ns
 or
 s
 SQLite
 M
 ob
 ile
  D
 ev
 ice
 Preprocessing
 Learning
 Model
 SQLite
 O
 ct
 av
 e
 M
 ob
 ile
  D
 ev
 ice
 Model
 Model
 Sensors
 Sampling
 rate
 M
 ob
 ile
  D
 ev
 ice
 Data acquisition
 Learning model
 Evaluating
 Figure 2. Learning and evaluation process of the intelligent middleware
 approach.
 and save it to SQLite database. We collected samples from
 5 consecutive days, which later were preprocessed offline to
 be ready for the learning algorithm. The main aim of the
 preprocessing phase was to decide weather the GPS sensor
 was active or not, depending on the speed threshold. After
 the learning process was finished, we moved learned model
 back again to the mobile device and based on that, we were
 adjusting sampling rates of the sensors.
 In the following Sections more details about implementation
 and evaluation results is presented.
 A. Implementation
 The prototype of the learning algorithm was written in
 Octave, and the evaluation of the learned model was performed
 on a Samsung Galaxy S II smartphone with Android 4.2 Jelly
 Bean installed.
 The Octave learning phase was performed according to
 the learning algorithm described in Section IV. Fragment
 of a gradient descent source code responsible for learning
 parameters of the model is presented below.
 for i=1:max_iterations,
 derivatives = zeros(nparams,1);
 for j=1:nsamples,
 product = -Y(j)*(X(j,:)*weights);
 error(i) += log(1+exp(product))/nsamples;
 sigm = sigmoid(product);
 for k=1:nparams,
 derivatives(k)=derivatives(k) +
 996 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. KRAK «OW, 2013
sigm*(Y(j)*X(j,k));
 end
 end
 derivatives = -derivatives / nsamples;
 weights -= learning_rate*derivatives;
 end
 During the evaluation phase, we used an Android device
 with a model of the sensor usage habits generated by the
 Octave algorithm. The algorithm that was adjusting sampling
 rates based on the learned model, performed following steps:
 ¥ Sample GPS sensor with a rate predicted by the intelligent
 middleware algorithm.
 ¥ When any movement is discovered, start sampling with
 the highest possible rate called baseFreq (we fixed this
 to be 1 second).
 ¥ After some fixed period of time called
 continuityThreshold (10 seconds in our
 approach), if no sensor activity was discovered,
 return to sampling rate predicted by the intelligent
 middleware algorithm.
 The source code fragment responsible for this is presented
 below:
 if(timeFromLastActivity < continuityThreshold){
 newFreq = baseFreq;
 } else{
 float probability =
 middleware.getProbability(clockTime);
 int multiplier =
 (1.0f - probability) * scaleFactor + 1.0f;
 newFreq = baseFreq * multiplier;
 }
 if(newFreq != refreshFrequency)
 rescheduleUpdatesFromProviders(newFreq);
 B. Results
 We made experiments on two identical devices carried by
 the same person. One device was equipped with and intelligent
 middleware algorithm implemented and the other does not.
 Both devices were fully charged at the beginning of the
 experiment and was not recharged during it. We decided to
 use speed threshold equal to 5 km/h. With lower thresholds,
 the difference between intelligent middleware approach and
 the other one was hardly visible, because of the errors in
 GPS sensor readings which results in fake "active" states.
 As depicted in Figure 3, the intelligent middleware approach
 allowed for 50% battery saving than in case of the device
 without the algorithm implemented.
 Figure 3 presents a proportion of the time that both devices
 worked on the battery. The right plot shows the time that
 the device without the intelligent middleware implemented
 worked, and the left plot presents a work time of the device
 with the intelligent middleware implemented.
 The distance error which we define as a difference between
 the GPS samples generated in our approach and referenced
 samples generated by the approach without learning algorithm,
 is presented in Figure 4. The average distance error of the
 presented data equals 0.053 km. The high error in several
 Work time in hours
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 With learning algorithm
 Without learning algorithmHo
 ur
 s
 Figure 3. Difference in power consumption for device with and without
 learning algorithm implemented, with speed threshold set to 5km/h.
 places on the plot is a result of noisy readings of GPS sensor
 rather than an algorithm fault.
 Figure 4. Error between position designated by the intelligent middleware
 approach and the reference data.
 VI. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
 In this paper we presented a prototype of an intelligent
 middleware approach that is able to learn sensor usage habits
 and adjust sensor sampling rates to minimize energy con-
 sumption of the context-aware system. The middleware was
 presented as a part of a context reasoning platform tailored
 to the needs of such intelligent distributed mobile computing
 devices. We argue that most of the existing solutions are not
 fully applicable to mobile architectures, and does not fulfil
 energy efficiency needs of context-aware distributed systems.
 The presented approach was designed to solve that issue,
 however we believe that it is suitable for predicting not only
 future sensor activity, but also context-aware application needs.
 Hence, it is possible to get the desired context in advance,
 before the application actually requests it. It can be especially
 useful in cases when context cannot be obtained by the
 middleware directly from the sensor layer, but has to be for
 example downloaded over the internet.
 We used a logistic regression algorithm to learn sensor
 usage model form historical data. This allowed for adjusting
 sampling rates of the sensors according to usage probability.
 SZYMON BOBEK, KRZYSZTOF PORZYCKI, GRZEGORZ J. NALEPA: LEARNING SENSORS USAGE PATTERNS 997
Evaluation on a real device showed that we can gain up to
 50% of energy saving using this algorithm.
 As a future work the implementation of the algorithm for an
 Android device is planned to allow real-time online learning
 and full evaluation of the intelligent middleware approach,
 not only for a GPS, but also other sensor like accelerometer,
 gyroscope, etc.
 It is also planned to implement the learning algorithm
 that uses Markov chains, and compare it to existing imple-
 mentation. We plan to design and develop an architecture
 dedicated for mobile context aware applications equipped with
 an intelligent middleware layer and rule based inference layer
 provided by the HeaRT [18] inference engine, which is a
 lightweight rule-based engine that uses XTT2 [19] notation
 for knowledge representation. This will allow for lightweight
 reasoning [20] and also verification of context models [21].
 We plan to incorporate and evalueate the middleware in
 the context-aware system for monitoring threats in urban
 environment proposed in [22]. We also believe that it would
 be valuable to compare challenges and problems in mobile
 context-aware computing with an area connected with research
 about wireless sensor networks [23]. This two fields of science
 can possibly benefit from exchanging solutions and ideas
 especially regarding energy efficiency and resource limitations
 issues.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The paper is supported by the AGH University of Science
 and Technology Grant 11.11.120.859.
 REFERENCES
 [1] A. K. Dey, ÒProviding architectural support for building context-aware
 applications,Ó Ph.D. dissertation, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2000, aAI9994400.
 [2] F. Sahafipour and R. Javidan, ÒA comparative study of context modeling
 approches and applying in an infrustructure,Ó Canadian Journal on Data
 Information and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 3, no. 1, 2012.
 [3] T. Strang and C. Linnhoff-Popien, ÒA Context Modeling Survey,Ó
 in In: Workshop on Advanced Context Modelling, Reasoning and
 Management, UbiComp 2004 - The Sixth International Conference on
 Ubiquitous Computing, Nottingham/England, 2004. [Online]. Available:
 http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.2.2060
 [4] C. Bettini, O. Brdiczka, K. Henricksen, J. Indulska, D. Nicklas,
 A. Ranganathan, and D. Riboni, ÒA survey of context modelling and
 reasoning techniques,Ó Pervasive Mob. Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
 161Ð180, Apr. 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
 pmcj.2009.06.002
 [5] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, M. Fanelli, and L. Foschini, ÒA survey of
 context data distribution for mobile ubiquitous systems,Ó ACM Comput.
 Surv., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 24:1Ð24:45, Sep. 2012. [Online]. Available:
 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2333112.2333119
 [6] I. Chronis, A. Madan, and A. S. Pentland, ÒSocialcircuits: the art of
 using mobile phones for modeling personal interactions,Ó in Proceedings
 of the ICMI-MLMI Õ09 Workshop on Multimodal Sensor-Based Systems
 and Mobile Phones for Social Computing, ser. ICMI-MLMI Õ09. New
 York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1:1Ð1:4.
 [7] J. J. Jung, ÒContextualized mobile recommendation service based on
 interactive social network discovered from mobile users,Ó Expert Syst.
 Appl., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 11 950Ð11 956, Nov. 2009. [Online]. Available:
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2009.03.067
 [8] D. Olguin, B. N. Waber, T. Kim, A. Mohan, K. Ara, and A. Pentland,
 ÒSensible organizations: Technology and methodology for automatically
 measuring organizational behavior,Ó IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYS-
 TEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS-PART B: CYBERNETICS, pp. 43Ð
 55, 2009.
 [9] N. Eagle and A. (Sandy) Pentland, ÒReality mining: sensing complex
 social systems,Ó Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 255Ð
 268, Mar. 2006.
 [10] M. Atzmueller and K. Hilgenberg, ÒTowards capturing social inter-
 actions with sdcf: An extensible framework for mobile sensing and
 ubiquitous data collection.Ó in Proc. 4th International Workshop on
 Modeling Social Media. ACM Press, 2013.
 [11] J. E. Bardram, ÒThe java context awareness framework (jcaf) Ð a
 service infrastructure and programming framework for context-aware
 applications,Ó in Pervasive Computing, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science, H.-W. Gellersen, R. Want, and A. Schmidt, Eds. Springer
 Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, vol. 3468, pp. 98Ð115. [Online]. Available:
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11428572_7
 [12] W. V. Woensel, S. Casteleyn, and O. D. Troyer, A Framework for
 Decentralized, Context-Aware Mobile Applications Using Semantic Web
 Technology, 2009.
 [13] B. van Wissen, N. Palmer, R. Kemp, T. Kielmann, and
 H. Bal, ÒContextDroid: an expression-based context framework
 for Android,Ó in Proceedings of PhoneSense 2010, Nov.
 2010. [Online]. Available: http://sensorlab.cs.dartmouth.edu/phonesense/
 papers/Wissen-ContextDroid.pdf
 [14] E. Elnahrawy and B. Nath, ÒContext-aware sensors,Ó in EWSN, ser.
 Lecture Notes in Computer Science, H. Karl, A. Willig, and A. Wolisz,
 Eds., vol. 2920. Springer, 2004, pp. 77Ð93.
 [15] H. Chen, T. W. Finin, and A. Joshi, ÒSemantic web in the context broker
 architecture.Ó in PerCom. IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp. 277Ð286.
 [16] T. Gu, H. K. Pung, D. Q. Zhang, and X. H. Wang, ÒA middleware
 for building context-aware mobile services,Ó in In Proceedings of IEEE
 Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC, 2004.
 [17] A. Ligeþza and G. J. Nalepa, ÒA study of methodological issues in design
 and development of rule-based systems: proposal of a new approach,Ó
 Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discov-
 ery, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 117Ð137, 2011.
 [18] G. J. Nalepa, ÒArchitecture of the HeaRT hybrid rule engine,Ó in Arti-
 ficial Intelligence and Soft Computing: 10th International Conference,
 ICAISC 2010: Zakopane, Poland, June 13Ð17, 2010, Pt. II, ser. Lecture
 Notes in Artificial Intelligence, L. Rutkowski and [et al.], Eds., vol.
 6114. Springer, 2010, pp. 598Ð605.
 [19] G. J. Nalepa, A. Ligeþza, and K. Kaczor, ÒFormalization and modeling
 of rules using the XTT2 method,Ó International Journal on Artificial
 Intelligence Tools, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1107Ð1125, 2011.
 [20] G. Nalepa, S. Bobek, A. Ligeþza, and K. Kaczor, ÒAlgorithms for
 rule inference in modularized rule bases,Ó in Rule-Based Reasoning,
 Programming, and Applications, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
 ence, N. Bassiliades, G. Governatori, and A. Paschke, Eds., vol. 6826.
 Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 305Ð312.
 [21] G. Nalepa, S. Bobek, A. Ligeþza, and K. Kaczor, ÒHalVA Ð rule
 analysis framework for XTT2 rules,Ó in Rule-Based Reasoning,
 Programming, and Applications, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science, N. Bassiliades, G. Governatori, and A. Paschke, Eds., vol.
 6826. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 337Ð344. [Online].
 Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/c276374nh9682jm6/
 [22] S. Bobek, G. J. Nalepa, and W. T. Adrian, ÒMobile context-based
 framework for monitoring threats in urban environment,Ó in Multimedia
 Communications, Services and Security: 6th International Conference,
 MCSS 2013: Krak—w, Poland. June 6-7, 2013. Proceedings, 2013.
 [23] C. S. Raghavendra, K. M. Sivalingam, and T. Znati, Wireless sensor
 networks. Springer, 2006.
 998 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. KRAK «OW, 2013
