Communication System Architecture for Air Traffic 
Management and Weather Information Dissemination 
Seana Gallagher Doug Blythe Steve Decker 
SAIC m c ,  Inc. TRW, Inc. 
1213 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1500 
Arlington, VA 22202 
seana.gallagher@saic.com pdb@arinc.com steve.decker@tnv.com 
6550 Riva Road 
Annapolis, Md 2 140 1 
One Federal Systems Park Drive 
Fairfax, VA 22033 
703-414-3800 410-266-2046 703-968-1000 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Abstract-The authors present the Communication System 
Architecture for Air Traffic Management and Weather 
Information Dissemination as viewed within the context of 
the overall National Airspace System (NAS) and the 
services it provides. This paper presents the architecture in 
the-2015 time frame when the final phases of transition take 
place ffom analog voice to digital data exchange of common 
data via integrated networks. The results of this transition 
are an integrated collection of systems and procedures that 
efficiently use the capacity of the NAS while balancing 
access to all user classes and maintaining the highest levels 
of safety. Efficient collaboration among users is built on a 
foundation of common data. This information base provides 
common situational awareness to all participants. All users 
are accommodated and will receive benefits commensurate 
with equipage level. This architecture development provides 
a technical framework for decision-making, research, and 
analysis of communication technologies. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Table of Contents 
INTRODUCTION 
FUTURE AVIATION CONCEPTS 
FUNCTIONAL RCHITECTURE 
MESSAGE LOADING 
LINK CAPACITY 
SYNTHESIS 
CONCLUSIONS 
METHOD 
RESULTS 
Aeronautical air-ground communications will be provided 
for the foreseeable future by a number of different 
communications systemddata links, including High 
Frequency (HF), Very High Frequency (VHF), L-band 
(1435-1525 MHz), and Satellite Communications 
(SATCOM). Relevant advanced technology development 
for any of these systems requires that a comprehensive 
technical communications architecture exist. The 
architecture must address the user communications 
requirements of the future mature Air Traffic Management 
(ATM) system that the various data links can support. The 
objective of the task was to develop a Communication 
System Architecture (CSA) with the potential for 
implementation by 2015. 
2. METHOD 
Our analysis leading to the definition of the 2015 Advanced 
Air Traffic Technologies (AATT) CSA involved the 
following tasks as shown in Figure 1 : (1) understanding the 
aviation community needs, (2) defining an overall functional 
architecture to satisfy the needs, (3) defining the information 
to be exchanged to support communication loading 
estimates, (4) identifying the existing and planned 
communication links that would be available, and ( 5 )  
synthesizing the load estimates with compatible links and 
determining the viable communication architecture 
altematives. 
Copyright: 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 Q 2001 IEEE 
3-1327 
I - -  
I 
Figure 1.2015 AATT Architecture Development Method 
Definition of the functional architecture first requires an 
understanding of the desires of the aviation community, 
which are expressed through various documents such as 
operational concept documents, industry standard 
documents, and requirements documents [ 1,3,4,5]. To gain 
this understanding, we reviewed a wide range of documents 
and drew upon knowledge gained through our team’s in- 
depth involvement in the development of the NAS 
Architecture. We organized the results of our need analysis 
into the major air traffic services. Next, we looked to further 
group our results into crosscutting areas that could be 
focused into specific functional areas. These functional areas 
would then form the basis for the functional architecture. 
When a functional architecture was established, we then 
estimated the message traffic associated with each functional 
area and for different classes of aircraii and operating 
domains. For each message, we used our research material 
to develop estimates for size, frequency, overhead, and 
applicability for two-way or broadcast transmission. This 
data were then aggregated to form the total load estimates. 
The total load estimates for each functional area were 
compared with the performance capabilities for existing and 
future communication links. 
The applicable communication links were identified through 
a survey of existing links and a projection of future links that 
had the potential to be available for research in the 2004 
time frame. Nine communication links were identified for 
consideration. A matrix was developed that mapped the 
functional architecture with the communication links that 
could support the load estimates. From this matrix, we were 
able to select viable communication architectures far further 
analysis. The remaining sections of this paper will describe 
each of these tasks in further detail ancl will conclude with a 
summary of our results and conclusions;. 
3. FUTURE AVIATION CONCEPTS 
The operational concepts are at the higlhest level and provide 
the top-down vision for what is desired. The vision provided 
by the operational concepts draws upon the results of efforts 
such as the Air Traffic Services (ATS) Concept of 
Operations for the NAS in 2005, the Concept Definition for 
Distributed Air/Ground Traffic Management (DAG-TM), 
and current and emerging industry trends. In the 2015 time 
frame, the drivers for the operational concepts are born out 
of the need for increased user flexibility with operating 
efficiencies and increased levels of capacity and safety to 
meet the growing demand for air transportation. These 
concepts are characterized by: (1) removal of constraints 
and restrictions to flight operations, (2) better exchange of 
information and collaborative decision making among users 
and service providers, (3) more efficient management of 
airspace and airport resources, and (4) tools and models to 
aid air tr,aflk service providers. 
The 2015 time frame represents the final phases of transition 
from the era of analog voice communication and islands of 
diverse information to the new era of digital data exchange 
through integrated networks using common data. The results 
of this transition are an integrated collection of systems and 
procedures that efficiently use the capacity of the NAS while 
balancing access to all user classes and maintaining the 
highest levels of safety. As depicted in Figure 2, efficient 
collaboration among users is built on a foundation of 
common data that comprise the inform:ation base. 
Human- 
based 
D S S  
based 
Info r Base 
Figure 2. Air-Ground Commurucation Levels 
3-1328 
This data can be logically divided into a static component, 
representing data that change infrequently such as maps, 
charts, etc., and a dynamic component, representing data 
that change frequently such as the weather, traffic flow 
status, and aircraft position. This information base provides 
common situational awareness to all users who choose to 
participate. In this time frame, a variety of users exist who 
will choose to participate at various levels of equipage 
ranging from voice only through multimode radios and fully 
modular avionics. All users are accommodated, however, 
and will receive benefits commensurate with their levels of 
equipage. 
The challenge in maintaining the information base is to keep 
the dynamic data current for all participating users so that 
optimum decisions can be made. Given a common 
information base, decision support systems can analyze this 
data continuously to develop optimum solutions for 
individual aircraft trajectories, as well as trajectories for 
groups of aircraft. This negotiation takes place between 
aircraft Decision Support System (DSS) tools and between 
aircraft and Air Traffic Control (ATC) DSS tools. When 
optimum solutions (or inability to find a solution) are 
determined, pilots and controllers are notified for 
confirmation (or other appropriate action). This action takes 
the form of strategic collaborative decision making or 
tactical control. In either event, data exchange continues 
using specified data link messages with voice 
communication used when it is the only practical means. 
4. FLJNCTIONAL h C H I T E C T U R E  
Our analysis of user needs and the latest concepts of 
operation led us to define these levels of air-ground 
communication and to also define a collection of technical 
communication concepts for categorizing the various levels 
of data exchange that we discovered. These technical 
concepts are defined in Table 1. The combinations of these 
technical concepts form the functional communications 
architecture shown in Figure 3. A roadmap including the' 
targeted transition schedule is provided in Table 2. 
3-1329 
- 
1 
I AUTOMET 
CPC 
NATIONAL 
WEAMER 
SERVICE 
FIS TIS APAXS 
-WEATHER1 I I *TV. RADIO 
.INTERNET AOC 
AIRLINES 
OPERATIONS 
I 
CONTROL - 
Figure 3. Functional Communicationis Architecture 
Table 2. Technical Concept Implementation Roadmap 
Our use of the NAS-Wide Information System (NWIS) at 
the center of the functional architecture represents a key 
assumption in performing this analysis. In the 2015 time 
h e ,  the ground-side NAS has evolved to the point that 
it contains a collection of data that is commonly defined 
and virtually available among all participating nodes using 
the most efficient communications paths available. 
DSSDL 
AOC 
ADS Reporting 
AUTOMET 
In addition, it is assumed that each participating node- 
either airborne or ground-has sufficient processing and 
storage capability that these capabilities iyill not be 
limiting factors in the timely exchange of information 
between nodes. 
. 
0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 
0.4 8.4 0.6 8.5 0.2 3.5 
0.0 16.1 0.0 3.3 0.0 1.5 
0.0 0.0 0.0 4.4 0.0 6.2 
identified as part of our documentation analysis to each of 
our technical concepts. We recognized, however, that the 
air-ground exchange of data would not be the same for all 
aircraft. We therefore chose to use three classes of 
aircraft: low-end general aviation (Class l), high-end 
general aviation and commuter aircraft (Class 2), and 
commercial carriers (Class 3). These classifications lead 
to a better traffic load estimate because the number, 
frequency, and type of message in many cases depend on 
where the aircraft is and what type of equipage it has. In 
addition, we chose to partition the analysis by domain so 
that the air-ground communication architecture could be 
optimized to meet any special regional requirements. 
5. MESSAGE LOADING A summary of the peak communication loads for 2015 
and an estimate of equipage per aircraft class are provided 
We determined the functional interface loading by in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively. 
logically grouping the message requirements that were 
Table 3. Summarv of Peak Communications Loads for 2015 
FIS 0.2 0.0 0.9 0.0 6.9 - I  0.0 
23.7 0.0 7.0 0.0 20.5 0.0 
CPDLC 3.4 2.9 1.3 0.9 1.1 1.3 
I I I I 
APAXS I 0.0 I 0.0 I 0.0 I 0.0 I 131.7 I 115.5 I 
* Aircraft that are not equipped with a radio are excluded .from the Communications System Architecture. 
3-1331 
6. LINK CAPACITY 7. SYNTHESIS8 
The overall approach to the air-ground communications 
load analysis is illustrated in Figure 4. The estimated 
traf€ic load was compared to the link capacity estimates 
shown in Table 5. 
As mentioned previously, the NAS in 20 15 requires a data 
exchange capability that supports thse establishment of an 
air-ground information base. The technical concepts that 
support this information base are F[S, TIS, ADS-B, and 
AUTOMET. 
- 
Describe Air-Ground Service 
Summarize Air-Ground 
Reouirements 
I I 
1 
Determine Total Data Message Trafflc for Each 
1 sspuatemsrsagstpsbysrusRd..s 
2 F o r u s h m n v l c o a t ~ a y M d d o ~ n , s p e d t y m s a s a g e ~ ~ c m  
Aircraft Class Dunng a Typical Flight 
&s per second ( b d  "#ink snd daulmk) 
Identify Voice Message Traffic for a Typical Flight 
1. 
2 :Spe&ymessageien@? b y d l  .osmds(@inkMddanlmk) 
3. 
:Separate M I C ~  -age by domdn 
pa d- ol airuHi 
I S m  message hqu- in -or pa minme pa dpu of 
11151.U 
Oftermme Total Vace Message Trafkfor Each 
Aircraft Class During a Typical Flight 
1 Ssparata ma, - w e  by wSRR da.9 
2 Fw old? d m " .  wmty message- u1 dl- s=xmds (Om 
uplink anddodink) 
1 Iv 
1 Specify Peak Instantaneous Distribution d Aircraft by Class and Domain ... t r d a t s  to... 
Calculate Total Data Load in 
Kbps for flight dependent Calculate Load in call seconds 
Calculate Total Data Load in 
i i- 
Figure 4. Load Analysis Methodology 
3-1332 
Table 5. Capacity Provided by Various Communication Links 
* Channel split between voice and data. 
** The Mode-S data link is limited to a secondary, noninterference basis with the surveillance function and has a capacity of 
300 bps / per aircraft in track / per sensor (RTCA DO-237). 
Taken individually, a solution for each of these concepts 
could be developed fiom one of the individual links 
identified in Table 5 above. When viewed fiom a system 
perspective, however, the notion of an integrated data 
exchange capability begins to emerge. Candidate links 
that could meet this integrated data exchange need should 
be capable of supporting data rates on the order of 
hundreds of kilobits per second. 
In addition to data exchange, the NAS also requires a two- 
way data messaging capability to support the 
efficient coordination of information, decision making, 
and the delivery of clearances and advisories. The 
technical concepts that support this are AOCDL, DSSDL, 
and CPDLC. Candidate links that could meet these needs 
should be Aeronautical Telecommunication Network 
(ATN)-compliant and capable of supporting data rates on 
the order of tens of kilobits per second. 
A summary of the applicable communication links that 
wil be capable of supporting the communication loads for 
each technical concept is provided in Table 6. 
Table 6. 2015 AATT Technical Concepts to Communication Links 
I * Acceptable Alternative 0 NAS Architecture *k * AA77 CSA Recommendation 
I 
- .  . 
Viable Architecture Alternatives 
From an integrated NAS Architecture perspective, we feel 
that an attempt should be made to minimize the number of 
aircraft radios required to operate efficiently while 
recognizing the desirability of maintaining a level of 
robustness across Communications, Navigation, and 
Surveillance (CNS) avionics. With this in mind, OUT 
optimuni aircraft would have a multimode VHF radio to 
support two-way messaging, a broadband Universal 
Access Transceiver (UAT) or SATCOM radio to rjupport 
data exchange, a Mode-S radio to support surveillance 
and colIision avoidance, and finally a radio to support 
navigation. (Note: Surveillance and navigation analysis 
were not considered within the scope of this analysis.) 
For CPC, CPDLC, and DSSDL, our recommendation 
follows that of the NAS Architecture[2]. The 
implementation of VDLM3 will more than adequately 
accommodate the ATC needs of 2015 and beyond. The 
transition to VDLM3 could be problematic, however, 
given the load projections for the VDLM2 network. There 
will ccmtinue to be a need to maximize the communication 
capacity of VHF data links operating in the protected 
aviation spectrum. Accordingly, vie recommend further 
research in the areas of link .modulation and data 
compression to increase the overall bit transfer rate, 
network prioritization schemes that combine voice and 
data, and the development of designs for virtuaI air 
ground links that will maximize the use of available 
frequencies. 
We have not made a recommendation for FIS, TIS, or 
ADS-B, because we believe that additional research is 
required to provide sutficient data to support a 
recommendation. An integrated data exchange capability 
as we: discuss in this analysis, is not currently envisioned 
in the NAS Architecture. In addition, the link decision 
currently underway on ADS-B can have a significant 
influence on the overall ccm"mcation system 
architecture. With regard to the implementation of UAT 
or SATCOM, one potential advantage of using UAT 
would be that the majority of aircraft would already have 
a UAT radio [if it is (one of) the technology(ies) chosen 
for ADS-B] and a UAT terrestrial network would have 
been established. In addition, UAT avionics have been 
designed to support all classes of aircraft. Implementation 
of UAT should consider the use of dedicated channels and 
protocols for ADS-B and TIS to optimize their 
performance, while FIS and AUTOMET could employ a 
more standard broadcast scheme. An advantage of 
SATCOM would be the wide area access provided 
without the need for a terrestrial network and the use of a 
commercial service provider. A current disadvantage for 
next generation SATCOM, however, is that antennas and 
receivers must be adapted for the aviation market (size, 
weight, cost) and must overcome the condition of rain 
attenuation for broadcast. 
We have not made a recommendation for AOCDL 
because it is a commercial link. The current plans for 
implementation of AOCDL are via VDLM2 using four 
allocated AOC frequencies. Costs for two-way SATCOM 
service may be attractive for the AOCs if it is coupled 
with some form of airline passenger service (APAXS) that 
make it cost competitive with VDLM2. 
AUTOMET is problematic in that our load projections 
exceed any VDL solutions. However, in all likelihood, 
AUTOMET will begin on the AOCDL VDLM2 network 
in the 2007 time &me. If an integrated data exchange 
capability is developed as described above, we would 
recommend it for AUTOMET. In the absence of that, we 
recommend that AUTOMET continue to use the same link 
as AOCDL (VDLM2 or SATCOM). 
Finally, for APAXS, the use of SATCOM will be driven 
by the commercial industry desire to provide high data 
rate services to passengers, such as real-time television 
and Internet access. These services are already available 
to private executive and business aircraft. Air Traffic 
Service providers should stay aware of these efforts and 
look for opportunities to exploit this method of data 
transmission. Accordingly, we recommend that further 
study be conducted to determine the possibility for 
innovative partnerships or incentives that may leverage 
the involvement of commercial service providers in the 
delivery of selected air traffic services via SATCOM. For 
example, providers of broadcast entertainment channels to 
aircraft could be required to provide an air traffic services 
channel that is freely accessible by all aircraft. This 
example is similar to the requirement that cable television 
providers have with regard to providing public access 
channels. 
8. RESULTS 
In summary, for the 20 15 time frame, a majority of Class 
1 aircraft will be equipped with a VHF multimode radio 
for voice and data communications and ADS-B avionics 
that transmit their derived position via the selected link 
(Mode-S, VDLM4, or UAT), which allows pilots to 
receive extended flight following and separation services 
due to the extended coverage of the ADS-B receiver 
network. Flight information and tr&ic information are 
provided through UAT or SATCOM. Many corporate jets 
and other high-end users will have provision for passenger 
services, such as Internet or television via satellite. 
Class 2 users differ fiom Class 1 users in that some Class 
2 users have access to AOCDL that provides operations 
and maintenance data via VDLM2. In addition, in this 
time frame, the majority of Class 2 users will be equipped 
with a multimode radio that supports VDLM3 
communications. Flight information and traffic 
information are provided through UAT or SATCOM. 
Some Class 2 users may also equip for APAXS via 
satellite. 
The Class 3 users see the greatest change in 
communications from the 2007 time frame. Virtually all 
Class 3 aircraft will be equipped with multimode radios 
that support controller-pilot voice and data 
communications via VDLM3. In addition, these aircraft 
will exchange performance and preference data with ATC 
via VDLM3 DSSDL. Flight and traffic information are 
provided through UAT or SATCOM. Two-way SATCOM 
will be available to support passenger television and 
Internet services and may begin to support aircrafl-AOC 
and aircraft-ATC data exchange. 
Class 3 aircraft will be the majority users of ADS-B via 
the selected link (Mode-S, VDLM4, or UAT) due to the 
maneuvering benefits derived from equipage. HFDL will 
continue to be used by some aircraft to support oceanic 
operations. An overview diagram of the 2015 AATT 
Architecture alternative using broadband satellite is shown 
in Figure 5 and a terrestrial broadband alternative is 
depicted in Figure 6. 
3-1335 
3 
Ground Aircraft 
< FlSlTlSlAPAXS 1 
+--- - - Not analyzed as part of this task - - - - -+ 
Figure 5.20 15 AATT Architecture Alternative-- 
SATCOM Based Broadband 
Ground Aircraft 
Figure 6.2015 AATT Architecture Altemative- 
Terrestrial Based 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, we have identified a communication system 
architecture that can support the needs of the aviation 
community in the 2015 time frame. Most significantly, we 
have concluded that an integrated broadband data link is 
required and that there are currently no plans to provide 
this capability. Finally, we have also identified areas for 
future research that are necessary to meet the 
communication needs in the 20 15 time fiame. 
This analysis is the first in a series of analyses that should 
continue to guide and refine the future communication 
architecture. This analysis should be expanded to 
incorporate navigation and surveillance requirements so 
that the entire avionics suite can be considered. Also, cost 
considerations should be added so that the benefits of 
hybrid architecture alternatives can be addressed. Finally, 
research programs should be established to address those 
areas identified in our analysis. 
REFERENCES 
[l] NASA Technical Publication, E 1:2390/CR :2 10343, 
Communication System Architecture Development for Air 
Trafic Management & Weather Information 
Dissemination, June 2000 
[2] hr)://~.nas-architecte.faa.go.v 
[3] RTCA DO-237, Aeronautical Spectrum Planning for 
1997-;?010, Prepared by SC-185, January 1997 
[4] FAA Technical Publication, ATS Concept of Operations 
for the NAS in 2005, September 30,1997 
[5] NASA LRC, Airbome Separation Assurance and 
Trafic Management: Research Concepts and 
Technology, AIAA-99-3989 
BIOGRAPHIES 
Seana Gallagher is a 
Program Manager for SAIC 
in Arlington, VA. She has 
more than 22 years of 
telecommunications related 
experience, the past five 
years dedicated to 
supporting aeronautical 
commimications research 
programs for NASA and the 
FAA. Seana holds an MS in Telecommunications fiom 
George Washington University and a BA fkom Saint 
Mary's College of Maryland. She is presently supporting 
NASA in the development of a Functional Architecture 
for the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) and 
was Program Manager for NASA's Advanced Air TrafEc 
Technologies (AATT), Research Task Order 24: 
Communication System Architecture Development for Air 
Traffic Management and Weather Tnformation 
Dissenxination. 
3-1336 
Doug Blythe is the 
Technical Director for 
Future Communications 
in the ARINC Aviation 
& Air Traffic Services 
Division. He received 
his BSEE from the 
University of Texas 
before moving to 
Washington to work in the federal government. He 
worked for the Federal Communications Commission, 
Department of Commerce and Federal Aviation 
Administration before joining ARlNC in 1981. Most of 
his career has involved aviation and communications and 
he has worked in numerous systems engineering and 
communications project positions. Currently, he is 
responsible for developing requirements for future 
ARINC systems and participates in RTCA and other 
industry forums. Doug was the lead engineer fkom ARINC 
on NASA’s Advanced Air Traffic Technologies (AATT), 
Research Task Order 24: Communication System 
Architecture Development for Air Traffic Management & 
Weather Information Dissemination. 
nations Intercontinental Ballistic Missile System, 
Consolidated Space Operations Center, and most recently 
was TRW’s Chief Architect for the National Airspace 
System. Recently, Mr. Decker has coauthored papers on 
System of Systems Engineering and Systems Architecture 
for the International Council of Systems Engineers and the 
TRW Technical Journal. He holds a BS in Aerospace 
Engineering from Parks College of Saint Louis University 
and an MS in Systems Engineering witb a specialization 
in Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence 
systems from George Mason University. Steve was the 
lead engineer &om TRW on NASA’s Advanced Air 
Traffic Technologies (AATT), Research Task Order 24: 
Communication System Architecture Development for Air 
T d i c  Management & Weather Information 
Dissemination. 
3-1337 
