Air Traffic Control Improvement 
Using Prioritized CSMAl 
Daryl C. Robinson 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Glenn Research Center 
2 1000 Brookpark Road 
Cleveland, OH 44135 ’ 
216-433-3553 
dcrobinson@grc.nasa.gov 
Abstract-Version 7 simulations of the industry-standard 
network simulation software ‘‘OPNET’; are presented of two 
applications of the Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Network (ATN), Controller Pilot Data Link Communications 
(CPDLC) and Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast 
mode (ADS-B), over VHF Data Link mode 2 (VDL-2). 
Communication is modeled for air traffic between just three 
cities. All aircraft are assumed to have the same equipage. 
The simulation involves Air Traffic Control (ATC) ground 
stations and 105 aircraft taking off, flying realistic free-flight 
trajectories, and landing in a 24-hr period. All communi- 
cation is modeled as unreliable. Collision-less, prioritized 
carrier sense multiple access (CSMA) is successfully tested. 
The statistics presented include latency, queue length, and 
packet loss. This research may show that a communications 
system simpler than the currently accepted standard envi- 
sioned may not only suffice, but also surpass performance of 
the standard at a lower cost of deployment. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. SIMULATION Focus 
3. SIMULATION VERVIEW 
4. CSMA DISCUSSION 
5. PRIORITIZED CSMA 
6. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Due to a lack of surveillance and communications coverage, 
in many parts of the world, aircraft are forced to fly routes and 
maintain separations that are inefficient from both a fuel and 
scheduling perspective. The total loss to airlines due to these 
inefficiencies is measured in billions of dollars [l]. 
The problem is expected to rapidly mushroom given the 
expected user demand for scheduled air service. The 
Advanced Air Traffic Technologies (AATT) Program has 
been instituted to develop new technologies that enable free- 
flight, an operating system in which pilots have the freedom 
to select their path and speed in real-time [2]. 
To implement free-flight, two applications are viewed as very 
important for the new aeronautical communications infra- 
structure: ADS-B will provide future surveillance capability, 
and Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC) 
will eliminate voice-only communications. 
The Intemet has been very successful in terms of providing 
self-healing global connectivity for heterogeneous communi- 
cations nodes. Engineers look favorably upon successfully 
working systems that have stood the test of time as founda- 
tions upon which to build new systems, which will hopefully 
enjoy equal success. Now we seek to have the convenience 
and connectivity ofthe Intemet in the aerospace environment. 
The idea is prevalent that with some minor modifications, we 
will have the Internet in the sky as well. However, currently 
engineers are very good at building terrestrial networks. The 
cost and complexity involved in implementing the aeronau- 
tical Intemet is staggering, and would slow its deployment. 
This paper pursues the idea of implementing that convenience 
and connectivity without the cost or complexity of extending 
the Intemet in an aerospace environment. In the simulations 
of this paper, realistic air-to-air, ground-to-air, and air-to- 
ground communications are achieved by assuming an effective, 
intact terrestrial network and by treating planes as traffic 
generators and sinks, in a manner analogous to the transparent 
usage of a traffic injector or “sniffer” in a network. Further, 
the idea of prioritized CSMA is introduced and successfully 
tested through simulation. Prioritized CSMA trades off the 
use of an additional radio frequency in order to implement 
efficient CSMA without collisions. The benefit gained of 
efficient, collision-less CSMA is that the inefficiencies intro- 
duced by wasted time division multiple access (TDMA) time 
slots may be avoided. 
‘U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. 
, 
3-1359 
2. SIMULATION Focus 
The primary focus of the simulations is to examine the 
behavior of air traffic control (ATC) communications and 
surveillance over VDL-2 in a realistic aviation scenario. Both 
weather and terrain were ignored, and the simulation assumes 
a perfectly spherical earth. Multipath communication is not 
implemented in this OPNET simulation so two nodes may 
communicate only when they are in line-of-sight. So extend- 
ing the range of ground stations by bouncing signals off of the 
ionosphere is not permitted here. The air traffic between only 
three cities was simulated to bound the scope ofthis six-month 
research project. As an excellent starting point for predicting 
gravitational effects, physicists model the earth as a point 
mass. An analogous approach is taken here. Since thie media 
access layer (MAC) layer is especially important in LANs, 
largely determining the limit of performance, heavy emphasis 
was placed upon the data link layer, VDL-2. Likewise, 
these simulations do not model the presentation, session, 
transport, or network layers, nor do they need to. Perhaps the 
most important use of these simulations is to test prioritized 
CSMA. 'The use of the simulations to test this new idea also 
enables us to study the upper bound for the performance of 
VDL-2 with the same given traffic. 
3. SIMULATION OVERVIEW 
As previously stated, the simulation involves 105 flights, 
35 ATC transceivers or ground stations, and 3 airports. The 
take off, arrival, and flight times for one day were €lased on 
real flight plans obtained from the airports. Instead ofactually 
modeling the fact that one plane may make several flights, a 
separate OPNET mobile airplane node is used for each flight. 
For reasons discussed later, CPDLC and ADS-B messages in 
these simulations have a 5,000 bit mean file size. CPDLC 
file sizes are chosen according to the normal distribution. 
CPDLC messages have a mean inter-arrival time of 6 min, 
according to the Poisson distribution. ADS-B messa,ges have 
a constant inter-arrival time of 1 sec. All CPDLC trans- 
ceivers operate at 136 MHz with a 10 KHz bandwidth. All 
ADS-B transceivers operate at 137 MHz with a 10 KHz 
bandwidth. 
Message Length 
Although 5,000 bit message lengths are somewhat excessive 
for CPDLC messages, they were chosen so that the effects of 
message collisions could be better studied given the unusually 
low amount of aeronautical communications traffic present in 
these necessarily bounded simulations. Given that ADS-B 
messages are meant to convey a coordinate triple of high 
precision numbers as a position and possibly up to 9 other 
coordinate triples for intent data, 5,000 bits may not be 
unrealistic for ADS-B message length. 
Ground Stations 
An interview with the FAA indicated that the maximum range 
of the Cleveland Hopkins air trafl'ic control tower is 
-20 miles. The ATC tower at Hopkinr; is -100 m in height. 
It is assumed for the simulation that typical VDL ground 
stations are no taller than 100 m. For a tower 100 m in height, 
the horizon is -22 miles away. Since they cannot be expected 
to see beyond the horizon, a spacing of 20 miles between 
ground stations is used in the simulation. 
Let d(X,Y) be the distance between X and Y. Then 
d(Detroit, Cincinnati) =256 miles, cl(Detroit, Cleveland) 
=168 miles, d(Cincinnati, Cleveland) =243 miles. In the 
simulation there are 13 (=256/20 mile) ground stations 
between Detroit and Cincinnati, and also between Cincinnati 
and Cleveland. There are 9 ground stations between Detroit 
and Cleveland. The presence of an additional ground station 
or air traffic control tower at each airport gives a total of 
38 ground stations. The ground stations are approximately 
equally spaced on the straight line joining each city. 
The ground stations are capable of detecting the presence of 
a plane iind only send CPDLC messages if there is a plane in 
range tal receive them. The ground stations are coordinated 
and produce no uplink interference. 
Details 
The Cleveland airport is initially stocked with 34 planes, 
which will take off for either Cincinnati or Detroit during the 
course alf the 24 hr simulation. Each ground station, including 
air traffic control towers, consists of a CPDLC transmission 
node, a receiver node and a later to be discussed connection 
transmitter (cnctrans) used to implement prioritized CSh4A. 
Each airplane has identical communications architecture 
except for the addition of an ADS-B receiver and transmitter. 
So ADS-B surveillance is simulatedl only for aircraft to 
aircraft. Likewise, CPDLC exists only between aircraft and 
ground stations. The ADS-B transmission node architecture 
is shown in Fig. 1. The CPDLC node architecture is not 
shown, lbut is identical except that no count processor module 
is preseint in it. 
gen Count 4-1 P-0 PLO 
Figure 1 .-ADS-B node architecture. 
3-1360 
In Fig. 1, “gen” is a clocked generator of packets. “Count” 
counts the total number of ADS-B packets generated in a 
short period. “ c l ”  is a queue to buffer the packets. “p-0” is 
a processor module which decides whether to leave the 
packets in the queue or to forward them on to the radio 
transmitter through pt-0. “IT-1” is a receiver of cnctrans 
packets, information from which p-0 uses for its decisions. 
Based on research, trapezoidal flight trajectories were used. 
A cruise altitude of 25,500 ft was used with an ascent rate of 
6.49 m/s. 
The histogram, in Fig. 2, of the number of planes in flight, as 
a fimction of simulation time is based on the actual data from 
the airports and is not an output of simulation. Simulation 
results will be compared with this histogram. 
t 
10 ! 
8 .  
61 
4 :  
n 
- 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 
Figure 2.-Planes-in-flight histogram. 
From the airport data, the average number of planes flying 
is 4.66806. So the expected number of CPDLC messages is 
4.66806 (1440/6) ~ 1 , 1 2 0 ,  where 1440 is the number of 
minutes in a day. The peak traffic is at (60 s/min) 
(1200 min) = 72,000 s or 20:OO (8 p.m.). 
4. CSMA DISCUSSION 
A single communications frequency is used for radio 
frequency conservation. Just as in CB radio, one party com- 
municates at a time. But as east coast truckers may talk to their 
east coast neighbors while west coast truckers may simulta- 
neously talk to their west coast neighbors-on the same 
frequency as their east coast counterparts-without 
interference, so in the simulations here, different line-of- 
sight groups can communicate on the same frequencies 
simultaneously without interference. 
CSMA is contention-based. All parties listen to the channel. 
When the channel is free, many parties contend for it until 
after a random back-off time. Eventually, one party gains 
control of the channel for uninterrupted usage. Because of 
the contention process, collisions can be inefficient. 
5. PRIORITIZED CSMA 
In prioritized CSMA, each communications party is assigned 
a priority for transmission, based on its need to transmit. 
In these simulations, the need to transmit is effectively 
measured by the length of a party’s or node’s transmitter 
queue, which is broadcast on a separate frequency to all 
neighboring nodes. In the event of a tie in transmitter queue 
lengths, the simulation kernel will arbitrarily choose one 
node to transmit; this occurrence is infrequent. When the 
channel is free, instead of a random back-off time elapsing 
before one node gains usage of the channel, in prioritized 
CSMA, the node with the next higher priority begins uninter- 
ruptedtransmission immediately in an orderly fashion, without 
contention. By choosing to study prioritized CSMA, we 
simultaneously accomplish two purposes. We can test this 
new idea and also obtain the upper bound for performance 
of VDL-2 with the given traffic of the simulation. 
Because of its random back-off time, VDL-2 should not 
perform as well as prioritized CSMA. 
Details 
As previously mentioned, both planes and ground stations 
include a cnctrans transmitter. This transmitter broadcasts 
cnctrans packets at regular intervals. In the simulations, the 
packets are of length zero and contain the unique source 
identification code (srcid) of the transmitting node. They also 
contain a time stamp and the queue length of that node. When 
a node receives a cnctrans packet, it updates an array of 
queue lengths from its neighbors. If a cnctrans packet has not 
been received from a node in At, it is assumed unreachable. 
When a node seizes the channel, all nodes wait until it is 
finished. Each node waits until the farthest neighbor ofthe last 
transmitting node has received the transmission. When the 
transmission is finished, the next node begins orderly trans- 
mission. The cnctrans packets do not collide since they are 
small and each node is assigned aunique phase lag with which 
to broadcast them. 
6. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
Results 
There were four simulation runs, which either used or did 
not use prioritized CSMA, and which either used transceivers 
and queues with data rates and service rates of 31.5 Kps 
or 1.544 Mbps: 
I: no CSMA, 31.5 Kbps, [3] 
11: no CSMA, 1.544 Mbps 
111: prioritized CSMA, 1.544 Mbps 
IV: prioritized CSMA, 3 1.5 Kbps. 
3-1361 
250 CPDLC transmitted packets 
1000 /- I 
1.75 - 
1.50 - 
1.25 - 
750 
500 
250 
0 
CPDLC received Dackets I 1250 
Figure 3 .4PDLC transmitted and received packets. 
CPDLC total queue lengt I 2.0 
1.7 
1.5 
1.2 
Figure 4.-Total queue length, Run U. 
The number of CPDLC messages received per transmitted 
for each of the Runs I to IV is respectively (1,067/1,077), 
(1,048/1,066), (1 059,1060), and (744,744). Plots of CPDLC 
transmitted and received packets for Run I are shown in 
Fig. 3. The other three plots are similar and have been 
suppressed since they convey no additional information. It 
seems impossible to determine the final number of packets 
transmitted and received from the plots. Therefore, the 
spreadsheet of their values was used to determine those final 
numbers. 
Only the runs using prioritized CSMA successfully transmit- 
ted all CPDLC packets without collisions. These results show 
that this implementation of the idea of prioritized, collision- 
less CSMA works. 
Figure 4 shows that an OPNET plot of ADS-B packets 
generated per time unit versus time is virtually identical in 
shape to Fig. 2. Since, in the simulations, a plane 'does not 
CPDLC total queuellength 
1.25. 
15.0 S-B total queue length 
12.5- 
Figure 5.-Total queue length, Run 11. 
CPDLC total queue length 
ADS-B total queue 15.0 
12.5 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24h 
Figure 6.Tota1 queue length, Run 111. 
Figure 7.-Total queue length, Run IV. 
3-1362 
Traffic sink 1. CPDLC end-to-end delay (sec) I 
8 
Traffic sink 1. CPDLC end-to-end.delay (sec) 
8 
Figure 8 .4PDLC and ADS-B ETE delay versus time for Runs I-IV. 
generate ADS-B packets until it takes off, the conformity of 
these plots shows that the ADS-B packet generators are 
fimctioning correctly and suggest that the copious take off 
and landing times were correctly input into the OPNET 
mobile nodes. In Figs. 4 to 7, plots of ADS-B queue lengths 
also exhibit this same conformity. The total queue length is 
the sum of the lengths of all CPDLC or ADS-B queues. 
Figure 8 shows plots of CPDLC and ADS-B end-to-end delay 
versus simulation time for Runs I to IV. Figure 9 shows plots 
of the time average of CPDLC and ADS-B end-to-end delay 
versus simulation time for Runs I to IV. 
3-1363 
Time average of traftic sink 1. Time average of traffic sink 1. 
5 CPDLC end-to-end delay (sec) 5 CPDLC end-to-end delay (sec) ' 
4 4- 
3 3- 
2 2- 
1 1- 
I 
Figure 9.-Time average of CPDLC and ADS-B ETE delay versus time for Runs I-IV. 
3-1364 
Analysis 
The excessive startup delays are accounted for by a transient 
glitch in the simulation. Runs 111 and IV show that as the data 
rate ofthe transceivers and service rate of the queues increase, 
prioritized CSMA works better. Also, the large spikes to- 
wards the end of the CPDLC plots-for all runs-suggest 
a problem with using the normal distribution with a small 
mean packet size. In that case, the distribution would be very 
skewed above the mean, resulting in a large number of 
packets of greater sizes towards the end of the simulations. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
One thing is obvious from a comparison of Runs I and TI 
with I11 and IV: prioritized CSMA works. Prioritized 
CSMA would serve the same purpose for aeronautical com- 
munications traffic as the traffic light would for automobile 
traffic-to prevent collisions. 
Although there was no bearing on this simulation, it appears 
as though the cnctrans packets may not contain enough 
information to determine priority. They should include a 
wait time so that a node is conferred a higher priority as 
it is delayed in transmission. 
In the event that it is critical to receivemessages without many 
retransmissions, prioritized CSMA may be very useful. 
Acknowledgements and retransmissions increase the 
amount of traffic, increasing the number of collisions and 
worsening communications throughput. 
It appears as though this method could be used to obtain an 
upper limit for the performance of CSMA or as justification 
for further research into the use of prioritized CSMA. Plans 
are underway to improve this simulation and to use it as the 
basis for future research. 
The simulation of communication was effected without the 
complexity involved in the aeronautical telecommunications 
network. Since planes merely need to access or “sniff’ data 
on the ATN, and also to inject data onto the ATN, the author 
believe that a custom solution for aeronautical communi- 
cations is more appropriate and effective than attempting to 
force the functionality of the Internet in an aviation 
scenario-potentially involving satellite communications 
with the concomitant delays involved. The problems 
involved with having mobile routing with periodic signaling 
or “hello” packets seem more difficult than to simply design 
ground stations of sufficient functionality and distribution. 
REFERENCES 
[l]  Final Report of RTCA Task Force 3 on Free Flight 
Implementation, October 26, 1995. 
[2] Tekla S. Perry, “In Search of the Future of Air Traffic 
Control,” IEEE Spectrum, August 1997. 
[3] Tekla S .  Perry, “Tracking Weather’s Flight Path,” IEEE 
Spectrum, September, 2000. 
’ 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I acknowledge Mr. Robert Kerczewski, Mr. Steven Mainger, 
Mr. Calvin Ramos, and other members of the Satellite 
Networks and Architectures Branch of the NASA Glenn 
Research Center for their technical assistance and help in 
providing the resources for this research. 
BIOGRAPHY 
Daryl C. Robinson received his BS in Mathematics from 
Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), MSEE from 
Cleveland State University, and is pursuing his Ph.D. in 
Computer Engineering from CWRU. Currently he is 
performing research for the AATT program. He has 
expertise in mathematical modeling and simulation and in his 
spare time enjoys reading and writing thoughtful literature. 
3-1365 
