Space Networking and Protocols for Planetary 
Exploration and Analog Planetary Sites 
Stephen P. Braham 
PolyLAB,TIME Centre 
Simon Fraser University at Harbour Centre 
515 West Hastings St. 
Vancouver, BC, Canada 
warp@!polvlab.sfkca 
Richard Alena, Bruce Gilbaugh, Brian Glass 
NASA Ames Research Center 
Moffett Field, CA 94035- 1000 
1 ral en a.bgilbaugh.bglass 1 @mail. arc .nasa. gov 
604-268-798 1 
Abstract-System flexibility and simplicity must be 
maximized for future human and robotic missions to Mars 
and other planets. A network deployed on the surface of 
another planet must interoperate with a space-based 
communication link and/or network, as well as the Earth- 
side networking segment. The operation of the space-based 
segment should be simple, but should be able to respond to 
environmental and system variations causing varying 
degradation of the link quality. 
An ongoing study into space and regional communication 
issues is taking place in the Canadian Arctic, at a prime 
Mars analog research field site. Preliminary results are 
demonstrating the needs for simplified operation of the 
space-based component, and a need to respond to 
ionospheric and tropospheric propagation variations. Such 
variations require fine control of the space-based segment, 
but also require network protocols and operational protocols 
that can maximize the science and other data uplink and 
downlink capacity of the complete integrated network 
system at any given moment of time. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. HAUGHTON-MARS ANALOG S m  
4. RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 
5. SPACE-BASED COMMUNICATION 
7. HUMANSINTHELOOP 
8. CIRCUIT-BASED COMMUNICATION 
9. THE APPLICATION LAYER 
3. EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY CONSTRAINTS 
6. QUAUTY OF SERVICE 
10. h A L O G  POSSIJ3LITES 
1 1. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS SUh4hMRY 
12. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Communications technology will be essential for the 
exploration of other planets. However, communications 
between instruments, robots, and eventually astronauts on 
the surface of a distant planet presents specific constraints 
that must be addressed by novel technical solutions. For 
instance, Mars presents varied terrain with substantial relief 
(craters, canyons, volcanoes, etc.), has no stable ionosphere 
to reliably support ground-based long-range wireless 
communications. The planet presents a hostile environment 
that requires high-speed video, audio and data 
communication to ensure safe robotic and human mission 
operations with the highest possible science return. In 
addition, the wide variation in expected communication 
performance, both for surface operations, and between Mars 
and Earth, leads to signifcant issues when it comes to 
protocol and operational networking standards. 
Project PlanetNet [ 13, a Canadian Space Agency-funded 
collaboration between NASA Ames Research Center, Simon 
Fraser University (SFU), and Canada's Communications 
Research Centre (CRC), is examining the development 
needs for communication technologies, both software and 
hardware, that will eventually enable the support of 
exploration missions to other planets, in particular to Mars. 
Advanced communications technology has already been 
experimentally deployed successfully during the 1999 and 
2000 field seasons of the NASA Haughton-Mars Project 
(HMP) [2], a Mars analog field research program focused on 
the Haughton impact crater site. The crater is located on 
Devon Island, Nunavut, in the Canadian High Arctic. During 
the 2000 field season of the HMP, the implementation of 
new concept studies and field trials of such exploration 
technologies strengthened the ongoing collaboration 
between NASA and Canadian research institutions and 
' Copyright 2001 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. No copyright is asserted in the United States under Title 17, US. Code. The U.S. 
Government has royalty-fiee license to exercise all rights under the copynght claimed herein for govemment purposes. All other rights are reserved by the 
copyright owner. 
3-1093 
industry. The Telematics Research Laboratory (TRL) at 
Simon Fraser University (SFU) worked with the SFU 
PolyLAE3 Advanced Collaborative Networking Laboratory 
to provide and manage space-based communkations, a 
regional radio-based networking solution, and infr. cistructure 
integration. 
2. HAUGHTON-MARS ANALOG SITE 
The NASA Haughton-Mars Project involves the detailed 
exploration of an extremely important Canadian scientific 
resource, namely the Haughton Crater site. The HMP is 
yielding significant new insights into the geology, 
environmental evolution, and possibly the biology of Mars, 
as well as into the natural history of the Canadian Aactic and 
the effects of impacts on Earth. Scientifically, the HMP 
addresses many themes central to Astrobiology. The HMP 
also includes studies of the technologies, strategies and 
logistics of field exploration itself, including issues of field 
instrumentation, transportation, communications, and team- 
based scientific research in a relatively hostile and isolated 
environment. This includes the operation of robotic elements 
in the field and their synergy with human exploration, 
especially with regards to communications. 
' 
The HMP is a NASA-led field research program (Principal 
Investigator Pascal Lee), dedicated to the stuey of the 
Haughton Crater and surroundings. The twenty-lulometer 
diameter crater was formed in an impact approximately 
twenty-three million years ago. Today, the region i s  a cold, 
polar desert, and thus presents a wide variety of geological 
features and biological attributes that may shed new insights 
into the nature and evolution of Mars. The scientific: study of 
the Haughton site provides a unique opportunity to also 
study the strategy, technologies, and human factors; relevant 
to planning the future exploration of Mars by ro,bots and 
humans. 
3. EXPLORATION TECHNOLOGY CONSTRAINTS 
SFU and NASA are investigating the use of both space- 
based and ground-based wireless networking in the 
exploration of the Haughton Crater site, both for this 
terrestrial site itself and as a concept for the future 
exploration of Mars. From the standpoint of 
communications, the topography at Haughton can be 
characterized as presenting an intricate network of hills and 
valleys, including vast tracks of inter-valley rocky plateau 
surfaces and deep canyon systems. The region experiences 
periods of extreme cold (- -5OOC in winter; -I 0°C in 
summer), and transportation of hardware systems across the 
region by all-terrain vehicles and autonomous robots inflicts 
high impact and vibration loads on electronic equipment. 
Furthermore, logistical support available at the site is 
limited, and the science and exploration research teams in 
the field are faced with the challenge of having to setup, 
configure, monitor, and maintain complex systems to ensure 
that high-quality science information is collected while 
coping with field survival and safe5 concerns. All these 
issues pose important constraints on the technologies that 
may be used in the field and make the site a useful 
preliminary paradigm for both overall lqgistics and 
communication problems on Mars. 
4. RADIO cOMMUNIC.4TIONS 
Digital radio communication systems are required because 
of the high data rate needed for communications with 
scientist:s in the field, as well as with robotics systems, 
ranging fiom audio and video to science data and control 
messages. These systems must operate at high frequencies to 
maintain correspondingly high bandwidth, arid thus are 
generally blocked by hills and canyoins, producing serious 
signal I&. The uncertain effects of the presence of 
subsurface ice (permafiost) might compound the situation. 
Furthermore, a rock-dominated landscape reflects radio 
waves in complex ways, causing interference between 
signals travelling along multiple paths. This multipathing is 
a serious problem at high data rates. These problems are 
significant both in the Arctic and on Mars. 
Fade at high-frequencies requires the deployment of radio 
repeater systems throughout the area, in particular on 
various high points with good line of sight to science 
research sites. These repeater systems must be monitored 
and maintained in the field, which poses important logistical 
constraints of relevance to future exploration missions to 
Mars. The HMP 1999 field season allowed NASA and SFU 
to test such repeater technologies, and to determine the basic 
problems with maintaining them, especially when it came to 
keeping the systems powered and responding to 
environment-generated transitory fault conditions. 
The HMP 2000 field season allowed us to move to 
constructing a full concept study based around solutions to 
these fade-induced problems. Solar power systems and 
advanced control and monitoring were studied to reduce the 
need for teams to visit the site of deployed repeater systems. 
Logistics were also studied for optimizing the ongoing 
positioxxing of repeaters to ensure that communications 
would constantly be available at active science research sites 
in future field seasons. The aim has been to ensure both the 
high quality of ongoing scientific study at this analogue 
Mars region in the long term, 2nd development of 
corresponding techniques for missions to Mars. 
Multipathing problems are presently the focus of a concept 
study into the use of wide-band orthogonal fiequency 
divisional multiplexing (W-OFDM) wireless networking 
technology. OFDM is becoming the standard global 
technology for wireless broadband, and the technology 
allows corrections to be made for multipath signaling, as 
well as high-noise environments. The superior multipath 
characteristics of W-OFDM facilitate the development of 
solutions that deliver between 20 and 155 Mbps. The 
technology is expected to perform well1 in canyon-dominated 
3-1094 
terrains, such as those found on Mars, in which multipathing 
is a serious issue. Tests of this technology are presently 
taking place in the SFU wireless testbed, networking across 
the Vancouver region, and at selected locations within 
British Columbia's mountainous terrain that present similar 
challenges to Haughton Crater. Such robust communications 
will be essential when it comes time to deploy interacting 
communities of robots within a region on a planetary body, 
without the high power needs, and extreme latency 
problems, of geosynchronous orbital space communications. 
5. SPACE-BASED COMMUNICATION 
Space-based communication links will be flexible for any 
human mission to Mars, and increased flexibility will greatly 
increase the scientific return fiom robotic missions to Mars. 
Space communication at HMP 1999 used the NASA 
Advanced Communication Test Satellite (ACTS), in a 
collaboration with NASA Ames Research Center, NASA 
Glenn Research Center, US Air Force Rome Laboratories, 
SFU, and CRC. ACTS allowed the study of steerable spot- 
beam technology, in which a beam fiom a Ka-band steerable 
antenna mounted on the spacecraft was directed directly 
onto a small region around the HMlp 1999 Field Site. The 
greatly enhanced effective radiated power (ERP), due to the 
dedication of the space-based antenna, allowed the use of a 
small CRC-developed satellite communications terminal. 
The small size of the ACTS spacecraft, and the extremely 
small size of the ground equipment, represents a good 
analog of the spacecraft and ground systems that one can 
imagine being deployed in Mars stationary orbit. Such 
spacecraft would be available to provide a communications 
relay from a Mars exploration field site to Earth mission 
command and control facilities. 
Space communication in both the HMP 1999 and 2000 field 
seasons used the Canadian Anik El  satellite operating in the 
C band to achieve high data rates into the crater region. This 
allowed the study of space-based communication at the 
extremes of the signal margins typically used for commercial 
deployment, and generated a lot of important information for 
Arctic users of these technologies. In the field and planetary 
exploration context, the system was fully integrated into the 
networks used in the base camp, and the radio systems used 
to signal across the Haughton Crater site. Furthermore, due 
to topographical difficulties, the C-band satellite terminal 
system was not directly connected to the base network in the 
HMP 2000 field season, but relied on high-speed radio 
communications from an exposed, rugged, Mars-like test 
site to the less exposed base camp via the SFU-led 
CraterNet regional broadband data network. CraterNet is 
comprised of a a high-speed regional radio network 
presently using Multicode Direct Sequence Spread- 
Spectrum (MC-DSSS) technology. The terminal end of the 
space-based link was located at CRC in Ottawa, using a 9m 
C-band dish, and placed the entire crater network onto the 
Internet. CRC provided expertise in link budget calculation 
for the space-based segment, as well as systems for 
collecting performance data fiom the link. 
The space-based segment was pushed to increasingly higher 
data rates to allow for a determination of the maximum 
performance, in terms of speed and other essential link 
quality of service (QoS) parameters. HMP 1999 Field 
season results drove HMP 2000 Anik El  spacecraft power 
reservation requests. HMP 2000 has provided data that will 
allow the HMP team to decide on the desired QoS levels for 
HMP 2001. 
It should be stressed that the space segment can be, and is, 
driven outside conventional commercial QoS parameters 
(which were primarily used for C-band communication in 
the HMP 1999 season) to increasingly approximate QoS 
levels and issues involved in human and robotic missions to 
other planets. QoS levels for Earth-based exploration may 
also not be those used for conventional commercial quality 
linkS. 
6. QUALITY OF SERVICE 
A primary operational factor in the engineering of any 
communication link is the required QoS level. Four primary 
factors are important for mission-critical operations: 
0 Bandwidth 
NetworkLag 
0 Bit-Error Rate 
0 Link Availability 
Bandwidth 
Bandwidth determines the amount and form of data that may 
be delivered or returned for an exploration field site, 
whether it is located on Earth, or on another planet such as 
Mars. A low-bandwidth link generally requires lower power, 
and may be suitable for telemetry requirements. A high- 
bandwidth link, however, will be required when live video 
and large amounts of imaging data must be returned from 
the field site. High-bandwidth links are also required on the 
uplink (Earth to Mars, for instance) segment, in the special 
case of human missions, due to the need to uplink major 
Telelearning resources, large-scale software updates, video 
conferencing, and other human to human (H2H) resources. 
ERP requirements for links are roughly proportional to 
bandwidth, both over space-based and land-based 
communications l i s .  
Network Lag 
The lag present in a communications link determines how it 
may be used in human and robotic missions, and the 
communications protocols that may be used in the network 
layer. In a protocol, such as the Transmission Control 
Protocol (TCP) for the Internet Protocol (E), that requires 
- 3-1095 
active acknowledgement of received data, for error- 
correction activities, the maximum usable bandwid.th, B, is 
determined by the maximum data that may be buffered over 
the link. B is. given by 
where W is the the maximum data that may be buffered, and 
D is the return lag time of the link. For local radio l:inks, this 
does not present any major problems. However, for links 
from the surface to stationary orbiting spacecraft, and for 
between planets, this is a significant issue. 
The use of one-way broadcast protocols, such as the: IP User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) or the Space Communications 
Protocol Standards (SCPS) [3], allows for sigruficantly 
higher data rates, but removes the ability for network link- 
level error correction. 
In surface to orbit communications, of the kind that may be 
used to extend communications across a large region on 
Mars, high buffering of data is feasible for accomplishing 
high data rates. The HMP 2000 Field Season used tuned 
TCP/IP stacks with large buffering levels (window sizes) 
and other TCP extensions to allow maximum bandwidth 
usage at link speeds. Such solutions are well known in the 
satellite communications industry, and may be used to 
achieve data rates significantly above 1 Mbps [4]. 
Interplane- communications require sigruficantly 
different solutions. With network delays reaching up to forty 
minutes for an Earth-Mars link, a 1 Mbps link can require in 
excess of thirty megabytes of buffering at each end of the 
link, per open connection, for full error correction, as can be 
seen from Equation (1). 
In reality, forward error correction (FEC) is used to greatly 
reduce the probability for error recovery using two-way 
communication. In such systems, the data is redundantly 
encoded to allow its recovery from corrupted packets on 
arrival. This trades bandwidth for reduced error rate, but 
allows relevant network protocols to use the link efficiently. 
Such protocols are broadcast based, and may use 8 method 
to request new copies of corrupted data. An example of such 
protocols is the US Navy-developed Multicast 
Dissemination Protocol, version 2 (MDPv2), [5 ]  protocol, 
which provides for reliable multicast distribution of data 
over a UDP-based link. MDPv2 supports file transmission 
over wired, wireless, and large-delay satellite networks, 
using reliable multicasting and many advanced multicast 
protocol technologies. 
The highly interactive requirements of human missions will 
generally require significant operational arid protocol 
solutions to ensure efficient use of communications 
resources. In these missions, high errar rates miiy be traded 
for prompt delivery of information, instead of waiting for 
completion of many acknowledgement and correction 
cycles. 
Robotic missions will generally require low error-rates, and 
may well need less prompt information delivery. Thus 
different protocols will be relevanl. Thus solutions in 
development for robotic missions may well not scale or 
extend well to human missions. In particular, humans on a 
planetary exploration mission will he, by the nature of 
expeditions, in close collaborative conununication with their 
mission control, and an intrinsic part (of the communication 
loop. They will respond in a dynamic and interactive fashion 
to delayed or corrupted data, in a way that will generally not 
apply to robotic exploration elements. 
Bit-Error Rate 
Bit-Error Rate (BER) is an important factor to consider in 
required link parameters. Local radio links can use two-way 
protocols to correct transmission errors. However, in space- 
based links, both surface to orbital, and interplanetary, the 
requirements to correct errors can cause si@icant 
problems, given network lag, as explained in the previous 
section. A low BER can be achieved at the expense of 
bandwidth, and link availability. However, low BER may 
not be needed, or may not be appropriate, for certain 
situations. For instance, frequently broadcast data, such as 
housekeqing telemetry, or even audio) and video, can often 
be broadcast at a high error rate. This is especially important 
in H2H situations, where the continuous availability of the 
data, and hence the communications link, is more important 
than loss of occasional single telemetry or video fiames. 
Reduction of the strength of FEC can decrease the raw 
bandwidth (symbols per second traramitted) required to 
implement a specific data bandwidth (data bits per second 
transmitted), due to reduction of the amount of redundant 
information. This can increase BER, but can save power 
needed in orbit, on the surface vehicles and robots, and, in 
the case of humans, on the spacesuit. 
The encoding used in the C-band link, during HMP 2000, 
has been varied to implement a 512 Kbps link using the 
same s p a c e d  resources as an original 384 Kbps link. 
BER was increased, but was still usable for surface-orbital 
communications, given the use of TCP/IP as a self- 
correcting protocol. UDP-based conlmunication was also 
used, and video delivered at reasonable quality. The latter 
would be appropriate for an interplanetary link. 
Multiple protocols are presently under investigation at HMP 
for dealing with network lag issues. 
3-1096 
Link Availability 
The single most important link QoS parameter may be link 
availability, when regarded from an operational point of 
view. Link availability is simply the probability that the link 
is able to pass data at any given time. 
All communication links vary in performance versus time. 
The received signal strength (RSSI) of a link can vary 
widely. In space communications, particularly Arctic 
communications, scattering and refraction of the radio 
signals as they pass through the ionosphere and troposphere 
respectively, can produce constantly changing RSSI. 
Temperature variation of electronics, a problem on Mars 
and in orbital communications relays, can also cause 
significant change in received power and BER. Thirdly, the 
Arctic location of the field site results in a situation in which 
Anik El and ACTS are located close to the horizon. Thus 
receiving terminals also receive significant earth thermal 
interference (ETI) in the C and Ka bands. The variation in 
ground temperature present at the site can cause varying 
induced. The latter arises from refraction of signals via 
density changes in the atmosphere close to the surface. In 
Arctic conditions, the variations can be extreme, especially 
during temperature inversions over Arctic desert regions. 
One of the Authors (SB) is currently investigating similar 
issues on Mars via the study of Mars Global Surveyor 
spacecraft radio occultation data. 
Significant decrease in RSSI can lower the signal to noise 
ratio to the point at which the communication system loses 
synchronous clock “lock” and the link fails. 
Failure of a link is a serious problem, both for 
communication with a remotely controlled robot, and for the 
monitoring of the health and status of humans and their 
support systems on another planet, and during an Earth- 
based exploration activity. 
The level of link availability has a significant effect on the 
protocols and software used for exploration. Low link 
availability requires that high-importance data be 
Bandwidth vs. Availability 
+0.55dB I+::: I 
1100 
lo00 
900 
800 a 
Y 
700 
U 
2 
2 
2 6M) 
x’ 
5M) 
400 
300 
200 
50 55 60 65 70 75 80 65 90 95 100 
Link Availability (36) 
Figure 1 - Bandwidth vs. Availability, Space Link, Sequential 314 encoding 
ETI, and hence varying signal to noise ratios. retransmitted when the link becomes available, or is 
redirected over high availability, potentially low- 
Radio communications on the planetary surface can also be performance, systems. 
highly effected, both by easily predictable problems like 
free-path loss, and by less predictable ones. Less predictable We can see how link variation effects link availability by 
effects are both topographically induced, as in blockage and looking at Figure 1. Predictions of the expected m a x i ”  
Fresnel clearance problems, and troposphere-variation bandwidth available on the link vs. required link availability 
2-1 n97 
are plotted, for different RSSI standard deviations, for the 
Sequential 3/4 FEC encoding used during the latter part of 
the HMP 2000 field season. The 0.55 dB curve represents 
the measured RSSI deviation during a twelve hour period 
during HMI? 2000, over the C-band h i k  El  
communications link. It can be seen that requiring high 
availability of the link would decrease available bandwidth. 
However, there were periods of extremely high RSSI 
deviation experienced during HMP 2000. For instance, an 
extreme solar proton event (a solar flare) that occurred 
during the season was observed to result in significant link 
variation. The 1 dB and 2 dB deviation curves indicate the 
effect such higher variations would induce. 
It should be noted that Figure 1 represents a rather simplistic 
concept of link availability, in the sense that the number 
quoted purely represents the probability of the link 
transmitting packets at any given time. In reality, it would be 
desired that the link be available at a given bandwidth for a 
certain minimum time period. This amount of time would 
depend on the protocol operating over the link, and the 
actual operational needs of the software being used over the 
link. If the required link availability time is large, the 
available bandwidth will be small. 
The FEC encoding used also determines the QoS ofthe link, 
including link availability that may be obtained. Figure 2 
demonstrates how changing fkom a Sequential 112 encoding 
mechanism to a Sequential 314 encoding mechanism (in both 
cases using Reed-Solomon outer encoding) for the 
communications link changed bandwidth vs. availability 
performance under Arctic operational conditions. The figure 
represents the predicted performance for the measured 0.55 
db variaition measured in the latter part of the HMP 2000 
field season. The change in availability QoS is quite small, 
but resulted in increased bandwidth (‘512 Kbps instead of 
384 Kbps) using slightly reduced spacecraft resources. The 
Sequential 112-encoded 384 Kbps link required the 
transmission of 823 Ksps (kilo symbols per second), 
whereas the Sequential 314-encoded 5 12 Kbps link required 
the transmission of 731 Ups. However, the trade-off 
required here was that the BER of the second link was 
approximately four times the BER of the original link, due 
to the less redundant encoding used. I f  it was required that 
the link deliver the same BER, availability would have been 
significantly reduced. 
This tradeoff is even more dramatic in the case of surface- 
based radio links integrated into the space networking 
infrastructure. In this case, large variations in RSSI are 
possible, with the deviation fkom simple fkee path loss 
increasing with distance, as Rayleigh scattering (probably 
dominant at large distances on Mars, due to the size of the 
clasts located on top of the regolith), tropospheric distortion, 
and topographic blockage increase. BER can also 
significantly increase as multipathing-induced corruption 
adds to h e  fade-inducing effects. Thus highly available links 
may require very low bandwidth, high ERP, or may not even 
be possible. 
Bandwidth vs. Availability 
1150 
1100 
1050 
1000 
2 
d 
B 
a 
Y 950 - 
3 900 
850 
800 
750 
700 
55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 
Availability (%) 
Figure 2 - Effect of encoding on availability 
3-1098 
7. HUMANS INTHE LOOP 
The effects of humans on both sides of an H2H application 
should not be ignored. Given the desired communication 
desired, a trade-off can be made between ERP, BER, and 
availability, as well as the time to total delivery of a 
complete error-free package of information, in the case of 
two-way correction of data. Loss of link may be repaired at 
both ends of the link, without the need to use slow 
negotiation links. In particular, the general QoS parameters 
of the link may be chosen to match the situation on an 
ongoing basis. 
Humans will make constant decisions on the desired QoS 
levels of the various communication links desired in the 
field, and both the crew on Mars (for instance) and the 
mission controllers on Earth will work on implementing 
those decisions. There must be a set of protocols 
implemented in the integrated communication system to 
allow modification of the system operating parameters from 
all locations at all times, to maximize flexibility as well as 
allow for emergency reconfiguration. 
The HMP 2000 field season utilized remote control and 
monitoring of the satellite communication modem used to 
communicate over the Anik El  link, from both the CRC 
(Ottawa) end, and from the Base Camp, via the CraterNet 
radio link. 
Many of the requirements of a human mission can be met by 
one-way broadcast of data, including housekeeping 
telemetry and video and audio data. Such transmission is 
easily possible using "unreliable" transmission protocols 
such as SCSP or UDP. Transmission of critical information, 
however, is a more complicated issue. 
Low Time-Priority 
Low time priority information, that remains critical, can be 
delivered via network protocols that ensure that information 
is repeated until it is verified that the information has arrived 
at destination, or the trmfer is cancelled. Such protocols 
are, by their nature, two-way communications, and are thus 
subject to the lag present in the communication links. For 
communication between EVA teams and a landed 
spacecraft, or traverse teams and a base camp (in the 
terrestrial case), TCPm is quite functional, as long as 
appropriate buffer sizes are used, in the case of surface- 
orbital communications. For interplanetary communication, 
however, more advanced protocols are possibly needed. 
Protocols such as MDPvZ, which can be used to constantly 
transmit a (potentially multicasted) package of information 
via UDP protocols, can be used in this case. The 
Interplanetary Internet Protocol (IPN) [6] may also be useful 
for this modality. However, a high BER link wil still require 
many transmissions of a given piece of data before a 
completely non-corrupted form is available, delaying the 
completion of the data transmission. For low time-priority 
information, this may be acceptable. 
High Time-Priority 
For a high time-priority link, TCP/IP may still be functional 
for surface operations. However, interplanetary 
communication of critical high time-priority information is 
problematic. Though the above protocols (MDPv2, IPN) 
may be useful, they will need to be supplemented by a 
correct choice of the QoS parameters of the link. It may well 
be desirable to decrease bandwidth, and hence increase 
availability and decrease BER, to ensure that the 
information can be delivered in a timely fashion. This is 
especially crucial when the transmission time of the data is 
significantly less than the interplanetary network delay. In 
the latter case, it is important not to use up time in multiple 
retransmissions. Also, identification of the failure point of 
the integrated link is important. If the information is from 
Earth to Mars, and eventually gets delivered to a long range 
crewed rover, for instance, it may well be true that the 
information is primarily lost in communication from Mars 
orbit, or the landed spacecraft, to the rover. Given the 
potential low-availability of a communication link on the 
Martian surface, this could be a significant problem. Thus 
buffering at a location with a small lag time to the rover will 
be important. The application level of the communications 
link will be needed to determine how this happens. For 
instance, TCPm communication could be used from Earth 
to Martian,orbit (or to the landed spacecraft), followed by 
secondary transmission by application software to the rover. 
Thus the application and communications architecture will 
also determine the protocols and QoS parameters that may 
be appropriate. 
Broadcmt 
It should be noted that the importance of broadcast protocols 
must not be undervalued for human missions. Humans 
communicate daily via high BER links, be they bad 
telephone lines, noisy video, or other technologies. Such 
communication links are especially important during 
emergencies. They will be equally important during a human 
mission to another planet, or even during the exploration of 
a field site on Earth. Thus package-based protocols, both 
operational and network, in which a large piece of data is 
transmitted, will not meet the essential needs of a human 
mission. UDP and SCPS can meet these needs. 
8. CIRCUIT-BASED COMMUNICATION 
So far we have considered circuit-less protocols, in the sense 
that the communication is based on Internet-type protocols 
that use end-to-end verification, or lack of such verification, 
to provide network service at a given total QoS. For 
instance, in TCP/IP, acknowledgement packets are sent back 
as information arrives. In UDP, no acknowledgement is sent 
back. These protocols essentially ignore the characteristics 
of each stage of the communication link, and concentrate on 
3-1099 
the performance of the complete, end-to-end, link. Given 
that the communication required in human missions can be 
broken down into various communication links with varying 
QoS, especially availability, it is important to consider 
protocols that can handle the requirements of 
communication on a link by link basis. 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) [7] is a protocol based 
on fixed-sized data cells that can be statistically predicted to 
control routing and switching to maintain a given (20s over 
an end-to-end link. Telecommunication companies 
delivering primary backbone connectivity, both telephone 
and data, throughout the world use it as the primary 
communication method. ATM functions by tagging cells 
passing through the network according to their path, instead 
of their source and destination. The communication is set up 
as an end-to-end circuit, with a given QoS. Cells are then 
transmitted efficiently depending on their QoS nee'ds. ATM 
communication thus allows cells to move along appropriate 
communication links. 
ATM is used by US and European military forces to ensure 
that emergency QoS, video and audio needs, and general 
data transmission requirements are dealt with in an 
automatic and efficient fashion. TCP/IP and UDP can be 
transmitted over ATM via a number of standards, and there 
is no inherent reason why SCPS or IPN could not also be 
transmitted via similar standards. 
ATM over satellite links is an increasingly important 
protocol, and the next generation of surface-based wireless 
systems will support ATM as well as TCPm over high- 
speed links. Fourth generation (4G) wireless technologies 
be expected to reach 155 Mbps soon. An ATM 
infkastructure on Mars, and between Earth and Mars, could 
automatically handle the routing of information depending 
on QoS requirements, with those requirements being 
selected by humans, or automatically. 
S U C ~  as W-OFDM can support upwards of 30 Mbp~, and can 
9. THE APPLICATION LAYER 
The application layer should not be forgotten when it comes 
to network-based communications in an Earth or space 
exploration environment. It is the applications that define 
the appropriate protocols and required QoS. 
The application is twinned with how the application is used 
in the operational environment. For instance, IPN deals with 
package data transfer over an interplanetary network link. 
However, such a function can also be implemented via a 
protocol like MDPv2 running over an off-the-shelf standard 
UDP-based link, with appropriate file management software. 
The decision between which to use should be based on how 
the files will be transferred and used, including reception or 
transmission at the mission control facility, and reception or 
transmission at the exploration site. 
Application level decisions, and the corresponding protocol 
and QoS decisions need to be made in parallel with 
decisions on desired scaling and extension characteristics. If' 
Just-in-Time extension is needed, it its important to follow 
standardls. For instance, PolyLAB is working on XML 
Standards for data transfer and manipulation, to increase the 
flexibility of the mission control-side data routing and 
handling in expedition situations. These standards allow 
easy extension to emerging technologies, and PolyLAB has 
implemented such features as voice iniput and output, as well 
as Wireless Web access to data in thla laboratory. Software 
agents may also be integrated into luture application and 
commurucations command and control infrastnicture to aid 
decisions on space-based and wireless network usage in the 
field setting. 
Videocainferencing and other collaborative software can use 
broadcast-based and event-oriented protocols instead of bi- 
directional protocols, to allow the use of correspondingly 
broadcast-oriented protocols at the network layer. 
The application layer thus can be used to mitigate network 
protocol problems, and can also be used to increase the 
probability that the network remains robust while 
maintaining maximum flexibility ant1 interoperability with 
commercial off-the-shelf systems. 
10. A N L O G  POSSIBlLITES 
Analog sites such as HMP offer compelling situations in 
which to test many of the issues discussed. The surface 
communications and surface-orbiital communications 
systems can be tested directly, all the: way from the landed 
spacecraft modalities to the rover and even spacesuited EVA 
team modalities. 
An exploration region such as the Haiighton Crater, through 
the constraints discussed before, will require many radio 
repeaters to ensure adequate availability of conlmunications 
resources. Steerable beam technology, used fiom orbiting 
platforms such as ACTS, can be used to extend networking 
to rovers and remote camps throughout the exploration 
region. 
The resulting mesh of systems, from surface links, through 
to satellite cpmmunications, must be integrated and routed 
correctly. Systems must balance quality of service with raw 
performance. 
It is tougher to simulate the interplanetary link in such a 
situation. Systems will be required that provide appropriate 
buffering for network delay, simulati.on of BE& and QoS 
variations. However, operational constraints can be 
combined with high BER links to simulate many of the 
effects of highly delayed communications. Data package 
delivery s o h a r e  can have built-in ccm"mcations delays, 
and can be forced to request delivery of corrupted data after 
the requisite period. 
Other analogs can also serve to help us investigate highly 
asynchronous information delivery in the space 
environment. One excellent model is the early 
communications phase of the Intemational Space Station 
(ISS). ISS can only communicate with Rossiyacosmos 
(Russian Space Agency) ground stations for a short period 
every ninety minutes. Thus many large pieces of information 
communicated via that route will need to be repeated often if 
lost in transmission. The effects on operational logistics can 
be observed. Long-term operation of ISS will use 
increasingly complex network infrastructure, and choices 
will need to be made on how to optimize the 
communications system that supports that infrastructure. In 
this sense, ISS can serve as an excellent analog and stepping 
stone to Mars. 
1 1. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS SUMMARY 
An analysis of the collected data for the space and radio 
links used in the HMP 1999 and 2000 field seasons is still 
on-going. However, to summarize the results so far: 
Mavimum Bandwidth 
A bandwidth of 5 12 Kbps has been reached with the C-band 
link through the Anik El  satellite, from the HMP field site. 
Margins for the Sequential 314 encoded links imply that a 
data rate in excess of 1 Mbps can be reached at marginal 
availability levels, and with reasonable BER, without a 
major increase in utilized spacecraft resources. 768 Kbps 
may be reached with no increase in utilized spacecraft 
resources, and . reasonable availability levels, by further 
decreasing the strength of the FEC encoding to Sequential 
7/8. HMP field expedition team members should be able to 
manage the link bandwidth to ensure adequate availability. 
Bit-Error Rate 
The use of reduced levels of FEC produces increasingly 
high BER Future experiments will determine when the 
tradeoff becomes problematic for robotic operations and 
human operations in the field expedition environment. 
Higher than usual BER did not produce any significant 
problems in the use of TCPAP or UDP over the 
geostationary space-based segment integrated with the 
wireless networking links, but could be expected to have an 
effect on interplanetary links. 
12. CONCLUSIONS 
The HMp offers the opportunity to investigate many issues 
pertaining to human and robotic communications needs for 
the exploration of other planets in our solar system. These 
needs are quite wide-ranging, and can vary dramatically 
depending on whether the mission is a human or robotic one. 
Network protocols and communication infYastructure and 
performance for robotic missions are probably not 
appropriate to human missions. Many quality of service 
issues need to be addressed, both from the network protocol 
and missions operations points of view. Hh4P is generating a 
significant amount of interesting data is this area, and can be 
expected to make an important contribution to concept 
studies for future missions to Mars and the Moon. 
REFERENCES 
111 PlanetNet Project Site, . URL 
httv://polvlab. sfu.ca/s~acesystenis/vlanemet/. 
[2] Stephen Braham, Peter Anderson, Pascal Lee, Richard 
Alena, Brian Glass, “Canada and Analogue Sites for Mars 
Exploratioii,” Proceedings of the Second Canadian Space 
Exploration Workshop, 1999. 
[3] “Space Communications Protocol Spe~itication,’~ 
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, CCSDS- 
713.0-B-I. 
[4] M. Allman, D. Glover, and L. Sanchez, “Enhancing TCP 
over Satellite Channels using Standard Mechanisms,” 
Intemet Engineering Task Force RFC 2488, Janwy 1999. 
[5 ]  Multicast Dissemination Protocol Version 2, URL 
htCp://manimac.itd.nrl.mil/MDP/. 
[6] Interplanetary Internet Site, URL htCp:/l~~~.iDnsig.org/. 
[7] ATM Forum Site, URL http:i/www.atmforum.com/. 
[SI R Alena, E. Yaprak, S. Lamouri (1999), Modeling A 
Wireless Network For Intemational Space Station, EEE 
Aerospace Conference. 
191 R Alena (1996), Wireless Network Experiment - Risk 
Mitigation Experiment 1306, report on STS-74176-Mir20 
experiment for the Phase One International Space Station 
Program. 
Stephen Braham is an Adjunct 
Professor of Communication, and the 
Director of the PolyLAB Advanced 
Collaborative Networking Laboratory 
at Simon Fraser University. Steve 
was instrumental in setting up the 
space-based and medium-range 
communications network for the 1999 
and 2000Jeld seasons of the Haughton-Mars Project. He 
also participated in space-based and wireless networked 
communication of physiological data obtained JLom 
climbers on Mt. McKinley, AK, in May 2000, with a team 
_f;.om the Environmental and Aerospace Physiology 
laboratory at SFU. Steve is an experienced theoretical 
astrophysicist, and has become a specialist in the neea3 of 
3-1101 
advanced scienti$c communication and exploration. Steve is 
also a co-founder and current President of the North 
American OpenMath Initiative (NAOMI). NAOMI is a 
collaboration between North American universities and 
industry to build a standard for communicating complex 
scientijk data that includes crucial mathematical 
information. 
Richard Alena is a Computer 
Engineer and the Group Lead 
for the Intelligent Mobile 
Technologies (IMT,) Lab and the 
Mobile Exploration System 
testbed at NASA Ames Research 
Center. The IMT team integrates 
mobile hardware and sofiware 
components into unique systems 
supporting human performance for flight and payload 
operations aboard spacecra3. He was principal investigator 
for the Wireless Network Experiment jlown aboard Shuttle 
and Mir, technology later adopted by the Inte.rnationa1 
Space Station Program. Rick spent three summers in the 
Canadian Arctic developing mobile technologies ftw human 
planetary exploration. He has a MSEE&CSJi.om University 
of California, Berkeley. 
Bruce Gilbaugh is a member 
of the Intelligent Mobile 
Technologies (IMT,) Group 
working on the Mobile 
Exploration System (m 
project at NASA Ames 
Research Center. He designed 
the regional wireless network - -  
radio conJguration and the 
hardware mounting and power implementation on the All- 
Terrain- Vehicle for MEX testing during Haughton Mars 
Project 2000. He hola3 an AS in RF Communications 
Systems and Computer Networks, a BS in Injbrmation 
System Management Ji.om the University of San Francisco 
and is currently working on an MS in Telecommunications 
Management at Golden Gate University. 
Brian Glass has been on the 
stafs of NASA-Ames Research 
Center since 1987. He has led 
projects in automated reasoning 
for Space Station and SETI 
health management), surface air 
traflc control (the Surface 
Movement Advisor, for which he 
shares a patent), and research 
groups in intelligent, adaptive 
control systems. In addition to 
his education and interests in engineering and computer 
science, he acquired an additional graduate degree in 
geophysics in 1992 focused on morphological models of 
scarplike landforms. Brian is currently responsible for 
~ 
7-1 1 n:! 
information and automation technologies in .the Human 
Exploration OBce and works closely with the Center ,for 
Mars Exploration. Over the past two summers, Brian has 
conducttdJeld experiments at terrestrial analog sites in the 
Arctic to test human-centered computing concepts for future 
Mars geological exploration. 
