The Antarctic Ice Borehole Probe 
Albert0 Behar Frank Carsey, Arthur Lane H e r ”  Engelhardt 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technology 
Avionic Systems and Technology Div. 
107-102, Pasadena, CA 91 109-8099 
Earth & Space Science Division 
300-323, Pasadena, CA 91 109-8099 
Geological and Planetary Sciences Div. 
100-23, Pasadena, CA 91125 
81 8-354-4417 818-354-8163,818-354-2725 626-395-3720 
Alberto.Behar@jpl.nasa.gov fcarsey@jpl.nasa.gov engel@caltech.edu 
arthur.l.lane@jpl.nasa.gov 
Abstract-The Antarctic Ice Borehole Probe mission is a 
glaciological investigation, scheduled for November 2000- 
January 200 1, that will acquire visible-light images and 
video in a hot-water drilled hole in the West Antarctic ice 
sheet. The objectives of the probe are to observe ice-bed 
interactions with a downward looking camera, and ice 
inclusions and structure, including hypothesized ice 
accretion, with a side-looking camera. The Probe mission 
also serves as a stepping-stone in the development of 
technology to acquire data in extreme ice and liquid 
environments. The information and experience will aid 
projects involving exploration in ice/liquid environments, 
including missions to Lake Vostok in Antarctica, Mars 
Polar Caps and Europa, Jupiter’s moon. This focus of this 
paper is to describe the design and use of the probe. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. PROBE DESIGN 
3. PROBE DEPLOYMENT 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
6. REFERENCES 
7. BIOGRAPHIES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The basal regime of ice sheets and glaciers is of increasing 
interest. This interest stems from a new appreciation of the 
role of the rock-ice-water system processes of the subglacial 
in the dynamics of ice sheets [l], the response of (even quite 
large) ice masses to climate change, and the creation of 
habitat for a community of chemotrophic microbes thought 
to contribute to local biogeochemical weathering [2]. 
Observational work [3] in the basal regime is challenging: 
the pressures are high, access is difficult, removal of ice 
samples is cumbersome because the warm ice is not 
competent, and the process of drilling into the ice alters the 
environment of interest. In the study for which the Ice 
Borehole Probe has been designed we address these issues 
through development of an in situ deployment strategy 
which acquires a video record of the ice sheet adjacent to a 
hot-water drilled hole. The drilling process has not 
significantly affected this ice, either chemically or 
physically, and considerable information about it can be 
derived from other optical probes, e.g., Raman and 
fluorescent spectrometers, to be developed in future. 
Additionally, the probe will collect the first visual data set 
on the interaction of an ice sheet with its bed, in this case a 
mix of wet and frozen material, probably sedimentary in 
origin. This unique inspection of a fundamental geological 
process is of great interest. Clearly the system-level 
requirements on a subglacial probe are significant in all 
areas, including general robustness, high data rates, high 
pressure, lighting, tether management, and the like. This is 
the first time that all these matters have been considered in 
this sort of probe. 
To address some of these issues, the Antarctic Ice Borehole 
Camera mission is to be conducted in the 2000-2001 
Antarctic field season (November 2000-January 2001), in 
collaboration with ice stream basal process studies 
conducted by scientists fkom the California Institute of 
Technology. The system designed and built for the mission 
is simply called the Probe hereafter; its design and 
implementation was funded by NASA Earth Sciences 
Enterprise, and its deployment was funded by the Office of 
Polar Program of the National Science Foundation. The 
mission study has scientific objectives of obtaining data on 
ice stream-bed interactions, on the mineralogical material in 
the basal ice, and on ice structure in the lower ice sheet, 
with emphasis on observations of hypothesized accreted ice 
in areas of the ice streams known as “sticky spots.” These 
scientific objectives have resulted in observational 
objectives to acquire video images with a downward- 
looking camera and sequential digital still images with a 
side-looking camera, with the attendant requirement to 
provide illumination for both geometries. 
The development, test and deployment of the Probe to meet 
these requirements also serves to develop the technology for 
acquisition of optical data in remote, high-pressure, liquid 
and ice environments. The experience and information will 
be of value in future terrestrial and planetary projects, 
including missions to sub-glacial lakes such as Lake Vostok 
in Antarctica, the Mars Polar Caps and to Europa, a Jovian 
moon thought to have a deep ocean beneath an ice crust. 
The task of the Antarctic Ice Borehole Camera Mission is to 
develop and deploy an instrumented ice/water Probe for 
depths up to 1.4 km in deep ice wells to obtain image data 
both down the hole and laterally into the ice. A key 
challenge for the Probe is in the extreme operating pressure, 
the consequence of being at a depth of 1.4 km of fkesh 
water, in which the structure, equipment, and optical 
elements must function. While assembly is performed at sea 
level and room temperature, the environmental pressure of 
the Probe ranges to over 130 atm at depth in the ice well, 
and the Probe must tolerate temperatures near -40 “C. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 c 2001 IEEE 
The narrow diameter of the probe also creates challenges, 
requiring miniaturization of instruments and complex 
lighting geometry. In addition there was a time constraint, 
with quick feasibility testing set for early February, system 
testing for August, and the mission itself in November; and 
the budget for the development was quite modest. 
Deep boreholes will be drilled through the Antarctic ice 
sheet using a proven hot-water jet technology developed by 
Caltech [l]. The boreholes will be kept large enough (-17 
cm diam.) by reaming for the passage and safe return of the 
Probe. 
2. PROBE DESIGN 
This section describes the Probe design and discusses some 
of the system components. The Probe was designed with 
the requirements and constraints as listed below. 
2.1 Requirements and Constraints 
Time: 20 hours drilling, 4-6 hours working time 
due to refi-eezing. 
Bandwidth: At least lhlbitls for adequate real-time 
feedback 
Size: 12-cm outer diameter. 
Temp: 0 O C  working; -40 OC transit 
Schedule: 9 months, including testing 
Redundancy: 2 complete Probeheel systems 
Sensors: 
Data Storage: Digital Video 
Live Real-Time: In situ video display. 
Reel: Single tether system 
The above requirements and constraints dictated design 
decisions implemented to produce a highly fimctional, 
reliable, robust probe system. 
Down and side looking cameras, with light 
sources 
The project team used off-the-shelf parts where possible in 
order to reduce cost, schedule, engineering development, 
and workforce. Figure 1 shows a sketch of the stainless steel 
Probe housing and the internal components, including the 
camera systems 
2.2 Probe hull 
This portion of the Probe contains the cameras and 
associated electronics. Two CCD cameras are used. A high- 
quality digital camera (side looking) and a high-resolution 
video camera (down looking) acquire the images. We use 
halogen bulbs to provide illumination, with one bulb for 
the side looking camera and two bulbs for the down-looking 
camera. NTSC Video-to-Analog fiber optic converters send 
images through the tether in real time to the surface Ground 
Station. For power, high voltage DC is sent down the tether 
cable and a 300V DC to 12V DC converter provid.es ‘clean’ 
power for the cameras and data transmission functions. The 
probe housing is used to conduct and dissipate heat from 
the electronics and power conversion units. 
89” 
Fig. 1. Schematic of Ice Borehole Camera Probe deployed 
in ice well. 
2.3 Deployment System. 
Figure 2 shows the deployment system that lowers the 
probe through the ice borehole. The spool is about 0.9 m in 
diameter, holding 1500 m of tether. 
1500-m Soool 
Patch Cables 
Cable to ___ 
Station 
Fig. 2. Reel System. 
The tether-support system, shown in Figure 2, is a direct 
copy of reel systems utilized in past years by the Caltech 
group, with the only significant difference being the tether 
itself. The tether is a single cable system that provides data, 
1-1363 
power, structure, waterproofing and support (strength) 
members. The data are transferred along four optical fiber 
lines and power is transmitted along two 18 AWG wires. 
The .entire unit, the cable, spool, motors and sled, weigh 
approximately 180 kg. The main spool is rotated with a 
three-phase AC motor giving a payout rate of about 1 d s .  
2.4 Ground Station 
The Ground Station is shown in Figure 3. It contains the 
video display, control computer and recording devices. 
The display is a high-resolution video monitor that displays 
either of the video feeds sent from the probe. Two digital 
tape recorders are used to store the images as they are 
received. A Sony L620 PC computer is used after images 
are acquired to digitally manipulate the images and analyze 
their contents. 
2.5 Assembled Subsystems. 
Figures 4 and 5 are pictures of the actual units that were 
sent to Antarctica. Figure 4 shows the intemal components 
held together by a frame containing two threaded rods that 
hold a series of plates. The plates support the cameras, 
lights and other components of the system. The pressure 
hull is shown in Figure 5 and contains the two quartz 
windows on the side (one for the camera and one for the 
halogen bulb) and the quartz window on the bottom for the 
two down looking lights and camera. Figure 6 is a diagram 
detailing the components and interconnections of the 
separate systems. 
3. PROBE DEPLOYMENT 
Although borehole picture systems have been applied 
successfully to problems in well-drilling, mineral 
exploration, and relatively thin valley glaciers [2] they have 
not been used previously in the study of ice sheets. 
3. I Test Deployment 
In order to field test the end-to-end system, a deployment 
was conducted in Crater Lake, Oregon in August 2000. 
Crater Lake was selected as a test site for the Probe because 
it is the coldest, deepest lake that is logistically close to 
southern California. The test covered the integrity of the 
Probe and all operations; the actual test involved the 
deploying the Probe into the deepest portion of Crater Lake 
and imaging that portion of the lake bottom (-570 m). The 
Probe was lowered and raised from a stationary boat via the 
tether system described above. This operation required the 
use of the National Parks Service research vessel “Neuston,” 
and the Probe team received excellent support from the 
National Park Service staff. Figure 7 shows one of the 
images gathered during one of the preliminary deployments 
at the lake’s fumaroles. The bars leading in to the picture are 
half-meter long metal rods with flags to visualize distances 
in front of the probe. 
3.2 Field Deployment. 
The final field deployment of the Probe is at Ice Stream C 
in Antarctica [5]. Its location is approximately 825 km from 
the South Pole and the surface temperature during the study 
will range from about -23 “C to about -15 “C. 
Sony 1024 x 768 TFT LCD 
Fig. 3. Probe Ground Station. 
1-737 
Fig. 4. Probe Instrumentation. 
Ground 
Station 
NTSC 
VKi€U 
Fig. 5. Probe Pressure Hull, 
Showing Windows. 
IIUVAC 11oIIAC 
4 Fiber, 2 Copper 24 A M  
Aramid Srength Member 
Water Block. Plastic Coat 
Borehole 
Probe 
Fiber 
U 
Fig. 6. Probe System Diagram. 
1-138 
Fig. 7. Crater Lake Fumaroles. 
The Caltech Antarctic program will drill a number of 
boreholes across Ice Stream C as part of their study of basal 
processes. Our approach is to deploy the Probe into some of 
these boreholes and record images of: 
Ice sheet-bed interactions as the ice moves, through 
sliding and deforming; 
Lower ice sheet structure with emphasis on 
identification of layers of ice thought to be accreted on 
the bottom of the ice sheet in slower moving areas 
called “sticky spots”; 
Observations of air bubbles and mineralogical 
inclusions in the ice; and 
Observations of isochronal layers, which are ice formed 
from snow that fell after major volcanic eruptions. 
In addition to the Probe, several other instruments will be 
deployed including: thermistor strings, pressure transducers, 
conductivity probes, ice motion sensors, etc. Ice cores and 
sub glacial till samples will be collected for analysis in the 
laboratory. A total of 16 boreholes are planned during the 
2000-2001 program. Figures 8 and 9 show previous field 
deployments; this year’s will be similar. 
The Probe system diagram shown in Figure 6 gives an 
overview of the three main segments of the system being 
deployed in 2000-2001. The power for the down-hole probe 
comes from a 300 VDC source at the surface and delivered 
through the tether. In the probe it is converted in 5 and 
12 V DC bus voltages. Electrical video signal data from the 
cameras are converted into optical streams and each is sent 
up a separate optical fiber to the surface station. The 
downward looking camera has only a power-on, automatic 
operation mode. The side looking camera records internally 
up to 2 hours of digital video, as well as sending out a real- 
time, analog video stream. The side looking camera has 
control command function via an optical fiber command 
line from the surface; hence the scientist/operator can zoom 
and focus onto interesting objects seen in the real-time 
stream. 
The surface ground station provides power (1 10 V AC) for 
the computer equipment that records and displays image and 
engineering data and issues commands to the probe. The 
analog image data streams from the cameras are recorded 
onto digital format recorders to preserve data quality for 
numerous replays, and the control station computer decodes 
the probe depth information from the cable reel rotations. 
All the data are time tagged to enable detailed correlations 
post-facto. To assist the operator to locate unique features, 
the real-time video display has sub-windows for depth and 
time. The highest quality digital images, recorded on DV 
tape within the side-looking camera, are removed from the 
probe and camera housing after the probe is returned to the 
surface station. Time tagging provides a direct correlation 
between these taped images and the analog real-time 
recorded images. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
This research has the objective of gaining knowledge about 
the Antarctic ice sheet processes as well as enabling us to 
develop new technology to explore the ice and water 
environments of Earth and other planets. The long-term 
future applications of this project include subglacial 
explorations such as of Lake Vostok, Antarctica, and 
Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons. At Europa, the ocean is 
thought to be beneath 10 to 40 kilometers of ice. The 
exploration will require descent through the ice with 
sufficient degree of mobility, acquisition of environmental 
and biochemical data in the ice, and observations in the 
subglacial ocean, all tasks of significant challenge. The 
Europa ocean may be as deep as 100 km and consequently 
at high pressure, about 1000 bars at the seafloor. 
Fig. 8. Ice Borehole Probe Deployment Site. 
Fig. 9. Ice Borehole Probe Deployment. 
1-329 
5 .  A C K N O W I E D G ~  
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a 
contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
The authors would like to thank all the members of the 
Antarctic Ice Borehole probe team including, but not 
limited to Kobie Boykins, Ken Manatt, Bob Ivlev, Fabien 
Nicase, Kai Zhu, Barbara Kachachian, Lloyd French, Brian 
Wilcox, Robin Bolsey and Prof. Barclay Kamb. 
6 .  REFERENCES 
[l] Paterson, W.S.B., The Physics of Glaciers 3“’ Edition, 
Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1998. 
[2] Skidmore, M., J. foght, and M. sharp, Microbial life 
beneath a high Arctic glacier, Appl. Environ. A4icrobiol. 
66,3214-3220,2000. 
[3] Kelty, J. R., An in situ sampling thermal probe for 
studying global ice sheets, 189 pages, Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 1995. 
[4] Engelhardt, H. and B. Kamb, Basal hydraulic system of 
a West Antarctic ice stream: constraints from borehole 
observations. J.  Glac. 43,207-230, 1997. 
[ 5 ]  Engelhardt, H., W. Harrison, and B. Kamb, Basal 
sliding and conditions at the glacier bed as revealed by 
bore-hole photography, J .  Glac. 20,469-508, 1978. 
7. BIOGRAPHIES 
Albert0 Behar is Chief Engineer of the 
Antarctic Ice Borehole Probe project at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He is also a 
member of the Robotic Vehicles Group 
where his group designs the rovers and in 
situ surface systems for several planetary 
missions. His previous studies earned him 
a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering 
(Astronautics Minor) from the University of Southern 
California (USC), an M.E. from Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute and an M.S. with Specialization in Robotics, also 
from USC. His primary interests are in architectures for 
planetary surface spacecraft. 
Frank Carsey received the Ph.D. in physics from UCLA in 
1971 and has been active in polar research for most of the 
intervening years, specializing in 
scientific application of satellite datal 
in polar oceanography and ice sheei 
glaciology. He is currently developing 
means for monitoring processes in the 
sub glacial domain using remote 
sensing and in situ measurements and 
is interested in the overlap of Earth 
and planetary science and technology. He is Team Leader for 
Polar Oceanography in the Earth and Space Science 
Division of JPL. 
Arthur (“Lonne”) Lane is a planetary 
scientist who has worked at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory for 34 years in 
Solar System Exploration and advanced 
instrument design and implementation. 
Lonne has been involved with the space 
exploration of 7 of the 9 planets ancl is 
currently building instruments for Mars surface 
investigations. Recently he led the scientific development of 
two full-ocean depth hydrothermal vent probes designed to 
provide imaging and spectroscopy of the insides of vent 
orifices. Lonne has authored or co-authored more than 90 
peer-reviewed scientific papers and hias given hundreds of 
talks on a wide variety of subjects during his career. 
Herman Engelhardt has a Ph.D. in 
Physics from the University in Munich, 
Germany. He is a Senior Research 
Associate in Geophysics at the California 
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA. 
His main research activity is in the field 
of glaciology studying the dynamics of 
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, especiailly the fast moving ice 
streams as they relate to global change. 
1-330 
