Efficacy Analysis of the Power-Law Detector for Non-Rayleigh Distributed 
Reverberation in Active Sonar Systems 
Douglas A. Abraham 
The Pennsylvania State University 
Applied Research Laboratory, P.O. Box 30 
State College, PA 16804 
Phone: (814) 863-9828 
email: d.a.abraham@ieee.org 
Abstract- Non-Rayleigh reverberation in active sonar sys- 
tems causes an increase in the number of false alarms when 
detection algorithms are designed under the assumption that 
the reverberation is actually Rayleigh distributed. Many mod- 
els have been used to represent non-Rayleigh reverberation 
and then build appropriate detectors including the Rayleigh 
mixture model, K-distribution, and McDaniel’s model. The 
detectors for these models de-emphasize the tails of the distri- 
bution. Thus, a natural non-parametric altemative would be to 
use a power-law non-linearity with a power less than one. In 
this paper the efficacy is used to evaluate the power-law detec- 
tor for the above reverberation models with a non-fluctuating 
target. For the K-distribution and McDaniel’s model, it was 
seen that the power-law can achieve the same efficacy as the 
locally optimal non-linearity with a simpler implementation. 
However, choosing the optimal power-law requires model- 
ing the reverberation with McDaniel’s model and a numerical 
optimization, the former of which can result in mismatch er- 
rors if there is not a good fit with the observed reverberation. 
Thus, a different technique is considered in which the power 
is chosen so that the transformed data have the same higher 
order moment measure (skewness, kurtosis, or scintillation 
index) as the Rayleigh distribution. It was seen that match- 
ing kurtosis resulted in the best average performance, but also 
the highest variability when the higher order moments must 
be estimated from auxiliary data. Matching the scintillation 
index provided the worst average performance, but the least 
variability, and matching the skewness was in between these 
extremes in terms of both average performance and variabil- 
ity. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
‘This work was sponsored by the Office of Naval Research under contract 
number N00014-00-G-0058, D.O. 0006 and does not necessarily reflect the 
position or policy of the Government and no official endorsement should be 
inferred. 
20-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 @ 2001 lEEE 
2. EFFICACY DERIVATION 
4. CONCLUSION 
3. CHOOSING THE POWER LAW 
1 .  INTRODUCTION 
Active sonar systems suffer more from reverberation when 
they operate in shallow water than in deep water. To com- 
bat the high reverberation power levels, broadband transmit 
waveforms are often used which in turn cause the target echo 
to be spread over several independent range cells (assumed to 
occur roughly every one-over-the-bandwidth seconds). The 
standard detection algorithm that recoups some of the spread- 
ing loss simply sums the matched filter intensity data after 
normalization by the reverberation power level, essentially 
creating an energy detector. However, the higher transmis- 
sion bandwidths can lead to non-Rayleigh reverberation, in 
particular reverberation with tails heavier than those of the 
Rayleigh distribution. Though the energy detector is the opti- 
mal processor for Rayleigh reverberation, it will not be when 
the reverberation is non-Rayleigh. Ideally, the log-likelihood 
ratio or perhaps a locally optimal non-linearity would be ap- 
plied to the data prior to summation. However, this requires 
the use of a non-Rayleigh reverberation model, its accom- 
panying target model, parameter estimation, and perhaps a 
difficult numerical function evaluation. As the log-likelihood 
ratio and locally optimal non-linearity for non-Rayleigh re- 
verberation (c.f. [ 11 for McDaniel’s reverberation) tend to de- 
emphasize the tails of the distribution, it is sensible to con- 
sider using a power-law non-linearity to create the test statis- 
tic 
n 
i= 1 
where X i  are the normalized matched filter intensity data 
over n consecutive range cells and the power p is chosen less 
than or equal to one. 
Two fundamental questions arise in considering this detec- 
4-1739 
tor. First, how will it perform compared to the optimal non- 
linearitie!;, and then, how should the power p be chosen? In 
this paper the first question is addressed for McDaniel’s rever- 
beration model by considering the efficacy of the power-law 
of eq. (1) and the locally optimal non-linearity [ 11 (which is 
a first order Taylor approximation to the log-likelihood ratio). 
The efficacy is an asymptotic signal-to-noise power ratio as 
the number of terms in the sum of eq. (1) goes to 00 and 
is loosely related to the small sample size performance. As 
for the second question, several techniques are considered for 
choosing p that do not require knowledge of the reverberation 
model but only estimation of its higher order moments. The 
efficacy is used to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
methods for choosing p when the reverberation follows either 
McDaniel’s model or a Rayleigh mixture model. 
2. EFFICACY DERIVATION 
Evaluation of the probabilities of detection and false alarm 
for a detector combining target echoes that are spread over 
multiple range-bearing resolution cells can be extremely dif- 
ficult and is very dependent upon the structure of the spread- 
ing. As an alternative, the efficacy of the detector, which is 
essentially an asymptotic signal-to-noise power ratio, is often 
easier to obtain. Subject to certain regularity conditions [2], 
a detector that combines n data samples X = [XI . . . X,lT 
into the test statistic Tn(X) has efficacy 
where the subscripts on the expectation and variance opera- 
tors denote the probability distribution function (PDF) under 
which they are considered 6 = 0 represents the null hypoth- 
esis and 6 > 0 the alternative. Here we consider detectors of 
the form 
(3) 
where X i  for i = 1, . . . , n represents the matched filter in- 
tensity output data over n consecutive range cells and g (.)
represents the detector non-linearity. When the data are inde- 
pendent and identically distributed, the efficacy of a detector 
having the form described in eq. (3) simplifies to 
’ 
(4) 
In evaluating the detectors in terms of their efficacy, we are 
using a large-sample/weak-signal (asymptotic) performance 
measure to infer the performance for small sample situations. 
Therefore, the following performance analysis must be con- 
strued as approximate rather than exact. 
2.1. McL)anielS Model 
McDaniel in [3] statistically described the reverberation in- 
duced matched filter intensity X accordling to the product of 
two independent random variables 
x = ZY,  (5) 
where both 2 and Y follow the Gamma distribution’ but with 
different parameters 
.,YO - 1 e - z 
r(v0) 
fZ(Z) == 
Y -Gamma(vl ,a) ,  . ~ Y ( Y )  ’= r (v l )aq  
Z - Gamma (vo, 1) , 
y”l-le-’l” (6) 
The resulting probability density function (PDF) of the inten- 
sity is 
for 2 2 10 where Kv(z) is a modified Bessel function of the 
second kind. 
A non-fluctuating target model for McIIaniel’s reverberation 
was derived [ 11 by extending one of the gamma random vari- 
ables to lbe non-centrally gamma distrilbuted. The following 
efficacy derivations exploit this target model which has PDF 
where S :is an SNR term. 
It is worthwhile to note that when vo = 1, McDaniel’s model 
simplifies to the K-distribution, popular in representing sea- 
surface dutter in radar [4,51. 
2.1. I Energy Detector - The standard processing for recom- 
bining spread target echoes simply :sums the normalized 
matched filter intensity data so that g(x) = x. The efficacy of 
such a detector in McDaniel’s model reverberation is easily 
derived as 
(9) 
v1 
= vo (1 + vo + VI)’ 
2.1.2 Lmally Optimal Non-linearity -- The locally optimal 
non-linearity for McDaniel’s model reverberation with its 
non-fluctuating target model was derived in [ 11 as 
1 fx (2;  vo + I., Vl, C Y )  
fx (2; vo, v1, CY> 
-- gLO(2) = 
~~ 
‘McDimiel described Z and Y as chi-squared random variables; the ex- 
tension to gamma random variables is trivial. 
4-1740 
To determine the efficacy of the LO non-linearity of eq. (lo), 
first consider the numerator term 
Noting that gLo(X) has zero mean under Ho, 
Eo b L O ( W 1  = 
= 0, 
its variance is seen to be 
which is identical to the result of eq. (1 1). Thus, the efficacy 
of the LO detector is 
2.1.3 Power-law Detector - The efficacy of the power-law 
detector of eq. (1) is easily derived for McDaniel's model re- 
verberation by exploiting the product definition and seen to 
result in 
(vo) ( 4 )  (vo + 2P) (V1 + 2P) - 
xxx (15) 
which correctly simplifies to eq. (9) when p = 1. 
2.1.4 Example - The efficacy of the energy detector, the LO 
detector, and the power-law based detector are shown in Fig- 
ure 1 as a function of the power p for the specific case of 
vo = 1.6 and v1 = 2,  which is significantly non-Rayleigh. 
Note that t o  and tp  clearly do not depend on the scale param- 
eter a. Though it is not quite so evident, this is also the case 
for ( L O .  Figure 1 illustrates that the LO detector outperforms 
the energy detector, as would be expected for non-Rayleigh 
reverberation and as was so for all cases considered. Addi- 
tionally, it is seen that the power-law detector achieves the 
same efficacy as the LO detector when the power p is chosen 
correctly. In all cases examined, the maximum efficacy of 
the power-law detector equalled that of the LO non-linearity, 
although it was not possible to prove such equivalence for 
all vo and VI. It is for this reason and the simplicity of its 
implementation that the power-law non-linearity is deemed a 
worthwhile alternative to the likelihood ratio or locally opti- 
mal non-linearities; that is, as long as a computationally effi- 
cient method exists for determining the optimal or near opti- 
mal p .  
2.2. Rayleigh Mixture Model 
The Rayleigh mixture has been shown to be a widely applica- 
ble model in representing non-Rayleigh reverberation [6,7,8] 
and is fairly easy to analyze for a non-fluctuating target which 
results in a mixture of Rician distributed random variables. 
The PDF of the matched filter intensity has the form 
m -I 
fx (x; 6 ,  = Ei- (16) 
for x 2 0 where ci is the weighting and X i  the power for the 
ith component of the mixture for i = 1,. . . ,m. When a non- 
fluctuating target is present, the PDF of the intensity similarly 
becomes a mixture, 
e 
Xi i=l 
where 
is the PDF of a non-central chi-squared random variable with 
two degrees of freedom. 
2.2.1 Power-law Detector- The efficacy of the power-law 
detector for Rayleigh mixture reverberation is obtained by 
first considering the numerator term of eq. (4), 
m 
= pr (P  + 1) 
i=l 
which required the use of 
4-1741 
0.31 
0.3 
0.27. 
0.26 
2 0.29 
;F 
0.28 . 
. 
Power-law detectors 
0.25 0.4 \t 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.1 
Power-law 
Figure 1: Efficacy of the energy, LO, and power-law detectors for McDaniel's model with vo = 1.6 and VI = 2 as a function of the 
power-law. The efficacies obtained by choosing the powers through matching the kurtosis, skewness, or scintillation index are 
also shown. 
The variance of XP under the null hypothesis may be cal- 
culated from Eo [XP] and Eo [X2P] ,  both of which may be 
obtained from 
p~p = Eo [ X g ]  
Thus, 
varo = P 4 p  - ( P 2 p ) 2  
and the efficacy of the power-law detector in Rayleigh mix- 
ture reverberation is 
3. CHOOSING THE POWER LAW 
optimal n"dinearity; however, choosing the optimal power- 
law requires maximizing eq. (15). To accomplish this re- 
quires estimation of the parameters of M-cDaniel's model and 
then a nuinerical optimization over p. The method will addi- 
tionally suffer from mismatch error if the reverberation is not 
well represented by McDaniel's model. 
The intent of applying the power-law is to control the rever- 
beration distribution tails prior to summation. An approxi- 
mate solution would then be to choose p so that X s  is nearly 
Rayleigh2. Based on the knowledge that if all of the mo- 
ments of two random variables are the same, then their distri- 
butions are also the same, one approach1 would be to choose 
p to equate a higher order moment measure (HOMM) of Xf 
to that of the Rayleigh distribution. Though this is a sensible 
approach it is not immediately clear that such a value of p will 
provide optimal or near optimal performance. The remainder 
of this section-evaluates this concem when the moments are 
known exactly and when they are estirnated from auxiliary 
data. 
One particular advantage of this technLque is that it is non- 
parametric in that it does not require the reverberation to fol- 
low any particular statistical distribution.. This procedure may 
also be viewed as generalizing the normalizer to one that ap- 
plies a power-law to control the reverberation tails in addition 
to a scale to control the mean intensity. If X is the data sam- 
As shown in the example of the previous section, the power- 
law non-linearity can achieve the same efficacy as the locally *The sqiiare root is used to form envelope data from the intensity data. 
4-1742 
2 I 
0.5 
, 
I I 
y for Rayleigh Mixture and vl-l for K-distribution 
0 0.5 1 1.5 
Figure 2: Higher order moment measures (kurtosis, skewness, and scintillation index) for the McDaniel's model and Rayleigh mixture 
distribution examples. 
ple being tested, then the normalizer output would be 
XP y r -  
X 
where p and X are estimated from auxiliary data, say 
X I , .  . . ,Xn. Choosing p based on higher order moments, in 
particular by using a moment ratio that is scale invariant (e.g., 
kurtosis or skewness) allows X to be estimated as a function 
of p and the auxiliary data. For example, the standard cell av- 
eraging normalizer would use the sample mean of the trans- 
formed auxiliary data 
. n  
An order statistic normalizer [9] would choose the ith largest 
of the ordered samples of the transformed data Y, = X f .  
This is equivalent to choosing the ith largest of the original 
data followed by raising it to the power p. 
3.1. Skewness, Kurtosis, Variance Excess 
As previously mentioned, the power-law will be chosen so 
that a scale invariant higher order moment ratio for the trans- 
formed data Xf is identical to that for the Rayleigh distri- 
bution. Skewness and kurtosis, the traditional higher order 
moment ratios, are considered as well as the scintillation in- 
dex [ 101 for choosing p. These are all formed from the mo- 
ments up to the fourth order of the matched filter envelope. If 
X is the matched filter intensity, then p p  = Eo [ X s ]  is the 
pth moment of the envelope under the null hypothesis (rever- 
beration only). The skewness is 
the kurtosis is 
(27) 
P4 - 4 P i A  - 3P; + 12PfP2 - 6P: 
7 2  = 
(P2 - P1)2 
and the scintillation index is 
For a Rayleigh distributed envelope the skewness is y1 = 
0.6311, the kurtosis is 7 2  = 0.2451, and the scintillation in- 
dex is 7 3  = 1. These higher order moment measures for re- 
verberation following McDaniel's model or a Rayleigh mix- 
ture distribution may be calculated from p P  which is found in 
eq. (21) for the latter and for the former is 
In the following efficacy analysis, a subset of parameter val- 
ues in McDaniel's model producing the K-distribution and a 
subset of a three component Rayleigh mixture spanning from 
a Rayleigh distribution through a point with parameters es- 
timated from real data are used to evaluate the performance 
4-1743 
of the power-law detector under various conditions of non- 
Rayleigh reverberation. The kurtosis, skewness, and scintil- 
lation index of the two cases are shown in Figure 2 where it 
is seen that they both contain the Rayleigh distribution at one 
end and then span out to be significantly non-Rayleigh. 
3.2, EfJicacy Analysis 
To determine the performance of the normalizer described in 
eq. (24) the efficacy is first considered when the moments 
of the reverberation envelope distribution are known exactly. 
The example considered in Figure 1 shows the power-laws 
that result in matchng the candidate higher order moment 
measures (HOMMs) where it is seen that matching the kurto- 
sis provides the closest performance to the optimal, followed 
by matching the skewness and finally the scintillation index. 
The power-law chosen by each processor is shown in Fig- 
ure 3 as a function of v1 with vo = 1 for McDaniel’s model 
along with the power-law that maximizes the efficacy. As 
vl increases while vo = 1, McDaniel’s model tends toward 
a Rayleigh distributed envelope, which corroborates the ten- 
dency of the power-laws to one seen in Figure 3. In this ex- 
ample all of the HOMM based processors over estimate the 
power-law that optimizes the efficacy. 
The resulting asymptotic relative efficiency (ARE), which is 
the ratio of the efficacy for the candidate power-law processor 
to that of the energy detector, is shown in Figure 4 where it 
is seen that choosing the power-law to match kurtosis values 
produces nearly optimal performance, followed by matching 
skewness, and then matching scintillation index. The ARE 
may be interpreted as the asymptotic ratio of the number of 
terms in the sum of eq. (1) required to produce equivalent 
performance between two detectors. Thus, at lower values 
of vl, the energy detector can require up to twenty percent 
more data than the appropriately chosen power-law processor 
to achieve identical performance. 
Figures 5 and 6 contain similar plots for a three component 
Rayleigh mixture distribution where the mixture proportions 
are held constant at E = [0.1469 0.4241 0.4290IT and the 
mixture powers are varied according to 
v y  = (1 - y) 1 + yvo (30) 
where 1 is a vector of ones, vo = [2.2863 0.6050 0.9500IT 
is estimated from real data, and y is varied between zero and 
1.5. When y = 0, the reverberation has a Rayleigh envelope 
and when y = 1 it is as estimated from real data. From Fig- 
ure 6 it is clearly seen that matching the kurtosis again pro- 
vides the best performance of the HOMM matching methods. 
3.3. Siniulation Analysis 
clearly affects the performance by introducing error in the 
power-law choice. To evaluate the error, the HOMMs are 
estimatedl from n = 500 synthetic auxiliary data samples 
over 5000 trials with a Rayleigh mixtun2 source as described 
in the prtcvious section with y = 1. ‘The PDFs of the es- 
timated power-laws along with the values that exactly match 
the HOMMs and the value maximizing the efficacy are shown 
in Figure 7. The resulting average efficacy for the proces- 
sors is also noted in the figure where it is seen that matching 
kurtosis values had the best average performance for this par- 
ticular case although it also produces the most variability in 
the estimated power-law. Figure 8 shows similar results when 
n = 1000 samples of auxiliary data are used and also exhibits 
the expected narrowing of the PDF about the value producing 
an exact HOMM match. 
As mentioned above, matching the kurtosis produces the 
best average performance; however, the: PDF of the resulting 
power-law is more spread than that far matching skewness 
or scintillation index. One of the objectives in choosing the 
power law so that the resulting HOMM is the same as for a 
Rayleighl distribution is to cause the displayed reverberation 
background to be homogenous in range and bearing rather 
than heavily cluttered in the non-Rayleigh regions. The vari- 
ability of power-law obtained by matching the estimated kur- 
tosis may not produce a homogenous background. However, 
matching the scintillation index may not be enough to rein 
in the reverberation tails (it always uses a power too close to 
one). Tlhus, matching the skewness may be an appropriate 
alternative. 
4. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the power-law detector was analyzed in terms 
of its efficacy for a non-fluctuating target in either McDaniel’s 
model or Rayleigh mixture reverberation. When the power- 
law is appropriately chosen it was seen to provide equivalent 
performance to the locally optimal detector for McDaniel’s 
model. .As obtaining the optimal power-law requires the use 
of a panticular reverberation and target model and perhaps a 
numerical optimization, alternative teclhniques were explored 
that involved choosing the power so that a higher order mo- 
ment measure (skewness, kurtosis, or scintillation index) was 
equivalent to that for the Rayleigh distribution. Here it was 
seen thait matching the kurtosis provided the closest perfor- 
mance to the optimal. However, when the higher order mo- 
ments must be estimated from auxiliary data (target free data), 
matching kurtosis resulted in the highest variability in the 
power-1,aw estimate, which may lead to inhomogeneity in the 
range-bearing image. Further research will investigate the ef- 
fects of the power-law processor on real data. 
The results of the previous section indicate that choosing the 
power-law to match HOMMs with the Rayleigh envelope can 
provide nearly optimal asymptotic performance. , However, 
in practice the HOMMs must be estimated from data. This 
a - 1  744 
1 
0.9 
0.E 
L 
a, 0.7 
a 
. . . . . . . . . .  
. . .  . . .  
I' 
i near Rayleigh 
i \  
10 20  50  
VI 
0 
Figure 3: Power-law chosen either to maximize the efficacy or match HOMMs for the K-distribution (McDaniel's model with vo = 1). 
1.25 
1.2 
1.15 
1.1 
1.05 
1 
VI 
Figure 4: Asymptotic relative efficiency between various power-law processors and the energy detector for the K-distribution (McDaniel's 
model with vo = 1). 
0.3 
0.5 1 
Y 
5 
Figure 5: Power-law chosen either to maximize the efficacy or match HOMMs for Rayleigh mixture distribution where y = 0 produces 
Rayleigh and when y > 0 non-Rayleigh reverberation. 
1.3 
1.25 
1.2 
1.15 
1.1 
1.05 
1 
Y 
5 
Figure 6: Asymptotic relative efficiency between various power-law processors and the energy detector for Rayleigh mixture distribution 
where y = 0 produces Rayleigh and when y > 0 non-Rayleigh reverberation 
10 I I I I 
! I  I%-. 
I 
I. I I I 
Scintillation Index Matching L F C a C Y  
a '1 E[e(p)l= 0.667 j e(p)=0.709 
,i; 0.2 
10 
I ! I  1 
I 
a 
0 c 
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
Power-law 
Figure 7: Estimated PDF of the power-law chosen to match the HOMMs along with the values that exactly match the HOMMs and the 
value that maximizes the efficacy using n = 500 samples of auxiliary data. The resulting average efficacy illustrates how 
kurtosis matching provides the best average performance. The reverberation followed the Rayleigh mixture model described in 
the previous section with y = 1. 
cintillation Index Matching 
I 
E[e(p)l = 0.668 i e(p)=0.709 
I 
! 
I I I 1  I I /  I !  h I 
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
Skewness Matching 1 
E[e(p)] = 0.691 
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
5 - E[e(p)] = 0.702 
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
Power-law 
Figure 8: Estimated PDF of the power-law chosen to match the HOMMs along with the values that exactly match the HOMMs and the 
value that maximizes the efficacy using n = 1000 samples of auxiliary data. The resulting average efficacy-illustrates how 
kurtosis matching provides the best average performance. The reverberation followed the Rayleigh mixture model described in 
the previous section with y = 1. 
REFERENCES 
[l]  D. A. Abraham and M. Gu, “A non-fluctuating tar- 
get model for McDanieJ’s reverberation,” in Proceedings of 
Oceans 2000 Conference, Providence, Rhode Island, Septem- 
ber 2000. 
[2] S. A. Kassam, Signal Detection in Non-Gaussian 
Noise, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988. 
[3] S. T. McDaniel, “Seafloor reverberation fluctuations,” 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 88, no. 3, 
pp. 1530-1535, September 1990. 
[4] “A model for non- 
Rayleigh sea echo,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 806-814, 1976. 
[5] K. D. Ward, “Compound representation of high reso- 
lution sea clutter,” Electronics Letters, vol. 17, no. 16, pp. 
[6] W. K. Stewart, D. Chu, S .  Malik, S. Lemer, and 
H. Singh, “Quantitative seafloor characterization using a 
bathymetric sidescan sonar,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic En- 
gineering, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 599-610, October 1994. 
[7] D. A. Abraham, “Modeling non-Rayleigh reverbera- 
tion,” SR-266, SACLANT Undersea Research Centre, May 
1997. 
[8] A. P. Lyons and D. A. Abraham, “Statistical character- 
ization of high-frequency shallow-watter seafloor backscat- 
ter,” Joumal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 106, 
no. 3, pp. 1307-1315, September 1999. 
[9] P. P. Gandhi and S. A. Kassam, “Analysis of CFAR 
processors in nonhomogenous background,” IEEE Transac- 
tions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 
427-445, July 1988. 
[ 101 A. Ishimaru, Wave Propagation and Scattering in Ran- 
dom Media, Academic Press, New York, 1978. 
E. Jakeman and P. N. Pusey, 
561-563. August 1981. 
Douglas A. Abraham was bom in Bermuda in ‘1966. He 
received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engi- 
neering in 1988, 1990, and 1993, respectively, and the M.S. 
degree in statistics in 1994, all from the University of Con- 
necticut. 
He is currently a senior research associate with the Applied 
Research Laboratory of the Pennsylvania State University. 
Previously he held a visiting faculty position at the Univer- 
sity of Connecticut (1998-2000), was a senior scientist at 
the NATO SACLANT Undersea Research Centre in La Spezia, 
Italy (1995-1998), and was with the Naval Undersea Wafare 
Center in New London, Connecticut (1989-1995). 
His work is primarily in the area of statistical signal process- 
ing applied to underwater acoustic applications. His current 
interests are in representing and accounting for non-Rayleigh 
active sonar reverberation in signal processing algorithms 
for detection, classijication and localization. 
