Preliminary Stray Light Analysis 
for the StarLight Mission 
Charley Noecker, John Fleming 
Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp. 
1600 Commerce St 
Boulder, CO 80301 
303-939-4621 (Noecker) 
303-939-4019 (Fleming) 
Peter Gorham 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109-8099 
8 18-354-7799 
Absfruct- StarLight (formerly ST3) is a separated 
spacecraft interferometer mission scheduled for launch in 
late 2005. (See paper 277 in this meeting.) StarLight will be 
the first space mission ever to perform astronomical 
observations on one spacecraft while a large object (a 
second spacecraft, in full sun), is intentionally placed in the 
instrument field of view. Though sunshades keep the second 
‘‘collector” spacecraft in nearly total darkness, it can 
nevertheless deliver stray sunlight into the starlight optical 
system on the “combiner” spacecraft by at least two routes, 
potentially obscuring the star or causing signal variations 
which corrupt the interferometer data. StarLight is intended 
to serve as a technology pathfinder for future formation- 
flying astronomical missions, and therefore should address 
stray light problems as thoroughly as possible within the 
budget and schedule. 
This paper presents recent preliminary analysis of glint and 
stray light concerns for StarLight, to help us prioritize our 
activities. From our results we conclude that 
1. With a modest knife edge sharpness on the collector 
sunshade, the stray light directed toward the combiner 
instrument can be rejected easily by the optical system; 
With little or no shading of the combiner, the glint from 
the combiner exterior to the collector exterior and back 
into the combiner instrument will be acceptable; and 
A siderostat and primary mirror with typical minor 
quality (BRDF) will be sufficient to reject off-axis stray 
light coming from the collector sunshade. 
2. 
3. 
Since we find large performance margins using a “typical” 
mirror quality in this analysis, it seems clear that 
extraordinary cleanliness measures will not be needed for 
StarLight. However, the missions for which it is a pathfinder 
may not enjoy these large margins. 
TABLE OF C 0 ” T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL 
2.1 SOURCE AND OPTICAL MODELS 
2.2 MIRROR BRDF MODEL 
3. RESULTS 
4. TWO-WAY STRAY LIGHT ESTIMATES 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
6. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
StarLight’ is a NASA-JPL mission to demonstrate 
formation-flying and separated-spacecraft optical 
interferometry. Because the elements of the interferometer 
reside on two different spacecraft, the system has the 
capability to extend the lateral separation between apertures 
to over a hundred meters; this allows imaging with angular 
resolution more than 60 times larger than with existing 
conventional telescopes, and eventually will permit sub- 
milliarcsecond resolution. This also enables future missions 
such as TPF (Terrestrial Planet Finder), MAXIMb (Micro- 
Arcsecond X-ray Imaging Mission), and SISP (Stellar 
Imager and Seismic Probe). 
A new challenge arising in separated-spacecraft 
interferometry is that our sensitive astronomy instrument is 
gathering its starlight from another spacecraft which is in 
direct sunlight. Though we gain tremendously from keeping 
all visible parts of that remote spacecraft fully shaded, there 
are practical limitations such as the sharpness of the edge of 
the shade and its lateral separation from the starlight optics. 
This is a new kind of problem in stray light control, 
primarily because of the small angle between the starlight 
a http:lltvf.ipl.nasa.sovl 
http:flmaximnsfc.nasa.nov/ 
http ://hires. gsfc .nasa. govl-sispf 
Collector 
-..*IC-- - - Starlight Fields 
Fixed of Regard 
7igure 1 - An artist’s view of the StarLight flight system, 
howing the combiner instrument and spacecraft in the 
oreground and the collector in the background. 
and the stray light. This paper presents the results of 
preliminary analysis assessing the seriousness of this so- 
called “glint” problem. 
The StarLight flight system consists of two instrument/ 
spacecraft packages known as the combiner and collector. 
(See Figure 1.) The collector relays the light from a chosen 
star back to the combiner. Light from the same star is also 
caught by an aperture on the combiner. The two starlight 
beams meet at an interferometric beam combiner, which 
contains a beamsplitter and a detector. (Other references 
provide more information on how this is done.) A major 
output of the mission is a set of starlight interferometry 
measurements like this, taken at a variety of inter-spacecraft 
separations ranging fiom 40 m to 600 m. 
The sunshade on the collector is placed on the sunward side, 
shading all parts of the spacecraft and instrument which can 
be seen from the combiner. This almost completely 
eliminates stray sunlight reaching the combiner instrument 
from the collector spacecraft and instrument. The two 
greatest remaining concerns are (a) sunlight scattered from 
the edge of the shade and (b) sunlight scattered from the 
combiner spacecraft illuminating the face of the collector 
spacecraft and instrument and then scattered back to the 
combiner instrument. (We wish to know what requirements 
should be levied on the combiner spacecraft shading also.) 
The two spacecraft and the star under observation lie in a 
plane which is nearly parallel to the plane of the sunshade. 
The combiner instrument aims one of its two optical trains at 
the starlight exit port on the collector instrument, which sits 
about 0.75 m above the edge of the sunshade. “One-way” 
stray light (that scattered from the collector sunshade edge) 
enters the combiner instrument at a small angle from the 
desired starlight, ranging from 1 degree at 40 m separation 
to 4 arcminutes at 600 m separation. After reflecting fiom 
the siderostat and a beam-compressor primary imirror, the 
starlight and stray light encounter a pinhole aperture at the 
focus of the primary, which helps to separate the starlight 
from off-axis sources. There is a notable defocus of the 
collector spacecraft compared to starlight at infinity, which 
is taken into account in our models but seems to have no 
impact at these off-axis angles, which are more than 200 
times the Airy radius. 
One of our models computes the amount of sunlight which 
emerges from the shade edge, scatters once from surface 
imperfections on the mirrors, passes through the pinhole, 
and then lands on the detector (a CCD). Another computes 
an estimate of the “two-way” stray light scattering from the 
combiner to collector and back. 
We imported the current combiner instrument optical design 
into a commercial stray light analysis program (ASAP). We 
added the collector sunshade edge and modeled the 
scattering of solar illumination into the combiner. We 
accountt:d for the scattering at the siderostat and primary 
mirror -- the only mirrors preceding the pinhole - and 
considered the rest of the system to be ideaLa The combiner 
siderostat and primary mirror (the only mirrors preceding 
the pinhole) were given a realistic :scatter function - a 
bidirectional reflectivity distributioin function (BRDF) 
curve; we chose a conservatively high BRDF. We conclude 
that 
1. With a modest knife edge sharpness on the collector 
sunshade, the stray light ,directed toward the 
combiner instrument is accept able (can be rejected 
sufficiently by the assumed optical system); 
With little or no shading of the combiner, the glint 
fiom the combiner to the collector and back into the 
combiner instrument will be acceptable; and 
,4 siderostat and primary mirror with typical mirror 
quality (BRDF) will be sufficient to reject off-axis 
:$tray light coming from the collector sunshade. 
2. 
3. 
2. DESCRIPTION F THE MODEX 
2.1 Sowee and optical models 
After importing the combiner instrument optical design into 
ASAP, we checked the model to ensure that it was ray- 
tracing properly. Then we added a pinhole to pass a 1 
arcminute FOV with about 5% toleirance on the diameter. 
This pinhole has a diameter of 190 pn Several baffles were 
added to prevent spurious pathways to the optics after the 
pinhole. Views of the ASAP model are shown in Figure 2. 
and Figure 3. The imported model has a minimumi 
Separation between collector and combiner optics of about 
a Though there are 10-12 optical surfaces following the 
pinhole, the light from the sunshade cannot illuminate them 
directly, but only via scattering from the siderostat or 
primary. Thus any scattering by these later optics is in series 
scattering from the first two., and therefore cannot 
couple: additional stray light to the detector. 
. 1-1446 
3.2 meters (z-axis distance from collector siderostat to 
combiner primary). 
The illuminated sunshade edge was modeled as a “Wire” of 
diameter 200 pm, stretched into a circle of diameter 2.69 
meters, and placed 0.75 meters below the two collector 
optics in the Zemax model. The combiner instrument 
boresight is pointed at those optics. This sunshade was 
centered either 40 or 600 meters away from the combiner. 
This sunshade edge was given a 20% Lambertian 
reflectance. 
The Light incident on the sunshade was given an irradiance 
of 0.001353 W/mm2, equal to the solar input at 1 AU. The 
source illuminated the sunshade edge from the direction of 
the combiner in order to simplify the source model. Since 
the edge is modeled as Lambeaim, the direction of 
illumination is unimportant for a rounded surface such as 
this edge, except that it doubles the visible illuminated area. 
The results are corrected by a factor of two at the end. 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the image of a line source on the 
collector shade edge, as seen at the combiner field stop. This 
analysis assumes the mirrors are perfect for gathering 
starlight (no wavefront error or. other scatter sources on 
them), but that the line source on the collector shade edge is 
out of focus. Superimposed on the calculated beam pattern is 
a sketch of the collector spacecraft and instrument boxes, the 
sunshade, and the collector mirror (in green); the red circle 
shows the 1 arcminute aperture in the field stop, centered on 
the collector mirror. 
It is apparent from the figures that the shade glare would be 
Figure 4 - Idealized view o 
nto the pinhole mask XY 
Figure 3 - Same as Figure 2 but showing only combiner 
optics, with baffles added to prevent unintended paths 
well-isolated from the field stop aperture in this ideal case. 
In particular, the defocused line sources are both 
approximately the same width as the apparent size of the 
collector transfer mirror, because in both cases the point 
source is far out of focus at the pinhole plane. Thus we 
expect the faint wings of the light distribution to be quite 
small at the much larger angle of the mirror-to-shade 
separation. 
But these idealized light distributions teach us only two 
things about our stray light problem: 
0 They show us that defocus alone is not a major 
contributor to the one-way stray light problem 
They help us to visualize the angular sizes of the beam, 
beam stop, and features of the remote spacecraft. 
2.2 Mirror BRDF model 
We used empirical BRDF models for the scatter at each 
mirror, based on published results at angles spanning the 
region of interest. This scatter allows some stray light to 
Figure 5 - Idealized view of light at the pinhole mask at 40 
m separation. Red dot in center is the 1 arcminute pinhole. 
3-1447 
1ooax)o 
1OOOOO 
1 W X  
loo0 
100 
F 10 
5. 
!i b 1  
0.1 
0.01 
0.001 
o.cm1 
0 . m 1  
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Angle from Specular (degm;) 
Figure 6 Comparison of BRDFs from several sources 
S&W 200 0633 is from reference 2 for CL200 
S&W 500 @633 is from reference 2 extrapolated to CL500 
K&H Blanco @450: Figure 4a in reference 3 - Blanco 4 m telescope 
K&H 4m diff @450 Figure 4a in reference 3 - conventional 4m telescope 
K&H HST @450 nm: Figure 4a in reference 3 - mirror roughness scatter for HST 
enter the pinhole despite its angular separation from the 
starlighe boresight. The BRDF models give estimated 
fractional scattered power per steradian as a function of 
angle from the specular reflection. 
We developed a scatter model assuming a cleanliness level 
of 500 and a mirror rms roughness of 20 angstroms. This 
model is dominated by scatter due to contamination for 
angles that are significant to this analysis. The BRDF used 
in the model is compared to other BRDF plots in Figure 6. 
The slope of the Spyak and Wolfe data2 at few-degree 
angles was used to extrapolate to much smaller angles for 
the modeled BRDF. The smallest scatter angle significant in 
the analysis is 0.072" (4.3 arcmin). For comparison at these 
small angles, we used the data of Kuhn and Hawle~ .~  
The Spy& and Wolfe model is appropriate for the 40 meter 
case, since the scatter angle is about 1". But for the 600 m 
case, where the scatter angle is about 4.3 arcminutes, we do 
not have appropriate data handy. We can extrapolate the 
Spyak and Wolfe model to small angles, and we can double- 
check this extrapolation against the results of Kuhn and 
H a ~ l e y . ~  
The Spy& and Wolfe model is based on Me scatter theory. 
Small particles scatter to large angle:; while larger particles 
scatter to smal l  angles. Typically the BRDF will roll off at 
small angles, because the size particle needed to scatter to a 
small  angle becomes unrealistically large or the probability 
of it occumng becomes too low. Extrapolating farther to the 
left in the graph requires even larger particles. Thus we 
expect the particle model to stop being appropriate and 
mirror figure errors to begin to Idominate. Indeed, the 
extrapolation does end up substantially higher than the Kuhn 
and Hawley data for small angles. This is mainly sigdicanl. 
for the 600 meter separation case. 
ASAP calculates the total integrated scatter (TIS) with each 
BRDF curve. For the modeled BRlDF a TIS of 48% was 
calculated, compared to a value -1% expected for typical 
surfaces. This supports the assertion that this BRDF model 
is very conservative. 
3. RESULTS 
Table 1 shows results of the ASAP analysis using this BRDlF 
model. We include corrections for solar illuminatioin 
direction (x0.5) and including both primary and siderostait 
3-1448 
Photonslsec 
(x2); we also scale from the total illumination passing 
through the arcminute pinhole to the illumination of a single 
pixel: 
For the 40 meter separation case the predicted stray light 
power is 1.9E-14 W, corresponding to a star of magnitude 
16.2; and for the 600 meter case the predicted stray light is 
5.4E-13 W, corresponding to a star of magnitude 12.5. 
(3.75")' / [n(O.S arcmin)'] = 5x10" 
The flux over the focal plane for the two cases is 
surprisingly uniform. There is no variation evident for the 40 
meter case. The spot diagram for the 600 meter separation 
case is provided in Figure 7. For the 600 meter case a slight 
gradient of decreasing power from top to bottom can be 
seen. This is because the pinhole is close enough to specular 
that the change in BRDF with angle from specular can be 
seen over the size of the focal plane. 
These calculations show that the photon rate landing on a 
single pixel is equivalent to a star with magnitude -12-16, 
about a factor 250-900 dimmer than the stars we plan to 
observe. Though these estimates rest on assumptions which 
need some refinement, they provide a first indication that the 
stray light fiom the edge of the collector shade will be 
straightforward to control. 
We conclude that within a plausible and conservative range 
of BRDF models, the stray light is negligible, and some 
relaxation of optical system and shade requirements is 
possible. 
Geometrical  R a y  SPOTS r 0 0 rl 5: F \ X 3 d h 0 0 0 
5 5 8 . 0 9  xmm 5 5 8 . 4 9  il- "" 
id+ 558.29 
! $  100.00 1 1  I 0 0 . 5 5  
U \ 
Figure 7 Flux at Focal Plane using BRDF model 
4. TWO-WAY STRAY LIGHT ESTIMATES 
We also considered the possibility that sunlight illuminating 
the combiner would shine on the combiner-facing surfaces 
of the collector and then back into the combiner optical 
system. The brightness of the collector illumination would 
be much less than the direct illumination of the collector 
sunshade edge, but the relevant parts of the collector are 
essentially on-axis with the combiner left boresight. We 
used the following assumptions: 
No combiner sunshade 
Albedos = 0.7 combiner, 0.1 collector 
Combiner projected area = 0.5 m2 (2 m2 at 20" grazing 
solar incidence) 
Collector box (albedod.1) covers starlight mirrors (i.e. 
we claim no off-boresight suppression as with the one- 
way calculation) 
This analysis consisted of carrying the solar illumination 
through appropriate suppression factors to derive an 
estimate of total power on the focal plane. The analysis and 
results are shown in Table 2; a description follows. 
We begin with an estimate of the effective scattering area of 
the combiner exterior; we assume 2 m2 area, illuminated by 
sunlight at 70 deg from the surface normal. This allows us to 
compute the total power emerging from the combiner 
surface. We assume this is a Lambertian surface, scattering 
its light into 2.n steradian; and we include a factor 0.5 to 
account for the Lambertian's variation as cos@) vs. off- 
normal angle 0. Thus if we divide the total power by 
z(separation distancel2 , we get the illumination of the 
collector in watts/m'. Multiplying this by the collector 
albedo, we get the surface brightness of the light emerging 
from the collector. 
This light only causes trouble if it lands on a particular pixel 
in the beam combiner - the one carrying the white light 
fiinge signal. It can only do that if (a) it lands on the 
siderostat and (b) it's also traveling within the tiny sliver of 
solid angle that gets focused onto that special pixel. The 
sliver is 3.75 arcsec wide, which corresponds to a patch 0.7 
mm across on the surface of the collector at 40 m separation 
(10 mm at 600 m separation). Thus the only way a ray can 
make it through is if it originates within an area on the 
collector which is about the same size as the siderostat 
&or, and traveling in just the right direction. So the total 
amount collected is proportional to An, where A is the 
siderostat area and R = (3.75 arcsec)' the effective solid 
angle of the pixel. Note that only the central 8.5 cm diameter 
portion of the siderostat contributes to the white light fringe 
pixel, because of the currently baselined partitioning of the 
pupil to interferometry and pointing control. 
So multiplying the surface brightness by An, we get the 
power collected on the "fringe" pixel. We can convert this to 
an estimated photon rate using our central wavelength of 
3-1449 
1353 waWW2 
Diameter of “fringe” 
portion of siderostat 
0.085 m 
Pixel width on sky 
3.75 arcsec 
<OO nm, and from that compute an estimated equivalent 
itellar magnitude. Note that neither the stray light estimate 
nor the stellar magnitude estimate take account of mirror 
losses in the optical train; they are both computed as though 
the mirrors are perfect reflectors. 
Collector albedo r - -  
-~ 
b Siderostat area 
.0.005675 W 2  
- 
. Pixel solid angle 
14.1 arcsec“2 
We conclude that the flux from 2-way stray light is less than 
1% of the stellar flux for mag 5 targets. We can place fairly 
high confidence in this result, because it involves an 
uncomplicated analysis and conservative assumptions: 
High reflectivity of combiner spacecraft and instrument. 
We could easily reduce the combiner surface area which 
is exposed to sunlight, as we assumed until recently. 
Looking at the collector box instead of collector 
mirrors. The black surface of the collector, illuminated 
by combiner glow, is modeled as extending across the 
collector starlight mirrors, rather than ending just 
outside the boundaries of the mirror. This overestimates 
the light being scattered back to the combiner by the 
collector. We should instead compute the off-axis 
scatter which brings the glow from the side of the 
collector housing into the combiner optics ancl onto the 
pixel. This computation is similar to the one we did for 
1-way “realistic” glint, though the off-axis angles are 
much smaller and hence the suppression is less strong. 
For these reasons, we take these estimates as upper bounds. 
5.  CONCLUSIONS 
Stray light concerns are becoming well understood. We have 
conducted initial studies of 2 possible mechanisms of stray 
light coupling: 
1 -way, sun-collector shade-scatter-instrument 
2-way, sun-combiner-collector-instrument 
The results indicate that neither will cause serious problems. 
One conclusion is that the values we assumed for the 
combiner optics quality and the collector shade edge 
sharpness leave us with a considerable margin. Another is 
that we have much greater freedom i n  combiner sunshade 
design than we’ve been assuming. Fiar example, we can 
contemplate 
0 
having no shade at all; 
small shades at several places (Figure 8); 
shading individual items as needed (AFF antennas, 
combiner optics box openings) 
Though StarLight will not have any trouble meeting its 
requirements, it will probably fall short of demonstrating the 
TPF stray light requirements for faint-target astrophysics, as 
presently understood. Based on sc;ding from the TPF 
requirements for finding a suitable guide star (K magc18) 
within %a reasonable angle (arcmin) from an arbitrarily- 
placed dim astrophysics target, ] M e l d  derived an 
equivalent StarLight goal for stellar magnitude: V mag=lO 
or dimmer! The current goal of S* mag was adopted by the 
Figure: 8 An early design concept for the collector shade - 
an example of a possible variation of the combiner shade 
desim. 
3-1450 
~ 
project later, mainly due to cost pressures. With the stray 
light levels we’ve calculated, StarLight would face 
substantial difficulty conducting TPF-like astrophysics 
observations (i.e. at the tighter 10* mag specification). Thus 
TPF probably will not enjoy the wide performance margins 
we’ve found for StarLight. We will need to start the TPF 
stray light design with less-conservative assumptions. 
H I  
121 
131 
141 
6 .  REFERENCES 
Deininger et. al., paper 277 in these proceedings; 
O.P. Lay, G.H. Blackwood, S .  Dubovitsky, P.W. 
Gorham, R.P. Linfield, “Design of the ST3 Formation 
Flying Interferometer,” Proc. ASP 194 (1999), p.366, 
Stephen Unwin and Robert Stachnik, eds. 
P. Spyak and W. Wolfe, Opt. Eng. 31,s (Aug 1992), p. 
1775 
J.R. Kuhn and S.L. Hawley, PASP 111 (May 1999), p. 
R.P. Linfield, in JPL intemal project document “ST3 
Instrument Requirements & Design Document Version 
601-620 
1 .U’ (draft Jan 3 1,2000), p. 17-20. 
Charley Noecker is a systems engineer at . 
Ball Aerospace. He has been engaged in 
studies of space optical inte$erometers 
since 1990, including the Precision 
Optical INTerferometer in Space 
(POINTS), Space Inte rferometry Mission, 
Terrestrial Planet Finder, Micro- 
Arcsecond X-ray Imaging Mission 
(MAXIM), and of course StarLight. 
John Fleming is the lead stray light 
analyst at Ball Aerospace. In this capacity 
he has analyzed stray light in many 
instruments including the NICMOS and 
Wide Field Camera 3 instruments for 
Hubble, the Science Instrument Module 
and Aspect Camera on Chandra, the 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility, and 
several instruments .for the National 
Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System. 
Peter Gorham is a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab. 
He is an expert in practical astronomical inte$erometry, 
and he also enjoys challenges, which is why he was the first 
person on the ST3 instrument team to study the glint 
problem. 
3-1451 
