Estimating Road Networks using Archived GMTI Datal 
Sean D. O'Neil 
The MITRE Corporation 
202 Burlington Rd, MS H145 
Bedford, MA 01730-1420 
sdo@mitre.org 
78 1-271-295 1 
Abstract-It is increasingly accepted that accurate maps of 
road networks can make a critical difference in enabling 
accurate tracking of ground movers using GMTI radar data, 
especially when sensor resources are limited. However, road 
maps are often incomplete and inaccurate to such an extent 
that their utility is eliminated or greatly reduced. At the 
same time, users of GMTI data have noted in heavily 
trafficked areas that the road networks are readily apparent 
on positional displays of GMTI data. This has lead to the 
notion of estimating the road networks using GMTI data, 
an idea, which is operationally appealing given that the data, 
can be collected over a time period of several days to 
several months. 
This paper addresses one of. the fundamental issues of 
estimating road networks fkom GMTI data. We derive a 
methodology for estimating a road network the views the 
road in a fundamentally different way than has been the case 
in previous approaches to this problem. The methodology is 
motivated by the stochastic models typically employed to 
model target trajectories as indexed by time, which we 
modify to come up with a stochastic model for the road 
trajectory which is indexed by arc-length. We apply this new 
method and compare it to a recently presented method that 
views the road as fundamentally composed of segments and 
vertices, and show using a limited data set that the stochastic 
estimation approach seems to offer much better 
performance. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
INTRODUCTION 
ROAD ESTIMATION: PRIOR METHOD 
STOCHASTIC ROAD ESTIMATION 
RESULTS 
CONCLUSIONS 
1 .  INTRODUCTION 
beginning to be deployed on other airborne platforms such 
as the Air Force's Global Hawk UAV and the Army's Aerial 
Reconnaissance Low (ARL) platform, and this trend is likely 
to continue. 
As has been noted by others GMTI radar can be used not 
only to provide an overall picture of ground trafllc activity, 
but can also be used to track individual targets. However, 
the difficulties associated with individual tracking of ground 
targets are far more formidable than those associated with 
tracking air targets [ChongOO]. For example, the relative 
levels of maneuverability when normalized by separation 
and typical revisit rate are much greater for typical ground 
traffic than for typical air trafilc. To this can be added 
complications due to intermittent, possibly prolonged 
dropouts of data due to terrain and foliage masking, 
minimum-detectable velocity issues, high clutter and false 
alarm levels, and sensor blackouts due to turns. 
For this reason, the use of a priori information to assist in 
the overall tracking process is considered by many to be 
critical. The most significant source of such information is 
the presence of road maps, which give preferred paths of 
motion for ground vehicles, and indeed digital road maps 
have been used to assist trackers for several years now as 
shown in pitzgerald991, Ipopp991, and [KlameBB]. 
One unfortunate fact is that digital road maps produced by 
the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NMA) as well 
as the United States Geodetic Survey (USGS), the two most 
common sources of such maps, often have errors that are 
large compared to the resolution of fielded GMTI sensors. 
This disparity will only increase with the GMTI sensors that 
are, or soon will be, coming on line. Perhaps a greater 
problem is the fact that road maps even for well-surveyed 
areas such as the contiguous United States are incomplete, 
often woefully so. An example of this problem can be seen 
in Figure 1 below, which contains two roadmaps, one fiom 
NIMA (in red) and one from the USGS (in black), of a 
The advent of GMTI radar has changed the nature of ground 
surveillance since the successful deployment of the Joint 
surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) to 
he haqi theater during Operation D~~~~ Stom in 1990- 
1991. addition to Joint STUS, GMTI are 
portion Of Holloman AFB in New Mexico. be 
noted that the NIMA map contains far fewer roads 
than does the USGS one, and, in addition, it is easy to spot 
places where the identical road on both maps disagrees in 
location and shape, even at the approximate 40x40 km scale 
of the map. 
It 
~ ~~~~ 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 8 2001 EEE 
4-1865 
Figure 2. “Mother of All Ketreats” 
Figure 1. Overlaid NIMA and USGS Road Maps for 
Holloman AFB, NM2 
The underlying cause of such gross disagreements and errors 
is the fact that most digital road maps have been created 
from paper maps, which typically are distorted to make them 
easier to1 interpret (e.g., paper maps typically push roads 
away from water edges and other boundaries to make them 
visible). As a result, tracker developers have sometimes 
turned-off the road-aided tracking fimction because road 
errors degraded precision. 
Recently, it has been noted that this process could be turned 
around, so that prior to using road maps to aid in GMTI 
tracking, accumulated GMTI data could be used to help 
extend and refine digital road databases. The motivation 
behind this is not new: GhITI operators have long noted that 
the cumulative picture of GMTI detections gives a fairly 
precise rendering of the road network for a given area of 
surveillance. An example of this can be seen in Figure 2, 
which contains the now-famous picture of the “Mother of 
All Retreats” as seen by the JSTARS platform at the 
beginning of the US ground operation to liberate Kuwait in 
February 1991. 
Source: Paul Castleberg, Toyon Research Corp. 
It may seem paradoxical to use lower-quality GMTI data to 
improve road network information to the point that it can 
itself be used to improve both decisionmaking and accuracy 
within a GMTI-based tracking system, but in fact several 
features of either roads or GMTI radars come together to 
make this possible. One is the fact that roads are static 
constructs and do not change over time. Thus, unlike time- 
evolving objects such as ground vehicles, information 
gathered on a particular road is cumiulative, and does not 
dissipate over time.. Thus, there is in principle no lower 
limit to the amount of integration gain that can be achieved 
by combining an ever-increasing number of passes of the 
sensor looking for vehicles on the road in question. 
Another facet of road-estimation using GMTI data is that it 
may be the case that multiple radars observe a road at the 
same time, and this idormation could be combined. This is 
important because multi-lateration for GMTI sensors results 
in a tremendous overall increase in aiccuracy, since GMTI 
detections typically have an associated error ellipse that is 
highly eccentric. The minor axis of this ellipse 
(corresponding to the range measurement) is often smaller 
than the major axis (corresponding to the azimuth 
measurement) by an order of magnitude or more. Finally, 
we show in this paper that another fcirm of multi-lateration 
can be used in this particular problem, one which requires 
only onle sensor present. This form of‘multi-lateration arises 
because the sensor itself may view the road from 
fundamentally different angles during its’ mission or 
missions, over a period of hours to weeks. Suitably framed, 
this tirne-separated multi-lateration can be invoked to 
achieve similar accuracy improvements as long as the 
vehicle; detected by the sensor or sensors at different times 
are recognized to have traversed the same segments of road, 
a requirement which is in general not very onerous. 
This rest of this paper is organized as follows. The 
succeeding section introduces the basics of road estimation 
from GMTI data, and presents a prior technique for doing 
4-1866 
such estimation. The next section reformulates the problem 
so that the road itself is described as a stochastic Ito-process, 
and a suboptimal method is derived for solving the 
estimation problem that arises from this reformulation. 
Finally, it is shown that the entire GMTI -> Road Map -> 
GMTI Track procedure can be viewed more directly as a 
process of estimating the kinematic history of a vehicle fiom 
GMTI data in the presence of prior GMTI data collected 
against vehicles known to be traversing the same stretches of 
road. 
2, ROAD ESTIMATION: PRIOR METHODS 
Roads are often given in standard vector product form 
(VPF), that is, as linked lists of line-segment end-points. 
For clarity we make the following definitions. A road 
segment is considered to be the portion of the road that lies 
between any two end-points. These segment endpoints shall 
be referred to as vertices v. A special type of vertex is a 
node, which is used to refer to a vertex that is the endpoint 
for a number of segments not equal to two. A road stretch 
is defined by a set of linked segments that run between two 
nodes. A picture of a roadmap with the various portions 
labeled can be found in Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Road Map Elements 
In [Enders], a method for improving road networks using 
GMTI data is put forth. An overview of the method is as 
follows: 
1. Prep initial map database (if any) into requisite 
format including initial guesses for vertex error 
covariances 
Associate track updates with road segments 
associated segments 
2. Run tracker on reports 
3. 
4. Introduce new segments where tracks lack 
5. 
6. 
7. Absorb vestigial vertices 
8. 
Introduce new vertices where indicated 
Nudge vertices to minimize error criterion 
Repeat steps 3-7 as needed 
It is shown in [Enders] that there can be some ambiguity in 
step 3, inasmuch as associating track points to roads in a 
statistical nearest-neighbor sense can easily lead to multiple 
track points that associate to a vertex. Such cases are 
handled by declaring that such track points are associated 
(i.e., will be used to compute error metrics) with all 
segments connecting to that vertex. 
New vertices are introduced in step 5 by sliding a window 
along each segment and calculating a mean perpendicular 
offset of the track as well as an associated standard 
deviation. A segment is broken into two (i.e., a new vertex 
is inserted) when the largest perpendicular offset is more 
than twice as large as the mean offset, and passes a 
significance test. Similarly, step 6 is carried out by 
calculating a mean perpendicular offset for each segment 
connecting to a vertex, then computing a covariance- 
weighted adjustment to the vertex combining the estimated 
offset for each connecting segment along with the initial 
uncertainty associated with the vertex position. 
Finally, vestigial non-node vertices are absorbed by 
comparing the uncertainty envelope of the two connecting 
line segments and removing those vertices that are contained 
in both envelopes. 
The approach in [Enders] has several virtues. It is easily 
motivated, works with road networks as they are currently 
described, and is not computationally prohibitive. However, 
there are some drawbacks that should be noted. Step 4 
outlined above is not completely set down (the author states 
it to be undetermined as yet), and so the expansion of the 
road network on the basis of GMTI data is not yet defined. 
Another possible drawback is that filtering of the data 
(tracking) is required prior to using it to update the roads, 
which may be a troublesome aspect especially if data is 
intermittent or sampled with long periods in between revisits 
(which is a likely mode during pre-conflict surveillance). 
3. STOCHASTIC ROAD ESTIMATION 
The standard VPF form that digital road databases come in 
implicitly view the road as a set of connected links. As 
such, most work until now aimed at modifying or improving 
the road networks takes that model of road structure as 
given, and attempts to work within that framework. 
However, other models for roads may be imagined. 
Consider the related problem of estimating the trajectory of 
a moving object from a set of observations of that object. 
One way of approaching this problem is exemplified by the 
method of fitting splines, an approach which is similar in 
4-1867 
spirit to that outlined above for road estimation, though the 
fitting functions are straight line segments in that case. 
Another way of handling the moving object estimation 
problem is to take the approach of Kalman, which is to 
model the object motion itself as an It0 (stochastic) process 
driven by white noise or its integral (Brownian motion), and 
derive an estimation procedure directly from that model. 
This approach has wide appeal and can be considered as the 
standard for this type of problem [Gelb][Bar-Shalom]. One 
of its' main virtues is that it imposes a probability density 
structure on both the U priori distribution of the target 
trajectory as well as on the observations of that trajectory, 
and so optimal estimation methods, such as the Kalman 
filter, can be derived in a straightfomard manner. 
Consider again the road estimation problem. The road itself 
is a trajectory through space, though there is no time 
component to it. However, it can be viewed as a function x 
of the arc-length s along the road. If we wish to consider 
how x evolves with s then it is probably not a good idea to 
consider as consisting of position alone, since this would 
lead to a very random behavior on the part of the road. 
What is :needed is some way of introducing local correlation 
in the increments of the road with arc-length. 
Consider the road 'state' to consist of position (u,v) and a 
heading CO. Then the road trajectory as a function of arc- 
length s can be written in discretized form as 
x(s + A S )  = f ( x ( s ) , & )  + G,w, (1) 
where the road state x is given by 
f is given by, 
(3) 
and G ,  is given by, 
G ,  f ] ,  
and w, is a normally distributed r.v. with unit variance. 
As just seen, equations 1-4 give a model for the road. Now 
consider an object moving down the road. GMTI 
observations of that object consist of slant range, azimuth, 
and Doppler. For simplicity, we will assume that we are on 
a flat Earth with a fvred sensor location, thus removing 
issues related to platform motion, altitude, and Earth 
models. However, the following treatment is easily 
generalized to handle those (admittedly important) real- 
world aspects of GMTI estimation. 
Since we are assuming that the target is on a road, we can 
summarize its' stale using arc-length s, and its' time- 
derivative . Thus, we can write the equation for the 
motion of the target in urc-length as 
s(t + At) = F,s(t) + GSws ( 5 )  
where 
F& =(; 4') 
and the r..v. term G,w, has covariance [Bar-Shalom] 
with 
(7) 
Finally, observations are made of the target at known times 
t. These observations are given as, 
z = h(x(t))+ v(t)  , (9) 
where the function 'h is defined as 
f 
and v is a 3-vector of corrupting measurement noise with 
known covariance matrix R, 
Thus, tco summarize, we have defined a model for the road 
that defines it as a stochastic trajectory as a function of arc- 
length, and defuled (standard) equations for the target 
motion and observations. 
4-1868 
At this point, the question is how to properly estimate the 
road function x given the observations z. One might be 
tempted to try and apply the Kalman filtering methodology 
by stacking the equations up so that there is a single plant 
equation, but the difficulty with this approach is that it 
requires one to estimate one function (x) that depends on a 
variable s with observations made at unknown, or 
imprecisely known, values of s. This does not fit within the 
standard Kalman formalism. 
The issue is, of course, that we do not know the road 
function x ahead of time. If we did, the estimation process 
for the values of s and s-dot could proceed unimpeded, and 
we could then turn around and estimate x, which we 
assumed we already know! However, it does not seem 
unreasonable to imagine that an approximate version of x 
might be constructed that could then be substituted in for the 
real x and used to estimate values of s and s-dot for the 
target. These in turn could be used to refine the estimate of 
A. 
Thus, a suboptimal estimation procedure can be defined as 
follows: 
1. Filter the observations z in the normal fashion to 
estimate the target trajectory 
Transform this trajectory in (u,v,u,v) into a trajectory 
in (s, s, w )  , all as a function o f t  
Use this mapping to transform z(t) to z(s) 
Estimate x(s) using the observations z(s) 
Use s(t) to transform x(s) to x(t), then to ( s , s ,w)  as a 
function oft  
Repeat steps 3-5 to convergence 
* .  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
Note that we have now defined a procedure for estimating a 
road function x fiom scratch (or using prior information) 
fi-om GMTI measurement information, constraining the road 
shape only probabilistically as defined in equations 1-4. 
While this algorithm does not address the specific issue of 
adding new road stretches, which should be required of any 
final scheme, once a road has been added or deemed 
present, the estimation process outlined above can proceed 
to convergence. 
Steps 1 and 4 involve actually carrying out an estimation 
procedure. Note that we have not yet specified how this is 
to be done. The obvious answer is to use a Kalman filter, 
yet there are a few points to consider before doing this. 
Perhaps the most important point is that all the data is 
assumed present prior to doing the estimation. Another 
point is that it is useful to estimate the road function x at as 
many places as possible, independent of the density of 
samples of the road. 
Both of these points lead to the idea of smoothing the data 
[AndersonMoore], i.e., coming up with an optimal estimate 
of the road function x for any value of arc-length s given all 
the data received on all portions of the road stretch. This 
problem is commonly referred to as the fixed-interval 
smoothing problem. and there are a number of ways to 
tackle it. The approach used in the results section [Gelb] 
below is to first run Kalman filters forward and backward on 
the data, then to construct the smoothed estimate at any 
point by taking the straddling points fiom the forward and 
backward filters, projecting them forward or backward to 
the desired point, and computing a covariance-weighted 
combination of the two values. An example of the 
improvement in arc-length velocity estimates that can accrue 
fiom using this procedure can be seen in the example in 
Figure 4, which shows the forward and backward estimates 
as dashed lines, with the smoothed estimate given by the 
solid line. 
I_ I 
100 150 200 250 
Tlme (Sec, 
'0 , 50 
Figure 4. Arc-Length Speed Estimates Using Forward and 
Backward KF, and Smoothing Estimate 
Thus, at all stages of estimation, a smoothing routine as 
described above was used rather than standard Kalman 
filtering. 
4. I&SUI.,TS 
A single comparison was made between the two 
methodologies described earlier. As the basis of 
comparison, we used a single 3.4 km road stretch from a 
very detailed digital road database of Holloman AFB, the 
assumption being that the high density of sample points from 
the road represented a compromise between the assumptions 
for either methodology (i.e., the vertex-adjustment method 
or the stochastic estimation method). 
Target motion was simulated along the road using a standard 
stochastic model as given in equation 5. It was assumed 
that a GMTI sensor made ten passes of the area (the sensor 
was assumed stationary at each pass, though the location 
was varied fi-om pass to pass), and each time observed a 
4-1869 
single vehicle on the road. The revisit time was held at 5 
seconds, though it could have been varied, to allow for a 
more even comparison of the improvement as more passes 
occur. 
dis lacement I 
However: because of the random nature of the target 
trajectory generation process, each pass contains a different 
number of ‘hits’, since the amount of time the vehicle is on 
the road stretch cannot be set ahead of time. Indeed, the 
vehicle can behave rather oddly, often not traversing the 
entire road stretch but turning around and exiting out the 
way it came, or turning around more than once. This type of 
behavior can occur, though it is likely that the present 
simplistic: simulation causes it to occur more frequently than 
would actually be encountered. It is tolerated for the time 
being since both algorithms can handle vehicles reversing 
direction. 
Radar detections were simulated using a unity probability of 
detection, zero false alarm rate, a range error of 20m, an 
azimuthal error of 2 m a d  (20Om at lOOkm standoff range), 
and a Doppler error of 1 d s .  The sensor was placed at a 
random orientation plus or minus 60 degrees to the boresight 
perpendicular to the axis defined by the starting and ending 
points of the road at a distance of 100 km from the midpoint 
of the road axis. 
For each algorithm, the stochastically generated road was 
first quantized to a VPF form with 21 vertices using a simple 
algorithm, and then the vertices were corrupted to give a 
starting point. Each estimation algorithm was applied and 
the resulting distortion of the estimated road from the true 
road was computed. The results for the vertex-adjustment 
method are given in table 1 below as a function of the 
number of passes used to estimate the road. The metrics 
used to evaluate the accuracy of the estimation procedure 
were: 
1. Overall arc-length discrepancy (meters) 
2. Perpendicular displacement from the true road 
3. 
(meters) 
Heading error at the displacement point (degrees) 
Arc-length 
error (meters) 
I error(:deg) 1 
Table 1. Results for Vertex-Adjustment Estimation 
The identical starting point was then used for the stochastic 
estimation algorithni with the results shown in Table 2 
below. 
Metric 
error (meters) 
Heading 
Table 2. Results for Stochastic Estimation 
A comparison of the two sets of results indicates a clear 
improvement in performance for almost all metrics and all 
cases for the stochastic estimation algorithm. It is worth 
commenting on the large improvement in perpendicular 
displacement going from one pass to two for the stochastic 
estimation algorithm as shown in Table 2. This is due to the 
fact that the frrst two passes were taken at substantially 
different look angles (-8 degrees VS. +52 degrees off 
boresight), so some benefit from the virtual multi-lateration 
of the mad is appeiuing here. Contrast this with the vertex 
adjustment algorithm which cannot really benefit from this 
facet, and so shows only & type improvement with n 
passes, with the limiting factor being the very large 
azimuthal uncertainty, whereas the stochastic estimation 
procedure is essentially range-accuracy limited. 
5 .  CONCLUSION s 
It is cleiu that this approach offers benefits not available in 
previous “cookie-cutter” approaches to modifying roads. 
However, several tluings must also be considered. As stated 
in the .prior section, the approach taken to solving the 
estimation problem is somewhat heuristic, and the 
assumption that the procedure would converge, while borne 
out in the simulations, is merely an assumption not 
supported by any analysis. This is a.n important point that 
needs to be addressed in future work. Perhaps more 
important than this is the estimation procedure itself-it is 
quite likely that the heuristic approach employed by the 
author could be improved upon. 
The reader should also consider the issue of how prior 
informa.tion such as roadmaps might Ibe useful to a tracking 
algorithm. While the actual placement of roads is of prime 
importance, they are only part of the answer when the 
problem posed is one of tracking military vehicles such as 
tanks that may go offroad. A vary useful adjunct to 
roadmaps such on and ofl6road wehicles are so-called 
“hospitability for maneuver” maps that yield information 
above preferred directions and ease of motion over all 
4-1870 
terrain (see ~usickKastella]). The final piece of the puzzle 
in getting additional information relating to likely stopping 
points, such as “rest areas” and the like where vehicles may 
be considered to be much more likely to pull over and stop 
(and hence disappear). Having good prior knowledge of 
such locations would greatly aid both the decision-making 
process of the ground tracker when faced with possible 
stopping vehicles (and the attendant loss of detections), as 
well as the overall sensor tasking and planning, which might 
be able to much more efficiently allocate SAR and or optical 
sensors to look at places where stopped vehicles are likely to 
congregate. 
REFERENCES 
[Enders] Robert Enders, “Improving Road Networks through 
Archived GMV’, 1999 Ground Moving Target Tracking 
Conference, Lincoln Laboratory, 14-1 5 December, 1999 
[Gelb] Arthur Gelb, ed., Applied Optimal Estimation, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1974 
[BarShalom] Yaakov Bar-Shalom and W. D Blair, ed., 
Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking - Applications and Advances 
Volume III, Artech House, Dedham, MA, 2000 
[AndersonMoore] B. D. 0. Anderson and G. B. Moore, Optimal 
Filtering, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1979 
~usickKastella] Stan Musick and Keith Kastella, “Track and 
Bias Estimation Without Data Association”, SPIE Aerosense 
2000 Proceedings, SPIE Vol. 4052, pp. 258-269 
Sean 0 ’Neil received his BSEEfrom M T  and MSEE from 
RPI where he did his thesis on image compression. He has 
worked for the MITRE Corporation since 1985 in a number 
of areas, including image processing, number-theoretic 
algorithms for advanced signal processing, multi-target 
tracking, and multi-sensor data fusion. Most recently he 
has been involved with the DARPA Affordable Moving 
Surface Target Engagement (AMSTE) program, which is 
exploring the potential of multi-laterated GMTIplaqorms to 
provide all-weather, long-stando8Jii-e-control quality 
information to a command-guided weapon against a moving 
target. 
4-1871 
This page intentionally left blank. 
4-1872 
