DESIGN OF A GRAPHICAL INPUT TO A DECISION SUPPORT 
SYSTEM FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION 
AIHUA SONG’, KEITH W. HIPEL’, and D. MARC KILGOUR” 
‘Department of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1 Canada 
’Department of Mathematics, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3C5 Canada 
Abstract 
A novel graphical input system for conflict 
modeling is designed for use as an interface to the 
analysis engine of the decision support system 
GMCR 11, which implements the Graph Model for 
Conflict Resolution. The main advantage of the new 
input system is that it enables the user to draw the 
conflict model as a graph on the screen, thus 
“modeling while drawing.” Not only is graphical 
input simpler, but also it helps the user to envision 
the conflict in proper perspective, getting a “big 
picture’’ uncluttered by details. Visio 2000 is selected 
as the graph drawing tool and the modeling is 
implemented through a Visio 2000 application 
program. Graphical input should be particularly 
useful for modeling real-world disputes, especially in 
early stages when the analyst only has a general idea 
of the strategic issues. When completed, the full 
system, Graphical GMCR, is expected to facilitate 
brainstorming and other techniques to generate 
creative solutions. 
Keywords 
Conflict resolution, decision support system, 
environmental dispute, graphical input. 
1 Introduction 
A strategic conflict is a decision problem that 
involves two or more decision makers (DMs). Each 
DM must select a course of action; the final outcome 
depends on the choices of all DMs. A conflict exists 
when DMs have different preferences over the 
possible final outcomes. Because conflicts are so 
pervasive in life, there is a great need for procedures 
to understand, model and analyze them. 
The graph model for conflict resolution [I]  
constitutes a comprehensive procedure for 
systematically studying real-world disputes. Based 
upon ideas from both graph theory and game theory, 
the graph model uses a graph to represent each DM’s 
strategic possibilities in a conflict. The decision 
support system GMCR I1 [4, 21 permits the graph 
model to be conveniently applied to a rich variety of 
challenging strategic conflicts arising in areas such as 
international trade, environmental management, and 
labor-management negotiations. Application of the 
graph model for conflict resolution involves three 
stages: modeling, analysis and interpretation. The key 
components of a graph model are DMs, states, state 
transitions, and preferences. 
During the early stages of a conflict, a DM may 
have only a general idea of what the conflict is about 
and what possible scenarios could take place, and 
know only approximately what he or she would 
prefer to see happen. The DM may not have 
formulated any specific options or courses of action 
to reach a desirable result. Accordingly, there is a 
need for graphical input tools that will permit the DM 
or another interested party to draw in a general 
fashion the main strategic aspects of the conflict 
under study. Drawing a conflict model can also be 
useful in brainstorming sessions, in which an analyst 
tries to come up with imaginative solutions to a 
dispute. 
The objective of this paper is to present the 
newly developed system Graphical GMCR, which 
furnishes a user-friendly environment within which 
to start modeling a conflict. The key features of this 
novel graphical system are described and illustrated 
herein, while more detailed descriptions are provided 
by Song [ 81. Allowing the user to model the conflict 
graphically provides many advantages which include: 
It gives the user more freedom in modeling: Since 
all the components of a conflict model are drawing 
blocks on the screen, the user can visualize them 
easily. Because editing a drawing is cheap, 
changing a conflict model is not costly. 
It helps the user generate new ideas graphically: 
When the user models the conflict graphically, it is 
not only a process of building the drawings by 
putting all the drawing blocks together, but also a 
process of constructing a representation of a 
problem. In this sense, a user can generate new 
0-7803-7087-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
1252 
ideas and conveniently incorporate them into the 
conflict model. 
It is easier for the user to understand things 
represented graphically: The integrated graph of a 
conflict is like a big picture of a conflict, in which 
the user can see all the states, state transitions, 
DMs and preference information. It is simple, 
clear, and direct. 
2 Design of Graphical GMCR 
Graphical GMCR uses the graph model [ I ]  to 
represent conflicts. The difference between Graphical 
GMCR and GMCR I1 is that the input method in 
Graphical GMCR is an actual drawing of a graph 
model of the conflict on the screen. To represent the 
conflict in this way, the user does not need to input 
all the information such as each D M s  options in a 
conflict. Instead, the user inputs each DM’s 
individual graph by first giving a brief description of 
the states. In this individual graph, only labeled states 
and state transitions appear on the screen. The system 
then automatically generates the integrated graph. 
Simply put, Graphical GMCR is state-oriented, and 
emphasizes specific states and state transitions. With 
these features, it will be suitable for employment by 
users, usually higher level DMs, who don’t want to 
go into details about the DMs’ options in a conflict 
but prefer to get the “big picture” employing a 
convenient computerized system. 
The design of Graphical GMCR follows the 
software design process described by Sommerville 
[73. 
Architectural design: The structure of a graph- 
based GMCR is depicted in Figure 1. A complete 
Graph-based GMCR system should comprise a 
user interface, modeling subsystem and an analysis 
engine. The user interface controls its connection 
to the modeling subsystem and analysis engine. 
Connections between the graphical modeling 
subsystem and analysis engine are actually passing 
data, which can be done through a small database 
that enables data sharing. 
Abstract specification: In the graph-based GMCR, 
the user interface provides basic file system 
options, connections to other subsystems, and data 
input. These data are descriptive information of a 
conflict model that is not convenient to input in a 
graphical modeling environment. The graphlcal 
modeling subsystem enables the user to set up 
agraph model and the analysis engine, and then 
processes the stability analysis of a conflict. 
The user interface is designed with Microsoft’s 
Visual Basic 6.0 Standard Edition. Because many 
Active X controls are used for interface 
implementation, Microsoft’s Visual Basic 6.0 must 
be installed on the computer in order to rn the 
user interface. The graphical modeling subsystem 
is implemented with Microsoft’s Visio 2000 
Standard Edition. Application programming uses 
Visual Basic as the Application Programming 
Interface (API). To use the graphical modeling 
subsystem, Microsoft’s Visio 2000 (Standard, 
Professional or Enterprise Edition) must be 
installed on the computer. 
Interface design and component design: The user 
interface has three major components consisting of 
menus, dialog boxes, and display pages. Menus 
provide executable functions including file 
operations and subsystem connections; dialog 
boxes prompt data input whereas display pages 
portray information that the user cannot modify. In 
the graphical modeling subsystem, the interface is 
customized to facilitate graphical modeling. Major 
components of the graphical subsystem include 
input stencils, guideline page, input and output 
pages, as well as data display pages. 
Data structure and algorithm design: In Graphical 
GMCR, specially designed data structures and 
algorithms enable data extraction from the input 
drawings and generation of reachable lists and 
preference information for each DM, which are 
then input to the analysis engine. 
To illustrate the design of a sequence of 
functional transformations that convert system inputs 
into required output, the data flow diagram of the 
graphical modeling is shown in Figure 2. When 
1253 
opened as a Visio Template file (.vst file), the 
graphical modeling subsystem shows one stencil and 
three drawing pages. The stencil and the menus on 
the drawing pages are not modifiable. Their 
functionality is to provide convenient input, as well 
as to enable the user to avoid Visio’s menus, making 
the input more efficient and guaranteeing that no 
errors will be caused by unexpected operations such 
as using Visio’s menudfunctionality in an 
unpredictable way. Visible stencils in the graphical 
modeling subsystem are used for input only. A 
preference-input stencil and an output stencil that 
generate preference rankings and an integrated graph 
are invisible to the user. On the input stencil, there 
are only two drawing blocks. A circle labeled “State” 
is used to represent a state; an arc labeled “Move” is 
used for drawing a state transition. The direction of 
the arc indicates the direction of the state transition. 
Two arcs with opposite directions connecting the 
same pair of states must be used for a reversible 
transition. The stencil is designed to be simple and 
plain, since its purpose is to provide simple tools for 
easy input. 
ofstates 
Get numb 
number d DMs 
Figure 2: Data Flow Diagram of Graphical Modeling. 
Of the three drawing pages, page one is titled 
“Guidelines” and is only for display. This page gives 
a brief description of the procedures for graphically 
modeling a conflict. The second page is titled “Input” 
and is actually the input interface page. Three menus 
are shown at the top of the page: State Input, 
Individual Graph Input and Preference Information 
Input. The user starts each input by using the 
corresponding menu, and returns from the display 
pages (if the input generates display pages) to the 
input interface page to continue the next input. The 
third page is the output interface page and contains an 
output menu and a large area for system display. This 
page cannot be edited. 
Graphical GMCR asks the user to input the states 
in a conflict model only once. After entry on the 
input interface page, all states are automatically 
included in all individual ‘DM’s graphs. This saves 
the user’s time and avoids inconsistencies. If the user 
decides to add new states during the process of 
modeling, he can do so by pulling a circle from the 
stencil to the corresponding drawing page. States can 
be labeled with numbers or free-form letters. Some 
detailed input specifications are given below: 
0 Individual graph input: Before the user starts to 
input the individual graph for each DM, he will be 
asked to input the number of DMs in this conflict. 
Based on this information, new pages with labeled 
states displayed will be added for the individual 
graph input. All the user needs to do is to indicate 
which state transitions are controlled by the 
specific DM. The user can label the state 
transitions with a D M s  short title or use the default 
names DM,, i = 1, 2, ..., n. From the individual 
graphs, the system generates reachable lists for 
each DM and saves the data. 
0 Preference information input: The input technique 
used, by graphical modeling is direct ranking of the 
states. More specifically, when the user starts to 
enter preferences for a DM, all states will be put on 
the input page in a horizontal line by the system. 
The user can then rank the states from most 
preferred on the left to least preferred on the right 
by pulling and moving the states to indicate their 
relative positions. The graphical modeling also 
supports “preference indifference”, that is, 
indifference of a DM between two or more states. 
The user can group the equally preferred states and 
handle them as one state. Sometimes a user might 
change his mind and want to “regroup” or 
“ungroup” grouped states. The system allows this 
by providing a “Ungroup” button in the 
“Preference Input” menu. After direct ranking, all 
1254 
the states are not necessarily in a straight line. 
When one state is to the left of another (the center 
of the circle is to the left), the left state is regarded 
as more preferred than the right one. Equally 
preferred states are indicated by a boundary that 
appears when they are clicked on. 
DM 
DMI 
The last step in the graphical modeling is to 
generate the integrated graph on the output page. 
Here, the integrated graph is treated as the output and 
the individual graphs and preference information are 
considered as the input in a graphical modeling 
subsystem. On the display area, the integrated graph 
is shown so that each DM’s state transitions are 
coded by a specific color and indicated by that D M s  
label. 
Long Title and Short Title of DM 
Ontario Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
Because graphical modeling provides 
considerable freedom and flexibility to users in 
inputting preference information, it helps the user to 
think out the most appropriate ranking by pulling the 
states around the page. Again, after the preference 
input is complete, preference rankings are saved by 
the application program. At the same time, all the 
state rankings will be sent to new added pages for the 
future review. 
1. MoE 
( 1 ) Modifi 
3 Case Study: Graphical Modeling of 
the Elmira Dispute 
N Y N Y N Y N Y -  
The Elmua dispute is an environmental conflict 
that took place in Elmira, Ontario, Canada, in 1989. 
The Ontario Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
discovered that the aquifer supplying the town’s 
water was contaminated by a chemical pollutant. It 
was suspected that the local plant of Uniroyal 
Chemical Ltd. (Uniroyal) caused this contamination 
problem. MoE issued a Control Order to require 
Uniroyal to clean up the pollutants and take measures 
to prevent further pollution. Uniroyal appealed this 
Control, Order immediately. Then, MoE, Uniroyal 
and the Local Government began to negotiate. Earlier 
analyses of the Elmira Conflict that do not use 
Graphical GMCR are provided by Hipel et a1.[3] and 
Kilgour et al. [5].  
DM 
MoE 
To represent the conflict as a graph model, one 
needs to first identify the DMs, states and preference 
rankings. Table 1 lists the DMs in the Elmira 
Conflict. The possible states that could occur in the 
conflict are listed as columns of Y’s, N’s, and “-”. 
A “Y” indicates “yes”, the option is taken by the DM 
controlling it, whereas an “ N  means “no”, the option 
is not selected, and “-” means either “Y” or “N. 
Preference rankings listed in Table 3 are the ranking 
Most Preferred to least 
preferred 
7 3 4 8 5 1 2 6 9  
of states fi-om most preferred to least preferred for 
each DM. For example, MoE prefers state 7 best 
among the nine states, and likes state 9 least. For this 
application, there are no sets of equally preferred 
states. 
Uniroyal 
LOCd 
Government 
Table 1 : Decision Makers (DMs) in the Elmira 
Dispute 
1 4 8 5 9 3 7 2 6  
7 3 5 1 8 6 4 2 9  
Uniroyal Chemical Limited ( Uniroyal) 
Regional Municipality of Waterloo and 
Government 
Table 2: Feasible States of the Elmira Dispute 
Table 3 : Preference Rankings for the Elmira Dispute 
To model the Elmira Dispute graphcally, we 
will follow the guideline of graphical modeling in the 
Graph-based GMCR system and go through five 
steps: State Input, DMs Input, Individual Graph 
Input, Preference Input and Generate Output. The 
reader should keep in mind that the option form given 
in Tables 2 and 3 was only used in earlier analyses 
[ 3 ,  51, but not in the Graphical GMCR study 
described here. Figures 3, 4 and 5 show the input of 
individual graphs for DM,(MoE), DM2(Uniroyal), 
and DM3(Local Government), respectively, while 
Figure 6 displays the integrated graph as output. 
Based on output from the analysis engine, Figure 7 
explains how the Elmira Conflict evolved from the 
1255 
status quo state 1 to the fiial equilibrium state 8. The 
shaded circles refer to strong equilibria as calculated 
by the GMCR I engine. Note that from state 5, a 
temporary equilibrium, the coalition of DM, and 
DM2 (MoE and Uniroyal) took the path from state 5 
to state 8 via state 6. As shown by the lower arc in 
Figure 7, this is equivalent to the DMs jointly causing 
the conflict to move directly from state 5 to state 8 
through their coalition in order to avoid having DMI 
move on its own from state 5 to the less preferred 
state 6 (see [6] for an explanation of coalition 
analysis with application to the Elmira Conflict). 
Q 
f - 
Figure 3: Individual Graph Input for DM, (MoE). 
Figure 4: Individual Graph Input for DM2 (Uniroyal). 
Figure 5:  Individual Graph Input for DM3 
(Local Government). 
- -. 
Figure 6: Integrated Graph of the Elmira Dispute 
Generated by the System. 
1256 
4. K. W Hipel, D. M Kilgour, L. Fang, and X 
Peng The Decision Support System GMCR in 
Environmental Conflict Management Applied 
Mathematics and Computahon, vol 83, pp. 117- 
152,1997. 
DM3 5. D. M. Kilgour, L Fang, and K W. Hipel. 
Negotiahon Support Using the Decision Support 
System GMCR. Group Decision and 
Negotiation, vo1.5, pp. 371-383, 1996. 
D. M. Kilgour, K. W. Hipel, X. Peng, and L 
Fang. Coalition Analysis in Group Decision 
Support Group Decision and Negotiation, 
7. I. Sommerville, Software Engineering (Fifth 
edition). Addison-Wesley, 1996 
8. A. Song, Design of a Graphical Input to a 
Decision Support System for Conflict 
Resolution. Master’s Thesis, Department of 
6 
~01.10, pp. 59-175, 2001 
Figure 7: Conflict Evolution in the Elmira Dispute. 
4 Conclusions 
Graphical GMCR facilitates the modeling of a 
small-scale conflict by allowing the user to construct 
a graph model by drawing on a computer screen. It is 
not only user-friendly from the software design point 
of view, but also effective from the conflict analysis 
viewpoint. Graphical modeling gives the user more 
freedom to modify the model during the process of 
drawing. States, state transitions and preference 
displays in Graphical GMCR are direct, simple and 
intuitive. This modeling process can help the user 
understand the conflict and come up with an effective 
’ solution. The graphical modeling generates valid 
input to the analysis engine of GMCR I. Connected 
to the analysis engine, the system can generate valid 
stability analysis results. 
References 
1. L. Fang, K. W. Hipel, and D. M. Kilgour. 
Interactive Decision Making: The Graph Model 
for Conflict Resolution, Wiley, New York, 1993. 
L. Fang, K. W. Hipel, D. M. Kilgour and X. 
Peng. Copyright holders for the decision support 
system GMCR 11, 2000. 
K. W. Hipel, L. Fang, D. M. Kilgour, and M. 
Haight. Environmental Conflict Resolution 
Using the Graph Model. Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, vol.1, pp. 153-158, 1993. 
2. 
3. 
Systems Design Engineering, University of 
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada,2001. 
1257 
