Effect of Cloud Polarization Properties 
on Target Discrimination1 
J.G. DeVore, J.H. Thompson 
Visidyne, Inc. 
595 1 Encina Road, Suite 208 
Goleta, CA 93 1 17 
devore@visidyne.com, thompson@visidyne.com 
RJ.  Jordano, A.T. Stair, C. Trowbridge 
Visidyne, Inc. 
10 Corporate Place, South Bedford Street 
Burlington, MA 01803 
jordano@visidyne.com, ats@visidyne.com, chris@visidyne.com 
805-683-4277 
781-273-2820 
P.C. Joss, S.A. Rappaport 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
77 Massachusetts Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
joss@visidyne.com, sar@visidyne.com 
J. Kristl 
Stewart Radiance Laboratory 
139 The Great Road 
Bedford, MA 01730 
jkristl@sdl.usu.edu 
6 17-253- 1000 
78 1-275-8273 
R.A. McClatchey 
McClatchey Associates 
3 Gould Road 
Bedford, MA 01730 
rmcclatchey@msn.com 
Abstract- The strong polarization signatures of many man- 
made surface targets suggest their use for detection and 
discrimination in satellite reconnaissance and surveillance. 
Since thin clouds on average cover more than 40% of the 
earth's surface, they are likely to contribute fiequently to the 
obscuration and apparent polarization'of such targets. We 
have carried out theoretical calculations of cloud particle 
scattering functions in combination with Monte Carlo 
calculations of radiative transfer in clouds, in order to 
determine the polarization signatures of thin clouds as a 
function of the relative spatial orientations of the sun, target, 
and detector, the cloud optical depth, the cloud particle 
phase (water or ice), and the electromagnetic wavelength. 
Our calculations of the scattering properties of individual 
cloud particles revealed situations in which the polarization 
of scattered, initially unpolarized, sunlight is very high. The 
theoretical cloud signatures were then combined with image 
polarization data for man-made surface targets and natural 
backgrounds in order to determine the consequences for the 
composite image with clouds of various optical depths. For 
the case investigated here we find that polarization 
signatures can be a useful discriminant for a surface target 
even when viewed through a cloud at optical depths as high 
as two. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. 
3. 
4. CIRRUS CLOUD SCATTERING PROPERTIES 
5. CIRRUS CLOUD RADIATIVE TRANSFER 
6. SAMPLE SCENARIO 
7. SAMPLE POLARIZED BACKGROUND DATA 
8. SAMPLE SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RESULTS 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
SCATTERING PROPERTIES OF WATER DROPLETS 
SCATTERING PROPERTIES OF ICE CRYSTALS 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
4-1985 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The strong polarization signatures of many man-made 
surface targets suggest their use for detection and 
discrimination in satellite reconnaissance and surveillance. 
Since thin clouds typically cover more than 40% of the 
earth’s surface, they are likely to contribute frequently to the 
obscuration and apparent polarization of such targets. Thin 
clouds also contribute to the blurring of background and 
target intensities; but this effect’ is not the subject of the 
work reported here. In this paper we present the results of 
theoretical calculations to determine the polarization 
properties of clouds, and we show an example of the 
polarization effects of a thin cirrus or cirrostratus cloud on 
an overhead view of a military vehicle. 
The theoretical calculations involve a chain of models and 
computations to build up the scattering properties of clouds. 
The chain starts with the indices of refraction of the cloud 
particle mlaterial, in this case either water or ice. Figure 1 
shows the real part of the indices of refkaction of liquid 
water and ice in the short-wave a a r e d .  The data for water 
and ice are taken from Hale and Querry [l] and Warren [2], 
respectively. Figure 2 shows the corresponding imaginary 
part of the indices of refraction, which are related to the 
absorptivity of the material and, ultimately, to the 
absorptivity of cloud particles (ice crystals or water 
droplets). Note the strong absorption peak near 3 pm. We 
will compare the scattering properties of cloud particles at 
electromagentic wavelengths, A, of 2.5 and 3 prn in order to 
investigate the importance of absorption to cloud 
polarization properties. 
2.5 3.0 3.5 4.( 
1 Wavelen!zth hh”i 
Figure 1 - Real Part of the Index of Refraction for 
Water and Ice as a Function of Electromagnetic 
Wavelength 
Given the complex index of refkaction of the material, the 
scattering properties of particles then depend only upon the 
size and shape of the particle and the wavelength of the light 
being scattered. Various techniques for calculating these 
single scattering properties will be discussed in sections 2 
and 3. To derive the average scattering properties of 
particles ID a particular cloud then requires averaging over 
the distntbution of particle sizes, shapes, and spatial 
orientations found in the cloud. We will show the results of 
our calculations for ii typical warm cirrus cloud in section 4. 
If the cloud is not optically thin then the probability that 
solar pholons will scatter more than once before exiting the 
cloud must be taken into account. The simple picture is that 
the polarization properties of thin clouds may be 
characterized with single scattering functions. The action of 
multiple scattering is to randomize the scattering plane and 
thereby decrease the polarization of scattered light. We have 
written a Monte Carlo code to simulate the multiple 
scattering process. W‘e show some examples of our results in 
section 5.  
In section 6 we describe a sample observational scenario 
that we set up in order to illustrate the application of 
polarization measurements in the detection and discrimina- 
tion of surface targets that are obscured by thin clouds. In 
section 7 we describe short-wave infrared polarization data 
that we (obtained ffor a military vehiicle in our sample 
scenario. In section 8 we present simulated signal-to-noise 
results, calulcated with our Monte Carlo code under the 
assumption that ow sample ground tiuget was observed 
through a thin cloud. Section 9 offers ,a brief statement of 
our conclusions. 
We shall Iherein assume that the radiation incident upon the 
cloud is unpolarized (as in the case of sunlight). Over the 
range of c,onditions that we consider, the degree of circular 
polarization induced by the scattering of radiation is 
negligible, so that any induced polarization is linear rather 
than elliptical. Throughout this paper we shall, for 
simplicity., refer to linear polarization as “polarization.” 
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 
Waden& (micron) _ _ _ ~  
Figure 2 - Imaginary Part of the Index of Refkaction 
for Water and Ice as a Function of Electromagnetic 
Wavelength 
This is variously called “the adjacency effect” or “blooming” and is a 
consequence of the strong forward scattering associated with particles 
larger than the wavelength of light. 
4-1986 
2. SCATTERING PROPERTES OF WATER DROPLETS 
Cloud water droplets are almost exactly spherical and 
consequently their scattering properties are calculable with 
Mie theory [3]. Various computer codes, such as that 
developed by Bohren and Huffman [4], exist for summing 
the series solution. It is conventional (and convenient) to 
plot the scattering properties as functions of the scattering 
angle, a, which is the angle between the scattered light ray 
and the incident or original light ray (Figure 3). 
I 
Detector 
1 
Original 
Lighr Ray 
Figure 3 -Definition of the Scattering Angle 
Figures 4 and 5 compare the intensity and polarization 
patterns, respectively, for radiation at h = 2.5 p scattered 
from water droplets with radii, R, of 0.5, 5.0, and 50 p, as 
calculated with Bohren and Huffman’s [4] code. Since the 
R =  0.5 pm droplet is substantially smaller than h, its 
scattering pattern is similar to that associated with the 
scattering of light by molecules (Rayleigh scattering). As the 
droplet gets larger more of the scattered sunlight is directed 
into the forward hemisphere, and for R >> h roughly half of 
the scattered light goes into a cone of very small solid angle 
about the original direction of propagation. The extinction 
(scattering plus absorption) cross section also increases 
rapidly with increasing R for R > h and asymptotically 
approaches twice the geometric cross section for large R. 
1 E+05 - 
5 nucron 
7- -- 
45 90 135 
Scattering Angle (deg) I 
Figure 4 - Normalized Intensity as a Function of 
Scattering Angle for Radiation at h = 2.5 pm 
Scattered by Water Droplets with Radii of 0.5, 5.0, 
and 50 p 
For R > h interference effects associated with propagation of 
radiaton through the particle are manifested as oscillations in 
the intensity pattern. The peak intensity near a = 120” 
corresponds to the primary rainbow in the visible. 
I 0 45 90 135 1801 
I i 
Scattering Angle (deg) 
Figure 5 - Fractional Polarization as a Function of 
Scattering Angle for Radiation at h = 2.5 p 
Scattered by Water Droplets with Radii of 0.5, 5.0, 
and 50 p 
In Figure 5, the polarization pattern for the smallest (R = 
0 . 5 ~ )  droplet again corresponds to Rayleigh scattering, for 
which scattered radiation at a = 90” is completely polarized. 
As the droplet size increases the situation becomes more 
complicated. Note that for droplets of all sizes the forward 
scattered light remains unpolarized. 
3. SCATTERING PROPERTIES OF ICE CRYSTALS 
Among the most common thin clouds are cirrus clouds. 
These clouds are found at high altitudes, where the ambient 
temperature is well below the freezing point of water. 
Magono and Lee [5] classify the large variety of shapes that 
ice crystals comprising cirrus may take. Among the more 
common forms are hexagonal columns and plates. 
Calculation of the scattering functions for ice crystals is 
considerably more complicated than for water droplets, 
because the spherical symmetry upon which Mie theory 
depends is absent. Valiant attempts have been made to 
determine “equivalent spheres” which could be employed to 
approximate ice crystals, but isuch efforts were abondoned 
in the 1980s. For crystals with characteristic sizes large 
compared to the wavelength of light the geometric optics 
approximation holds and ray tracing techniques can be 
successfully applied. For our calculations we have adopted a 
Fortran Ray Tracing (RT) code written by Macke [6] .  In RT 
codes individual light rays are followed as they reflect and 
refract through the scattering particle. For smaller ice 
crystals the problem becomes quite difficult. Depending 
upon whether there are any symmetries which can be 
exploited, several approximate methods are available. We 
have adopted the Discrete-Dipole Approximation (DDA) 
code written by Draine [7]. The DDA consists of replacing 
4-1987 
the continuous scatterer by an equivalent collection of 
coupled, polarizable points. 
The differences in polarization fraction are even more 
distinctive than those in scattered intensity. 
1 .E.+02 
2 l.E+01 
l.E+00 
0 1.E-01 
9 l.E-02 
l.E-03 
N + 
E 
'g 
* 
. __I .. 
Hex Column 
-- Hex Plate 
- lum Sphere 
0 45 90 135 180 
I Scattering Angle (de& 
~ 
Figure 6 - Same as Figure 4 for Scattering by 
Hexagonal Ice Columns and Plates and for Ice 
Spheres with Equivalent Direction-Averaged Cross 
Sections (See Text) 
The effect of particle shape is demonstrated by comparing 
the intensity scattering patterns for ice crystals and spheres 
of roughly the same cross section averaged over the 
direction of the incident radiation. For all of the calculations 
shown in this paper we assume that the spatial orientations 
of the ice crystals are not aligned. This allows the scattering 
patterns to remain functions only of the scattering, angle. . 
However, this is only an approximation, since in long-lived 
clouds hydrodynamic forces on large crystals cause them to 
gravitationally align so that their maximum projected areas 
are approximately horizontal. Figure 6 shows the effects of 
particle shape on the scattering intensity pattern. The plot 
compares DDA calculations of the intensity scattering 
functions at h = 2.5 pn wavelength for a hexagonal column 
and a hexagonal plate with Mie calculations for two ice 
spheres. The hexagonal column is 5 pm long and 0.46 pm 
wide, and the hexagonal plate is 5 p wide and 4.2 p 
thick. The R = 1 p and R = 3 pn radius spheres have the 
same average projected areas as the column and plate, 
respectively. Differences in intensity as large as a factor of 
10 between the hexagonal crystals and the equivalent 
spheres occur over much of the range of scattering angles 
and are even larger in the forward scatering direction. These 
differences disappear as the particles become small 
compared to h, (i.e., as the Rayleigh scattering regime is 
entered). As the particles become large compared to h, the 
ice crystals exhibit various halos while the spherical droplets 
produce rainbows. 
Figure 7 compares the polarization, P, for hexagonal ice 
crystals with those for the equivalent spheres at h = :2.5 pn. 
(The absolute value of P is the polarization fraction, with P 
< 0 corresponding to cases where the angle between the 
plane of polarization and the scattering plane exceeds 45".) 
i 1  
0.5 
-0.5 
-1 
-- 3um Sphe -- I _  ' 
0 45 90 135 18( 
Scattering Angle (deg) 
Figure 7 - Polarization as a Function of Scattering 
Angle for Radiation at h = 2.5 pm Scattered by 
Hexagonal Ice Columns and Plates and for Ice 
Spheres with Equivalent Direction-Averaged Cross 
Sections (See Text) 
In order to verify that the differences shown in Figures 6 and 
7 result firom the differences in particle shapes rather than 
the differing computational methods, we used the DDA code 
to calculate the scattering properties of I.: = 3 pm ice spheres 
at h = 2.5 pn and compared the results with those obtained 
from Mie calculations. Figures 8 and 9 compare the 
scattered intensities :md polarization fraictions, respectively, 
as fimcticins of a. While the results are not identical, the 
overall good agreement indicates that the DDA and M e  
methods are functioning as intended. 
0 45 90 135 180 
Scatteringhgle (deg) 
Figure 8 - DDA and Mie Calculations of Normalize 
Intensity as a Function of Scattering Angle for 
Radiation at h == 2.5 pm Scattered Iby R = 3 p Ice 
Spheres 
I 
4-1988 
I 
45 90 135 180' 
/ Scattering Angle (de& 
Figure 9 - Same as Figure 8 for Polarization Fraction 
as a Function of Scattering Angle 
The utility of the DDA code is limited by practical 
considerations to particles with dimensions less than or of 
the order of 1. Figure 10 shows the CPU time required for 
DDA calculations of the scattering functions for hexagonal 
ice crystals at h = 2.5 and 3 pm. The calculations were 
carried out on an SGI Octane workstation equippec 
R12000 processors running at 300 MHz. 
I 0 5 10 15 20 
Crystal Length (micron) 
Figure 10 - CPU Time for DDA Calculations of 
Scattering Functions for Hexagonal Ice Crystals, as a 
Function of Crystal Length, at h = 2.5 and 3 pm 
with 
The size distribution for ice crystals in typical cirrus clouds 
can extend to thousands of microns. Since there is a 
practical limit to the maximum size of crystals that can be 
handled with the DDA method, we next ask whether RT 
calculations can complete the size spectrum. Figure 11 
compares the intensity functions at h = of 2.5 pm for 
hexagonal crystals with lengths of 5, 10, and 15 pm. The 
intensity curves from the two approximate solutions are 
similar and generally within an order of magnitude of each 
other. It interesting to note that the interference effects 
calculated with the DDA approach eliminate the halos at 
approximately 15 and 30 degrees which appear in larger ice 
crystals but are incorrectly part of the RT solution when it is 
applied to small crystals. Figure 12 compares calculations of 
- 5  
DDA - 10 
0 45 90 135 18C 
Scattering Angle (deg) 
igure 11 - DDA and RT Calculations of Normalized 
Intensity as a Function of Scattering Angle for 
Radiation at h = 2.5 pm, Scattered by Hexagonal Ice 
Crystals with Lengths Of 5, 10, and 15 pm 
polarization fraction for unpolarized incident light. The 
model comparison improves as the crystal size increases. 
0 45 90 135 18( 
Scatteringhgle (deg) 
Figure 12 - Same as Figure 11 for Polarization 
Fraction as a Function of Scattering Angle 
Figures 13 and 14 compare the two calculation methods for 
incident light at h = 3 pm. It is interesting that the model 
comparison shows better agreement, despite the fact that the 
wavelength is longer and therefore farther from the regime 
0 45 90 135 181 
Scattering Angle (deg) 
Figure 13 - Same as Figure 11 for h = 3 p 
4-1989 
1.0 7 
0 45 90 135 18C 
Scattering Angle (deg) 
Figure 14 -Same as Figure 12 for h = 3 pm 
of applicability of the RT approach. This improved 
agreement is a result of the strong absorption of radiation by 
ice at 3 pn, which reduces interference effects by damping 
the radiation that propagates through the ice crystals (see 
Figure 2 and the accompanying discussion). Note also that, 
because of this effect, the polarization fi-action tends to be 
higher at 2. = 3 pm than at 2.5 pm. 
4. CIRRUS CLOUD SCATTERING PROPERTIES 
Cirrus clouds are composed of a variety of ice crystal shapes 
and a large range of crystal sizes. For the calculations 
reported here we employed a single shape, a solid hexagonal 
column (crystal habit Cle  in the nomenclature of Magono 
and Lee [.SI). Auer and Veal [SI have developed empirical 
relationships characterizing the dimensions of ice crystals 
found in natural clouds. Figure 15 shows the relationship 
between orystal diameter and length for solid hexagonal 
columns prescribed by their model. 
10 100 1000 1000( 
Length (microns) 
Figure 15 - Diameter of Hexagonal Ice Columns in 
Cirrus Clouds as a Function of Column Length 
(Auer and Veal [SI) 
Heymsfield and Platt [9] have parameterized the crystal size 
spectra of ice clouds. Figure 16 shows their parameter- 
izations. They organized the empirical data into eight 
temperature bins ftom - 20" to -60" C and fit the values 
within each bin with power-law functions. They found two 
100 1 O!)O lO0OOi 
lo MaximumDimnsion (mcrons) I 
Figure :16 - Distribution of Ice Crystal Sizes in Clouds 
for Eight Temperature Ranges 
(Hejmsfield and Platt [9]) 
natural grloupings of the fits with a break at - 40" C. This 
break conresponds to the dramatic increase in backscatter 
lidar measurements that is observed to occur at this 
temperature. 
We generated average scattering functions for a warm cirrus 
cloud composed of hexagonal columns at a temperature in 
the -35" t'o -40" C range using the size spectrum shown in 
Figure 16 and the distribution of crystal dimensions given in 
Figure 15. We used the DDA method to calculate scattering 
functions for ice crystals with lengths of 1, 5, 10, and 15 pm 
and the RT method for crystals with lengths from 20 to 3000 
p. We c'ombined our results to form an average scattering 
function bly weighting each phase funcition element by the 
scattering cross section: 
where Pkl( a) is the composite scattering function component 
kl, e.g,. PI1 is the intensity, Pkl(a,L) is the scattering function 
component kl for a crystal of length L, n(L) is the size 
spectrum, C,(L) is the scattering cross section, and a is the 
scattering angle. Figure 17 shows the composite intensity 
scattering functions for h = 2.5 and 3 pni. Note the peaks in 
l8OI 
0 45 90 135 
Scatteringhgle (d.eg) 
Figure 17 - Normalized Intensity as a Function of 
Scatteiring Angle for Radiation at h =: 2.5 and 3 p 
Scattered by Cirrus Clouds 
4-1990 
the intensity function for h = 2.5 p; these correspond to 
two halos. Again these halos are missing at 3 pm due to the 
strong absorption of radiation by ice at that wavelength. The 
strong forward scattering peaks demonstrate the influence of 
large particles in the size spectrum. 
Figure 18 shows the polarization fraction of the scattered 
light for unpolarized light incident on the cirrus cloud. Note 
that integrating over the crystal size distribution has (1) 
smoothed some of the oscillations characteristic of the 
curves for the moderate, single size crystals at h = 2.5 p 
and (2) generally decreased the polarization fraction at both 
2.5 and 3 p. 
0 50Scattering!&$e 1 0 (degf50 20( 
Figure 18 - Same as Figure 17 for Polarization 
Fraction as a Function of Scattering Angle 
5. Cmus CLOUD RADIATIVE TRANSFER 
We have written a Monte Carlo code to calculate the 
transfer of radiation in a plane-parallel cloud layer. Our code 
makes no assumptions about the polarization of the incident 
light, only that it can be described by a Stokes vector3. 
Given the solar elevation angle, the (vertical) optical depth 
of the cloud, the scattering functions (4 by 4 Mueller 
matrices, which are functions of the scattering angle) and the 
corresponding scattering and absorption cross sections, and 
a number of light packets, the code simulates the scattering 
process and collects the scattered light packets into a set of 
user-prescribed bins. The binned results are functions of 
azimuth and zenith angle and are renormalized to the solar 
spectral flux of Thekaekara [ 1 13. 
Our Monte Carlo code uses the method of weighted photon 
packets to treat absorption. Each packet starts with unit 
weight. A draw fiom an exponential distribution serves to 
determine the packet's progress. The packet either exits the 
cloud or is scattered. If it scatters then a draw from a 
uniform distribution determines the orientation of the 
Stokes vectors are 4-vectors which describe the polarization 
characteristics of light. They are computationally convenient since the 
interactions of light with scatterers or, indeed, any optical element, can be 
characterized as a transfonnation involving a 4 by 4 matrix, called a 
Mueller matrix. See, for example, the discussion by Gerrard and Burch 
U O I .  
scattering plane, and a draw from a distribution correspond- 
ing to the intensity scattering function determines the 
scattering angle. The 4 by 4 scattering matrix, initialized to 
the unit matrix, is transformed by the Mueller matrix for the 
scattering event and also rotated according to the orientation 
of the scattering plane. As each photon packet progresses, its 
weight is decreased according to the probability it has been 
absorbed based on the distance it has traveled within the 
cloud. The resulting Mueller matrix is added to the binned 
results according to weight of its photon packet 
We performed a number of comparisons of the results of our 
Monte Carlo code with both analytical and numerical results 
of other researchers. For example, Figure 19 compares the 
results of our Monte Carlo code (labeled VI) with the 
analytical results of Chandrasekhar [12] (labeled CRT) for 
the case of scattering fiom a semi-infiite plane-parallel 
layer of isotropic scatterers. The various curves are for 
scatterers with albedos (the ratio of the scattering to 
extinction cross section) from 0.1 (highly absorbing) to 1.0 
(lossless). Figure 20 compares calculations carried out using 
our Monte Carlo code with those performed by Takano and 
Liou [13] for scattered intensity from a cirrus cloud as a 
function of zenith angle at h = 0.55 pn. The sun is at the 
zenith, and the cloud is composed of hexagonal ice columns 
125 p long and 50 p wide. The various curves 
correspond to cloud vertical optical depths of 0.25, 1, 4, and 
16. (We assume throughout this work that the cirrus cloud 
layer is horizontal.) On the basis of these and other tests we 
believe that our Monte Carlo code is performing as 
intended. 
- . - 
i l  -CRTO 1 
CRT 0 3 
-CRTO5 
CRT 0 9 
C R T I O  
WO 1 
1 --VI03 
----- W O 5  
' t  
- W O 9  
0 0100 ; / I  - - -  - VI 1 0  
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 
Cosine of the Scattering Angle 
Figure 19 -Monte Carlo Calculations (VI) and 
Calculations by Chandrasekhar [12] (CRT) of the 
Reflectivity as a Function of Scattering Angle, of a 
Semi-Infinite Plane Layer of Isotropic Scatterers with 
Albedos 0.1,0.3,0.5,0.9, and 1.0 
4 - 1  991 
0 45 90 135 180 
Zenith Angle (deg) 
Figure 20 - Monte Carlo Calculations (VI) and 
Calculations by Takano and Liou [13] (TL) of the 
Scattered Intensity, as a Function of Zenith Angle, 
of Sunlight at h = 0.55 prn Incident ffom the 
Zenith upon a Cirrus Cloud 
6. SAMPLE SCENARIO 
Our sample scenario is designed to illustrate polarization 
measurements of surface targets and backgrounds. We 
deployed an Mared camera, built by Santa Barbara 
Focalplane (SBF), on the roof of Building 1105 at Hanscom 
AFB in Bedford, Massachusetts (Figure 21). The camera 
viewed a IHumvee, borrowed from the local reserve unit, and 
its immediate surroundings (Figure 22). The camera focal 
plane is a 320 by 256 InSb detector array that has been 
equipped with three filters covering the wavelength ranges 
of 2.53-3.27, 2.95-3.15, and 3.042-3.187 m, respectively, 
and with a rotating linear polarizing filter with stops at 60" 
intervals. 
Figure 2 1 - Instrumentation on the Roof of 
Building 1105, Hanscom AFB 
The viewing geometry is such that the camera is looking 
down on the Humvee at a 10" depression angle. The sun is at 
an elevation angle of 30". The azimuths of the Humvee and 
the sun from the caniera are 215" and 239", respectively. The 
solar scattering angle at the Humvee is then - 45". 
Wavelengths, of the Humvee Parked at a Distance 
7. SAMPLE POLARIZED BACKG~ROUND DATA 
4-1992 
The Stokes parameters for the image of the target and 
background were dt:rived by combining linearly polarized 
intensity measurements fi-om the SBF camera at each of the 
three filter spots, utilizing the good assumption that 
circularly polarized radiation is negligible (see Section 1). 
Figure 23 shows the polarization percent and polarization 
angle (i.e , the angle between the plane of polarizaiton and 
the local vertical) fix the sample scenario in a waveband 
centered near 3 pn. 
Figure 23 -Images of the PolariZa1:ion Percentage 
('Top) and P&rization Angle (Bottom), in a 
Waveband Centered Near 3 pn, for the Humvee and 
Surroundings in Our Sample Scenario 
8. SAMPLE SIGNAL-TO-NOISE R SULTS 
We have carried out Monte Carlo calculations using the 
average cross sections and scattering functions for ice 
crystals in warm, uniform cirrus cloud layers of various 
optical depths, t, from 0.1 to 1.0, for a solar elevation angle 
of 30°, and for a wavelength of 3 pm. For a viewing 
depression angle of 10” the line-of-sight optical depth 
through the cloud layer is 5.8 t. Figure 24 shows the Stokes 
parameters from the Monte Carlo calculations corresponding 
to the geometry of our sample scenario. The Stokes 
parameter V is zero because circular polarization is 
negligible. 
l.E-04 
3 8.E-05 
( ~ l -  
o 8 6 5 0 5  
2 3 4.E-05 
= <  
2 2 2 5 0 5  
v1 
.a .5 
% 
kO.E+OO 
3 -2.E-05 
-4.E-05 
I 
4.00i 0.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 Line-of-Sight Optical Depth 
Figure 24 - Calculated Stokes Parameters as a 
Function of Line-of-Sight Optical Depth through a 
Cirrus Cloud in Our Sample Geometry 
We generated simulated targethackground data by 
combining the experimental Humvee dataset with the 
calculated cloud data. To accomplish this, we first smoothed 
the experimental data to remove instrumental noise and then 
derived, from the smoothed data, the Stokes parameters at 
each pixel of the image. Next we attenuated the tar- 
gethackground Stokes parameters according to the cloud 
line-of-sight optical depth and added the cloud Stokes 
parameters to attenuated dataset. Finally, we added Gaussian 
noise to the dataset and then converted the Stokes 
parameters back into polarization fraction, I P 1, and 
polarization angle, Q. 
We took as the target signature the strong return fi-om the 
roof of the Humvee and used the shadow area in front of the 
Humvee to measure the background noise level. As a 
measure of the noise level, we took the standard deviation of 
the values of I P I and R in a region of adjacent pixels 
divided by the square root of the number of pixels used. We 
found that the noise levels in the target and background 
regions agreed fairly well. We then defined the signal-to- 
noise ratio as the ratio of the difference of the average 
values of I P I and Q in the target and background regions to 
the noise level of the background. Figure 25 displays the 
results of our calculations of the signal-to-noise ratio as a 
function of line-of-sight cloud optical depth I P I and Q 
(DOLP and AOLP, respectively, in the figure). Both 
polarization signals appear to remain useful for line-of-sight 
optical depths as large as 2. 
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.001 
Line-of-Sight Optical Depth ! 
Figure 25 - Calculated Signal-to-Noise Ratios for 
the Polarization Fraction (DOLP) and Polarization 
Angle (AOLP) as Functions of Line-of-Sight 
Optical Depth through a Simulated Cirrus Cloud 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
We have developed the capability to model the polarization 
properties of thin clouds. We have also constructed a sample 
scenario in which we combined polarization data from a 
measured target scene with simulated data from a hypotheti- 
cal intervening cirrus cloud. We then used the results of this 
procedure to evaluate the utility of polarization measure- 
ments in the detection and discrimination of surface targets 
beneath thin clouds. For the sample case investigated, we 
found that polarization signals at wavelengths near 3 pm 
contain important ground target information for line-of-sight 
cloud optical depths as high as - 2. 
We believe that the tools are now available to begin 
quantifying the effects of particulates in the atmosphere on 
polarized target signals. Although we have heretofore 
emphasized wavelengths in the short-wave infrared, the 
tools we have used are applicable to any wavelength from 
the ultraviolet through the visible to the mid-wave idtared. 
With the inclusion of thermal emission processes our Monte 
Carlo calculations could readily be extended to treat the 
long-wave inf?ared. Our model of cirrus cloud scattering 
should be improved by modeling the hydrody- 
namic/gravitational alignment of ice crystals. Using Mie 
scattering hc t ions  we can easily extend our techniques to 
the treatment of thin clouds composed of water droplets, 
such as marine stratus (see section 2). The DDA and RT 
codes can be employed to calculate the scattering properties 
of aerosols and smokes - all that is needed is the complex 
refractive index of the material and the shape and size 
distribution of the particles. 
4-1993 
REFERENCES 
[l] G.M. Hale, and M.R. Querry, “Optical Constants of 
Water in the 200-nm to 200-pm Wavelength Region”, 
Applied C)ptics 12 (3), 1973, pgs 555-563. 
[2] S.G. Warren, “Optical Constants of Ice from the 
Ultraviolet to the Microwave”, Applied Optics 23 (S), 1984, 
. PgS 1206-1225. 
[3] G. Mie, “Beitrage sur Opt& Truber Medien Speziell 
Kolloida1i:r Metallosungen”, Ann. Phys., 25, pgs 377-445. 
[4] C.F. Bohren and D.R. HuEman, “Absorption and 
Scattering; of Light by Small Particles”, New York: Wiley 
Interscience, 1983. 
[5] C. Magono and C.W. Lee, “Meteorological Classifica- 
tion of Natural Snow Crystals”, J. Fac. Sci., Hokkaido Univ. 
Series VIl, 2 ,  1966, pgs 321-362. 
[6] A. hfacke, “Scattering of Light by Polyhedral Ice 
Crystals”, Appl. Opt., 32 (15), 1993, pgs 2780-2788. 
[7] B.T. IDraine, “The Discrete-Dipole Approximation and 
Its Application to Interstellar Graphite Grains”, Astrophy- 
scal J, 3383, 1988, pgs 848-872. 
[SI A.H. Auer and D.L. Veal, “The Dimension of Ice 
Crystals in Natural Clouds”, J.  Atmos. Sci., 27 (9), 1970, pgs 
9 19-926. 
[9] A.J. Heymsfield and C.M.R. Platt, “A Parameterization 
of the Particle Size Spectrum of Ice Clouds in Terms of the 
Ambient Temperature and the Ice Water Content”, J .  Atmos. 
Sci., 41 (5 ) ,  1984, pgs 846-855. 
[lo] A. Gerrard and J.M. Burch, “Introduction to Matrix 
Methods in Optics”, New York, Dover, 1975. 
[ l l ]  M.P. Thekaekara, Solar Energy, 14, 1973, pgs. 109- 
127. 
[12] S. Clhandrasekhar, “Radiative Transfer”, New York: 
Dover, 1960. 
[13] Y. Takano and K.N. Liou, “Solar Radiative Transfer in 
Cirrus Clouds. Part II: Theory and Computation of Multiple 
Scattering; in an Anisotropic Medium”, J.  Atmos. Sci., 46 
(l) ,  1989, pgs 20-36 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors are pleased to acknowledge the support of the 
Director’s, Innovation Initiative of the National Reconnais- 
sance Organization through contract NROOOO-00-C-0057. 
4-1994 
