Multi-Platform GMTI Tracking for Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance Coalition Environments123 
Robert Popp Harold Maney Jon Jones 
Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense for Advanced Systems & Concepts 
ALPHATECH, Inc. 
50 Mall Road 
Air Force Research Laboratory 
26 Electronics Parkway 
1400 Defense Pentagon Burlington, MA 01803 Rome, NY 13441-4514 
Washington, DC 20301 781-273-3388 3 15-330- 1665 
rpom@,aca. osd.mi1 manev@,al,alt>hatech.com ionesi @l.af.mil 
Abstract-The focus of this paper is to describe several 
recent applications of multi-platform Ground Moving Target 
Indicator (GMTI) tracking technology for surveillance and 
reconnaissance coalition environments. As part of the U.S. 
Air Force's 1999 Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment 
(JEFX), we demonstrated (in stand-alone mode) GMTI 
tracking technology for a simulated ground target scenario 
consisting of 20,000+ military and civilian ground vehicles 
and GMTI sensor data based on multiple U.S. and coalition 
radar simulators (i.e., U.S. Joint STARS and Global Hawk, 
U.K. ASTOR, French HORIZON, Italy CJXESO). As part of 
NATO's Joint Project Optic Windmill (JPOW) V / Clean 
Hunter 2000 (CNOO), we demonstrated the real-time 
operation of GMTI tracking technology in a live military 
coalition exercise environment. Two such systems were 
supported at P O W  V / CNOO: (i) an on-board system 
consisting of the GMTI tracker ported to a DEC ALPHA on 
the Navy's P3 MY-6 platform, and used by operators to 
track ground targets based on GMTI data produced by the 
MY-6 radar system alone, and (ii) an off-board system 
consisting of the GMTI tracker ported to a Sun Quad Ultra 
80 at NATO HQ AIRNORTH at Ramstein AFB Germany, 
and used to track ground targets based on real GMTI data 
produced by both the P3 MY-6 and the French HORIZON. 
In addition, simulated GMTI data from the JSTARS, Global 
Hawk, and ASTOR radar simulators was also produced and 
tracked based on a simulated ground target scenario 
consisting of 30,000+ military and civilian ground vehicles. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. JPOW V f CLEANHUNTER 2000 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
2. JEFX 1999 
4. THEWAYAHEAD 
1. INTRODUCTION 
GMTI and/or Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) ground 
surveillance assets are entering the force structures of the 
U.S. military and our key NATO allies. However, declining 
U.S. and allied force structures place an imperative upon 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 EEE 
maximum utilization of these assets. The technical and 
operational interoperability of these assets must be explicitly 
addressed and evaluated by users in coalition environments; 
otherwise, we risk employing these assets in a suboptimal 
and ad hoc way, possibly denying a theater commander the 
information dominance needed and inherent in an integrated 
GMTYSAR picture of the coalition battle space. 
Tracking enemy ground movements and maintaining ground 
order of battle for coalition operations such as Situation 
Awareness (SA), Indications and Warning (I&W), targeting, 
and Battle Damage Assessment (BDA) requires a high 
degree of surveillance and reconnaissance. Multiple 
cooperating and interoperable GMTI/SAR surveillance and 
reconnaissance assets can provide the needed coverage both 
spatially and temporally in the sensor and tracking domains. 
However, for a variety of reasons, there are difficulties in 
doing so, including limited number of surveillance and 
reconnaissance assets, terrain and other types of screening 
(e.g., building in urban environments), multiple coalition 
systems that are not interoperable, and uncoordinated 
mission tasking, planning, and operations. 
The Coalition Aerial Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
(CAESAR) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration 
(ACTD) program is developing, integrating, evaluating, 
demonstrating, and transitioning advanced technologies for 
the efficient and effective use and interoperability of diverse 
U.S. and coalition airborne, space-based, and ground-based 
GMTI and SAR systems. In addition, corresponding 
Concepts of Operations (CONOPs) and Tactics, Techniques, 
and Procedures (TTPs) are being jointly developed to 
support a variety of coalition warfare operations including 
SA, I&W, targeting, and BDA. 
In this paper, as part of the CAESAR ACTD program, we 
describe several recent applications of multi-platform GMTI 
tracking technology in U.S. military and coalition exercise 
environments. The focus of this paper is on describing the 
application, utility, and some qualitative lessons learned 
fi-om employing GMTI tracking technology in these exercise 
environments. 
* This work is supported by OSD and AFRLKF under the CAESAR ACTD program. 
The authors would llke to recognize and thank Dr. Judith Daly and Mr. Joe Ross for all their support and contributions in this effort. 
4-1925 
Figure 1 - JEFX 1999 Multi-Platform GMTI Tracking Demonstration 
2. JEFX 1999 
In JEFX 1999, we supported a Category III stand-alone 
tracking demonstration at Hurlburt Field, FL (see Figure 1) 
using our Moving Target Exploitation (MTEx) system 
(illustrated in Figure 2 and described below). The CAESAR 
scenario was based on a large-scale target scenario (i.e., 
/-.+ 
%F/ MTEx System 
20,000+ military and civilian ground targets) and pre- 
recorded simulated GMTI data (in NATO Ex 2.01 format) 
from five: radar simulators (i.e., U.S. .JSTARS and Global 
Hawk, U.K. ASTGR, French HORIZON, Italy CRESO). 
For this effort, we: (i) integrated our rnulti-platform GMTI 
tracking imd Display Manager (DM4-t) visualizatioddisplay 
technologies onto it SPARC 20 workstation in a NATO 
___, 
GMTI, 
SAR, 
Tracks 
Figure 2 - MTEx System Description 
4-1926 
Figure 3 - Track Oriented MHT Approach 
testbed at The Hague, Netherlands, (ii) verified the correct 
operation of the GMTI tracker and DM++ (in stand-alone 
mode) on numerous simulated GMTI data sets produced by 
the radar simulators, (iii) created a tracking demonstration 
script for the JEFX 1999 demonstration, and (iv) ported the 
demonstration script onto an Ultra 5 at Hurlburt Field, FL 
for the demonstration. Before describing the utility and 
lessons learned fiom ow Gh4TI tracking demonstration in 
JEFX 1999, we first describe the MTEx system and then 
briefly overview the Multiple Hypothesis Tracking (MHT) 
framework on which our tracking technology is based. 
MTEx System Description 
The MTEx system (see Figure 2) originated from our work 
in the DARPA MTE program [3] ahd is a GMTI 
exploitation system that consists of four primary modules, 
namely, a sensor Interface Manager (IM), the Messenger 
Service Server, the GMTI tracker, and the DM++. The IM 
module serves as the interface between the internal h4TEx 
system and the external sensor systems. In CAESAR, there 
are multiple sensor-specific IM modules, one for each 
GMTI sensor, real or simulator. The Messenger Service 
Server is a centralized inter-process communication server 
that posts outgoing and receives incoming event messages. 
The GMTI tracker is based on our MHT approach tailored 
for multi-platform ground target tracking. The D M t t  is a 
visualizer and displayer that facilitates the understanding, 
analysis, and demonstration of key moving target data such 
as GMTI, tracks, and cartographic maps. The Local Store is 
an object-oriented database highly-tuned for performance. 
MHT Description 
ALPHATECH'S MHT was conceived in the 1970s from [5] 
as a way of applying optimal estimation theory [ 11 to multi- 
target tracking problems. The strength of MHT is that it 
potentially provides near optimal (in a rigorous, estimation- 
theoretic sense) estimates of target positions and velocities. 
However, a weakness is that it can have unrealistic 
computational requirements. In the 1980s, we developed a 
track-oriented approach to MHT (illustrated in Figure 3) that 
largely overcame these computational problems. 
The example in Figure 3 illustrates how the track-oriented 
MHT approach works. There are initially two tracks, with 
three sensor reports (Zl, &, Z,) to process and update these 
tracks and to also hypothesize a new third track. It is 
assumed sensor reports are fiom a single fiame and no target 
is detected more than once within a frame. As in any 
tracking algorithm, the initial steps are to predict tracks 
forward to report times and to gate tracks against reports to 
determine feasible track-report association hypotheses. 
Hypothesis formation and resolution are performed in two 
steps. In the first step, reports are tentatively assigned to 
tracks and the tracks are updated using these reports to form 
local hypotheses HI through H5. For example, H2 is a 
hypothesis in which there was a missed detection for track 1, 
H3 is a hypothesis in which Z, is assigned to track 1, while 
IT, is a hypothesis in which Z2 is assigned to track 2. Note 
that H3 and €€, are inconsistent, since it is assumed that a 
report can be assigned to at most one track. In the second 
step, global hypotheses, which are consistent sets of local 
hypotheses, are formed and the best global hypothesis is 
selected. Finally, any reports that cannot be associated with 
existing tracks are used to initiate new track hypotheses. 
In this example, global hypotheses are resolved based only 
upon a single fiame of data so that the local hypothesis trees 
corresponding to track 1 and track 2 have depth one. More 
generally, to achieve the full benefits of the MH'I approach, 
it is necessary to defer resolution of global hypotheses until 
k fiames of data are accumulated, resulting in local 
hypothesis tree of depth k. 
4-1927 
The key 1.0 the computational efficiency of the track-oriented 
h4HT approach is the decomposition of hypotheses into 
local and global hypotheses. Local hypotheses are formed 
and pruned completely independently of one another, so that 
the computations associated with local hypotheses grow only 
linearly with the number of tracks. Each local hypothesis 
defines a particular association of sensor reports to a track. 
Thus, an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) can be used to 
provide liarget state estimates corresponding to each track 
hypothesis by processing all the sensor reports associated 
with the irack under the hypothesis. These reports can come 
from multiple platforms so that multi-platform tracking is 
built directly into MHT. Moreover, the EKF provides a 
rigorous and consistent means of combining all information: 
vehicle motion, sensor data, terrain data. Global hypotheses 
are not explicitly formed, but are implicit in the formulation 
of a multi-dimensional assignment, as discussed next. 
In the track-oriented MHT approach, resolving hypotheses 
(data association) is by selection of a maximum a posteriori 
(MAP) global hypothesis. The track log likelihood function 
is obtained as a by-product of computing the target state 
estimate for local hypothesis H (using the EKF) and the sum 
is over all local hypotheses contained in the given global 
hypothesis Q. Choosing the hypothesis Q that maximizes 
P(QlZ) is a combinatorial optimization problem known as a 
(IC+ 1)-dimensional assignment problem, where k is the depth 
of the hypothesis tree. For k = 1 (case illustrated in Figure 
3), there are fast optimal algorithms for solving the 2D 
assignment problem. For the more general case, i.e., k > 2, 
there is no polynomial time optimal algorithm but effective 
suboptimal algorithms are available. See [2,4] for details. 
JEFX 1999 Lessons Learned 
The tracking demonstration in JEFX 1999 demonstrated a 
core CAESAR technical objective, namely, the feasibility of 
large-scale surveillance and reconnaissance tracking of 
moving ground targets using multiple U.S. and coalition 
GMTI platform assets. However, the demonstration also 
highlighted a real operational tracking issue, namely, how to 
roll up the "track" picture into an information product that is 
clean, simple, and meaningful for user consumption when 
tracking large-scale ground target scenarios, e.g., multiple 
convoys spanning say 3,000 to 5,000 individual targets (as 
depicted in Figure 1). For operators, it would not be 
feasible nor meaningful to generate that many individual 
JTIDS 3.5 track update messages and post them on say a 
Link 16 C2 network. Alternatively, rolling up the individual 
track picture into a convoy track picture with each convoy 
indicating the number of vehicles contained within is better. 
Some of the key multi-platform GMTI tracking technical 
accomplishments in JEFX 1999 include: (i) a common 
GMTI data format interface (i.e., NATO Ex 2.01), where the 
data format specified not only includes the GMTI data itself 
(i.e., range, azimuth, target radial velocity), but also a 
characterization of the GMTI radar itself (e.g., measurement 
accuracies, coverage area, minimum detectable velocity) for 
each different radar, (ii) an ability to track large-scale 
convoys on- and off-roads, and (E)  an ability to handle 
terrain screening and missed detections (due to terrain 
screening: and/or non-unity detection probability) as well as 
clutter arid false alarms. The primary technical deficiency 
was the need for automatic geo-registration to deal with the 
biases inherent in multi-platform GMTI data. 
3. JPOW V / CLEAN HUNTER 2000 (CNOO) 
In JPOVV V / CNOO, we used two MTEx systems to 
demonstrate several additional CAESAR technical 
objectives, namely, (i) the feasibility and utility of on- and 
off-boarcl GMTI tracking, and (ii) the real-time operation 
and utilization of GMTI tracking technology in a live 
military exercise environment (see Figure 4). The on-board 
MTEx system was in the Navy's P3 pllatform and was used 
by operators to track ground targets based on the P3's APY- 
6 GMTI radar system alone. The off-board MTEx system 
was in NATO HQ , W O R T H  at Ramstein AFB Germany 
and was used to track ground targets based on live GMTI 
data produced by both the P3 and the French HORIZON; in 
addition, simulated GMTI data fiom JSTARS, Global 
Hawk, and ASTOR radar simulators was tracked. 
&-Board MTEx System Description 
Figure 5 depicts the IvlTEx system context and deployment 
during JPOW V / CNOO. As can be seen, the on-board 
system consisted of a Mercury multiprocessor for AF'Y-6 
radar signal processing, an SGI worksstation for tasking the 
various .MY-6 radar SAR/GMTI modes, a DEC ALPHA 
workstation (i.e., MTEx) for GMII exploitation, and an NT 
workstation for interfacing the P3 P9Y-6 system to the 
ground via a Tactical Common Data Link (TCDL). The P3 
would down link GMTI in both NATO Ex 2.01 and NMTI 
1.10 fonmat for exploitation, the former for exploitation in 
theater, and the latter for display on a Joint Services 
WorkSteition (JSWS) at the Navy Strike Cell (in CONUS) 
via an FTP transmission over a secure SIPRNET link. 
Off-Board MTEx S'atem Description 
The off-board system consisted of MTEx ported to a Sun 
Quad Ultra 80 at NATO HQ AIRNORTH. Live P3 APY-6 
and HORIZON GMTI data was domi linked to the ground 
over their respective data links, broadcast (via UDP) over 
various NATO networks (in NATO Ex 2.01 format), and 
eventually ingested in MTEx for GNKI exploitation. For 
the JSTARS, Globid Hawk, and ASTOR radar simulators at 
DePeel, The Netherlands, I'IEST arid CAMDEN ground 
truth scenario geneiration simulators were used to generate in 
real time ground taxget movements for over 30,000 military 
and civilian targets. The Network Time Protocol (NTP) was 
used to synchronize and make consistent time across these 
various simulators. For each time update epoch, the truth 
simulators would broadcast (via U>P) over the NATO 
simulation network at DePeel DIS PIDUs corresponding to 
4-1928 
Figure 4 - JPOW V / Clean Hunter 2000 Multi-Platform GMTI Tracking Demonstration 
ground truth target updates. These DIS PDUs would be JPOW V /  CNOO Lessons Learned 
ingested by the JSTARS, Global Hawk, and ASTOR radar 
simulators for processing. Each radar simulator would then 
generate (or not) a GMTI detection for the various DIS PDU 
targets, and broadcast (via UDP) over the NATO 
exploitation networks the GMTI detections in NATO Ex 
2.01 format for subsequent processing. 
In P O W  V / CNOO, we used MTEx to demonstrate several 
additional CAESAR technical objectives, namely: (i) the 
feasibility of GMTI tracking for on- and off-board systems, 
(ii) the real-time operation and utilization of Gh4TI tracking 
technology in live military exercise environments for 
Navy P3 PlatForm 
r 
French 
HORIZON 
CONUS 
.** 
.- POW V I Clean Hunter 
Demo (May -June ‘00) 
Figure 5 - MTEx System Context at JPOW V / Clean Hunter 2000 
4-1929 
Figure 6 - Finding TCTs and TCT Irh-astruchn-e at POW V / Clean Hunter 2000 
surveillance and reconnaissance of large-scale moving 
ground target scenarios based on multiple U.S. and coalition 
real and simulated airborne Gh4TI platform assets, and (iii) 
the utility of tracking technology to an Intel and/or Theater 
Missile Defense (TMD) cell by providing ground moving 
target Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB) (e.g., 
JTIDS 3.5 track update messages) to support a mission such 
as Time Critical Targeting (TCT) andlor SA. 
Figure 6 provides an example illustrating how integrating 
MTEx with an EO/IR TMD exploitation system can aid in 
finding TCTs andor illuminating TCT infrastructure (e.g., 
hidelreload sites). As depicted in Figure 6, at time t, a 
launch event (via a JTIDS 3.0 message) was received in 
MTEx. At the time and within the vicinity of this launch 
event, track ID 10119 was born and subsequently tracked 
for approximately 10 minutes before dropping track (track 
based on tracking simulated GMTI data fiom both Joint 
STARS and Global Hawk). Approximately 5 minutes later, 
at time ( t  t- 15) minutes, another launch event (again via a 
JTIDS 3.0 message) was received in the GMTI exploitation 
system. At the time and within the vicinity of this launch 
was track ID 10419. Showing track ID 10419’s track 
history rleveals that it was born in the vicinity of where track 
ID 10119 stopped. One could conjecture that not only are 
tracks 10119 and 10419 TCT targets, but also that perhaps 
the operator-drawn square area depicted in Figure 6 is part 
of the enemy’s TCT infrastructure (e.g., hidelreload site). 
Some of the key technical accomplishments in P O W  V I 
CNOO iriclude: (i) the real-time operation of multi-platform 
GMTI tracking technology in a live military and coalition 
exercise environment for surveillance and reconnaissance 
using COTS equipment, (ii) an ability to filter (or select) the 
GMTI data to be processed by the traclker, e.g., track only a 
particular sensor’s GMTI data, track in an operator- 
designated Area of Interest (AOI), etc, and (iii) an ability to 
run concurrently niultiple specially-tuned Gh4TI trackers 
tailored lor different missions, e.g., run one tracker tuned for 
group targets in an A01 that contains large-scale convoy 
targets in support of SA (example scenario in Figure 1 is a 
good ilhstration), and run another tracker tuned for 
individual targets in an A01 that may contain ‘TCTs. The 
primary deficiencies were similar to the ones identifed in 
JEFX 19199, namely, the need for automatic geo-registration 
to deal with the biases inherent in multi-platform GMTI 
data, ancl the need to address operational tracking concerns. 
3. THE WAY AHEAD 
In this section, we describe several enhancements to our 
GMTI tracking technology for future CAESAR activities. 
Automatic Geo-Registration 
Automatic geo-registration compensates and removes biases 
inherent in multi-platform GMTI data. Automatic geo- 
registration can be accomplished in several ways, including 
(i) removing GMTI biases from one or more sensors with 
respect to a geodetic position (absolute registration) or (ii) 
removing GMTI biases fiom two or more sensors with 
respect to each other (relative registration). To register 
absolutely, a physical entity (e.g., roads, stationary mover) is 
needed that is itself geodetically registered and shows up, 
directly or indirec:tly, in the GMTI returns. In another 
4-1930 
12 
10 r 'I 
2 Md Term Sensors 2 Far Term SPClior~ 
Figure 7 - Automatic Geo-Registration Approach 
program, we have developed geo- and bias-registration 
algorithms and integrated them in closed loop form with the 
GMTI tracker (see Figure 7). These algorithms work in a 
bootstrapping fashion in which biases are continually Enhanced GMTI Tracking 
and track stationary movers in an effort to estimate sensor 
biases based upon the residual errors in tracks. 
updated and used to improve multi-P1a'om tracking The state-of-the-art of our group tracking in JEFX 1999 was In we propose to leverage this 
work to both (i) register GMTI data to roads, and (ii) detect somewhat simplistic, and enhancements are needed to deal 
Figure 8 - Enhanced GMTI Tracking Tailored for Groups, AOIs, and Radar Modes 
4-1931 
with some of the realities of current radar capabilities and 
target behaviors, e.g., group tracking for radar Wide Area 
Surveillance (WAS) modes, and group tracking that does 
not assume vehicle motion is independent and uncorrelated 
from target-to-target (vehicles stop or slow down to avoid 
hitting one other in military formations or convoys). In 
another program, we are enhancing our group tracking 
technology (see Figure 8) and will leverage it in CAESAR. 
Likewise, we are developing and will leverage in CAESAR 
a mode-based tracker that automatically tailors itself to 
altemative radar modes (resolution, coverage, revisit rate) 
and missions (I&W, targeting), and an AOI-based tracker 
that automatically tailors itself to operator priorities and 
characteristics of the sensor and target environment. 
Our current multi-platform tracker in CAESAR uses road 
data as a constraint on track motion, and forces track states 
to lie on the road itself. For some sensors, this may be 
problemaric since the GMTI may be more accurate than the 
road itsel& and, as a result, such an approach increases the 
track error. In CAESAR, we will utilize a new approach 
that combines road and GMTI data, weighing each 
accordingly based on their relative accuracies. 
The sensor report latencies between a sensor creating a 
GMTI detection and the tracker receiving it for processing 
can cause the GMTI from multiple platforms to arrive out of 
temporal order. This is not a problem for a single platform, 
but is for multiple platforms. In CAESAR, we will ensure 
in-order processing by enhancing our current latent sensor 
data processing approach with both roll back re-processing 
and input data buffering. Other enhancements we will 
incorporate into the CAESAR tracker include dwell-level 
processing, target-adaptive processing, Interacting Multiple 
Model (IMM) filtering, and integrated moving and 
stationary target tracking. 
Continmus Tracking 
Under a IlARPA Camtinuous All-source Region Monitoring 
(CARM) SBIR program, we developed a capability to 
continuously track gound targets through move-stop-move 
cycles using GMTI and S A R  data. Part of the continuous 
tracking problem is to collect the right type of information at 
the right place and the right time to monitor target behavior. 
As Figure 9 depicts, two key functional modules enabling 
such a calpability is a GMTI tracker integrated with a Sensor 
Resource Manager (SRM). The SRM solves a constrained 
optimization problem where limited sensor resources (i.e., 
modes) are tasked and scheduled to maximize an objective 
function, which reflects a mission goal, e.g., continuous 
tracking. In CAESiu1 we will leverage this capability for 
move-stolp-move targets. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we deslcribed several recent applications of our 
multi-platform GMTI tracking technology for surveillance 
and reconnaissance (coalition environments. In JEFX 1999, 
we demonstrated in stand-alone mode our GMTI tracking 
technology for a simulated ground target scenario consisting 
of 20,000+ military and civilian ground vehicles and GMTI 
sensor data based on multiple U.S. and coalition radar 
simulators. In POW V / CNOO, we demonstrated the real- 
time operation of our GMTI tracking technology in a live 
Fig,ure 9 - Continuous Tracking Through Coordinated GMTI Tracking and GMTUSAR Sensor Resource Management 
4-1932 
military coalition exercise environment. Two systems were 
supported, namely, a Navy P3 APY-6 on-board system and 
an off-board system at NATO HQ AIRNORTH at Ramstein 
AFB Germany. Real GMTI data produced by both the P3 
APY-6 and the French HORIZON was processed and 
tracked. Additionally, simulated GMTI data from the 
JSTARS, Global Hawk, and ASTOR radar simulators was 
produced and tracked based on a large-scale ground target 
scenario consisting of 30,000+ military and civilian ground 
vehicles. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Bar-Shalom, Y., and X. Li, Multitarget-Mziltisensor 
Tracking: Principles and Techniques, Y B S  Publishing, Storrs, 
CT, 1995. 
[2] Pattipati, K., R. Popp and T. Kirubarajan, “Survey of 
Assignment Techniques for Multitarget Tracking,” Multitarget- 
Multisensor Tracking: Applications and Advances, Vol. JII (Y. 
Bar-Shalom and W. D. Blair, eds.), Dedham, MA: Artech 
House, 2000. 
[3] Popp, R., N. Sandell and B. Johnson, “MTE Ground Station 
Testbed - A Battlefield Awareness Asset for GMTI 
Exploitation,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, Snowmass, CO, 
1999. 
[4] Popp, R., K. Pattipati, Y. Bar-Shalom and R. Ammar, 
“Shared-Memory Parallelization of the Data Association 
Problem in Multitarget Tracking,” IEEE Trans. Parallel and 
Distributed Systems, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 993-1005, October, 
1997. 
[5] Reid, D., “An Algorithm for Tracking Multiple Targets,” 
IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 423-432, 
December 1979. 
Dr. Robert Popp: Dr. Robert Popp received his B.A. and 
MA.  degrees in computer science from Boston University, 
Boston, M A  (summa cum laude, distinction) in 1992, and 
his Ph. D. degree in electrical and systems engineering fi-om 
the University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT in 1997. Dr. Popp 
is presently employed with the OBce of the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense for Advanced Systems and Concepts 
(DUSD/AS&C). Prior to this, he was employed with 
ALPHATECH, Inc., Burlington, MA, where he was Director 
of Business Development and Marketing, Fusion 
Technology and Systems Division. Dr. Popp was also an 
Adjunct Professor in the Computer Science and Engineering 
Department at the University of Connecticut, a Visiting 
Research Scientist in the Advanced Concepts Directorate at 
the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), and has active 
duty service in the US.  Air Force as an Aircraj 
Maintenance Technician. Dr. Popp has published over 60 
technical papers and is the holder of two patents. He is a 
member of variozls honoray and technical societies, 
including Phi Beta Kappa, Upsilon Pi Epsilon, IEEE, and is 
listed in “Who‘s Who in the Eastr‘ and ”Who’s Who in the 
World”. Dr. Popp is presently serving as Associate Editor 
for the IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics (SMC), and as Chairman of the IEEE SMC 
Society’s Adaptive Computing Systems (ACS) technical 
committee. Dr. Popp’s expertise is in multisensor- 
multitarget tracking, sojhvare engineering, parallel and 
distributed computing, adaptive computing systems, and 
computer networking. 
Mr. Harold Maney: Mr. Harold Maney is presently Chief 
Somare Engineer with the Fusion Technology and Systems 
Division at ALPHATECH, Inc. Mr. Maney received his B.S. 
Degree in Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State 
University in 1969, and his MS.  Degree in Management 
Administration from Georgia in 1976. Mr. Maney ’s career 
includes active duty service as a Pilot in the US Air Force, 
civil service as a Systems and Sofiware Engineer for 
airborne Radar and EW systems, and ten years of 
consulting work developing flight test and radar and sonar 
data analysis groundstations. Among his publications 
include a paper on the application of Object-Oriented 
software technology to radar signal processing, and a co- 
authored paper on the development of 3-0 radar 
interferometric imagery. At ALPHATECH, Mr. Maney has 
been the chief technical lead on the DARPA Moving Target 
Exploitation ( W E )  program and numerous follow on 
efiorts. 
4-1933 
This page intentionally left blank. 
4-1934 
