Geophysical Prospecting of Mars Subsoil by TDEM 
S y s t em1 
Sergio Pagnan and Roberto Marcialis 
Institute for Naval Automation of National Research Council 
Via De Marini, 6, “Torre di Francia” - 16149 Genova - Italy 
space@ian.ge.cnr.it 
Tel. +39 10 647 5655 Fax +39 10 647 5600 
Giorgio Tacconi and Luca Minna 
Advanced Engineering Technology, Viale Mosto 4,16100 Genova - Italy 
giorgio.tacconi@aetnet.it 
Cinthya Ottonello 
Science and Space Engineering Group of DIBE - University of Genoa 
Via all’Opera Pia 11A - 16145 Genova - Italy 
cinthya.ottonello@aleph.it 
Abstract. This communication deals with the design of a 
TDEM (Time Domain Electromagnetic Measurement) 
system suitable for Martian subsoil investigation. 
An experiment, called MASTER (Mars subsurfAce 
Sounding by Time-domain Electromagnetic 
measuRements) is described. 
MASTER is expected to achieve the following main 
objectives: 
Measure electrical conductivity profiles of Martian 
subsoil layers; 
0 Identify Martian ground waterhce signatures 
0 Perform passive measurements of the Martian 
electromagnetic (EM.) environment 
The particular application leads to the design of a system 
satisfying some specific requirements that, if not met, 
could compromise the quality performances of the data 
obtained 
In the paper, a proposed configuration for the 
measurement system will be described. Data acquisition 
and analysis strategy, required by the extreme 
environmental conditions, will be presented. 
This project, funded by the Italian Space Agency, has 
been proposed to fly aboard DEEDIU, the Italian Drill 
Payload for the Mars Surveyor Program 2003. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. OBJECTIVES OF MASTI% EXPERIMENT 
3. INSTRUMENT DESIGN 
4. THE OPERATING PROCEDURE AND SIGNAL PROCESSING 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The investigation of Mars was initially based upon optical 
and remote sensors. With the landing of robots on its 
surface, the observations are much less “remote” and 
include a wider range of parameters and measurements. 
Consequently, Mars has become one of the better 
understood objects in the solar system, second perhaps, 
only to the Moon. 
The high-resolution images, provided by missions such as 
Mars Global Surveyor, have shown large areas of 
stratified rocks, which differ greatly due to several 
processes (e.g. lava flow emplacement, lacustrine 
sedimentation, eolian deposition). Extensive high- 
resolution mapping, and imaging of outcrops of layered 
geological units, may help in interpreting these 
formations. However, it is necessary, like it is necessary 
on Earth, to investigate the subsurface to understand the 
nature and the genesis of these stratigrafic formations. 
Future Mars scientific exploration programs will be 
focused on looking for evidence of biologicallchemical 
signatures of life and, in particular, on searching for liquid 
water and ice. The main strategic objectives are: 
0 Surface site reconnaissance, 
0 Climate monitoring, 
0 Sample return; 
0 Telecommunication infrastructures. 
In-situ science of surface and atmosphere; 
To meet these aims, spacecraft designs and technologies 
for further missions will follow the engineering milestones 
of Mars Pathfinder (1997). This mission placed a semi- 
’ 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 @ 2001 IEEE 
1-119 
autonomous roving vehicle capable of conducting science 
experiments on the surface of the planet. 
The Italian Space Agency (ASI) has been engaged for 
several years in projects of planetary exploration. The 
recent Calls for Proposals requested proposals both for 
remote sensing of Mars' surface from orbit and for in-situ 
, sounding of Mars' surface and subsoil. 
In particular drilling systems for subsurface analysis and 
sample collection and instruments suitable for installation 
aboard rovers (Mars Pathfinder type) were requested. 
In response, the MASTER (Mars subsurfice Sounding by 
Time-domain Electromagnetic measuRements) experiment 
was proposed to AS1 in 1999. 
MASTER has been designed to fly aboard DEEDRI, the 
Italian Drill developed for collecting samples of Mars 
subsurface. DEEDRI represents one of the ten Additional 
Payloads (Aps) that are scheduled to fly aboard the 
mission Mars Sample Return 2003 (A0 1999-AS1 ARS- 
003 for Mars Sample Return 2003 Lander). 
In the present paper, the purposes of the project and the 
preliminary system design will be described. 
2. OBJECTIVES OF THE MASTER EXPERIMENT 
MASTER is intended to exploit the scientific knowledge 
and experience which geologists and geophysics have 
accumulated in the past decades in the field of electrical 
conductivity measurements of the Earth, for the 
development of electromagnetic geophysical 
investigations [ 13 [2] on roving vehicles dedicated to Mars 
in situ measurements. 
Electromagnetic (EM) survey methods have been used on 
the Earth for more than 50 years. They have been applied 
to mineral exploration, deep crustal studies, superficial 
geological mapping (environmental and engineering 
applications) and mapping sedimentary basins for 
petroleum exploration. Frequencies between 0.000 1 Hz 
and 100 lrHz are required to cover all these applications. 
The application of this technique on Earth have been used 
for mapping of the surface, mostly from airborne 
instruments. Also, the ground penetrating application here 
is a new concept different from other ground penetrating 
techniques. 
The goal of the experiment is to determine the layered 
structure of the Martian subsoil, down to hundreds of 
meters of depth, by means of non-intrusive time-domain 
electromagnetic measurements. In particular, MASTER is 
expected to achieve the following objectives: 
0 Measure electrical conductivity profiles of  Martian 
subsoil layers; 
Identify Martian ground waterhce signatures; 
Passively measure the Martian EM environment; 
Produce correlatiodcomparisodintegration with 
information from other measurement techniques; 
Provide data for orbital sounding radars (e.g. MARS 
EXPRESS); 
The abovementioned objectives are perhaps attainable 
&om a TDEM (Time-Domain Electromagnetic 
Measurements) system operating on the Earth, but would 
be much more complex if these techniques had to be 
accomplished from space. There are several constraints 
that canniot be disregarded: 
0 mass and power budget limitation; 
limits on the amount of data that can be transmitted to 
Earth; 
0 the limited area of the planet surface that could be 
scanned; 
EM interference with other science experiments. 
The TDlEM technique has been selected since it is based 
on measurements of electrical res#istivity, which is 
generally able to discriminate geological layered 
structureis. Moreover, the resistivity of a rock can undergo 
notable variations due to water presence. Therefore, it 
may be very useful in detecting waterlice signatures. Since 
the TDEM is a time-domain technique (recording of a 
relaxatbn transient following a proper excitation), in 
principle it is possible to derive information from different 
depths with a single measurement, speeding the execution 
of high-#density surveys over large are.as. This last feature 
makes tlhe TDEM technique much more expeditious and 
flexible than analogous techniques operating in the 
frequency domain. It is a low-cost and light-weight 
technobgy. 
Finally, the TDEM approach does not require the return of 
samples and intrinsically satisfies the Planetary Protection 
and Cross Contamination requirements, 
3. INSTRUMENT DESIGN 
The basic configuration of a TDEM instrument uses the 
central loop induction method. The receiver, a sensitive 
magnetometer, is placed concentric with the source loop. 
Electrical and electromagnetic geophysical techniques 
have orLe important principle in common: the electrical 
resistivity of the soil is measured. To do this an electrical 
current must be generated in the soil. This is accomplished 
by magnetic induction in the TDEM method. A square 
wave current is driven through a transmitter, usually 
consisting of square loops of small diameter insulated 
wire, laid above or, better, directly on the ground surface. 
The diniensions of these loops vary depending on required 
exploration depth. Smaller dimensions are used for 
shallower depths. The square wave current driven through 
the transmitter causes a time-varying magnetic field. This 
"primary" magnetic field in turn induces eddy current flow 
in the ground (Faraday's Law), and the intensity of these 
eddy ciurrents is a function of the electrical resistivity 
stratification in the subsurface. In horizontally layered 
ground. the eddy currents are horizontally closed rings 
concentric about the transmitter loop. Immediately after 
current turn-off in the transmitter, the ground eddy 
current!; are concentrated near the surface, and with 
increasing time eddy currents are progressively induced at 
greater depths. A small receiver coil in the centre of the 
transmitter loop measures the voltage due to the secondary 
magnetic field caused by the eddy currents. From the time- 
decay of the voltage, the resistivity layering in the ground 
is computed. 
1-340 
Ground application systems use transmitting coils from 1 
meter up to some tens of meters wide driven by currents 
from one Ampere up to tens of Ampere, depending on the 
required inspection depth. 
However, the extreme working I conditions due to the 
particular environment lead to the design of a system 
satisfying some specific requirements, such as: 
- 
Subsystem I Type I Weight 
Transmitting coil I Cu - coil diameter 150 mm, section I 5 5  gr. 
0 minimizing the total mass of the system; 
0 using very low temperature working components; 
0 using very low power consumption components (of the 
order of milliwatt); 
reducing data memory allocation and computation 
time. 
The instrument developed for DEEDRI Payload [3] uses a 
set of two equal coils (transmitter and receiver) with 
diameter of the order of 150 mm. The instrument is 
mounted on the bottom face of the Drill box and does not 
interfere with the DEEDRI drilling and sampling 
activities. 
The coils directly face the soil (i.e. no conductive material 
shall be either interposed between the coils and the soil or 
used within the coils themselves) 
The total weight is 110 g for both the coils. Coils are made 
of copper, with a section of 0.4 mm2. 
The coils should be contained in Teflon coil holders. The 
coil holders have the double task of preserving the coils 
and of supporting them a little spaced fiom the Lander 
surface. The control electronics is divided into two blocks: 
proximity electronics, near the coils, and remote 
electronics which is part of the Main Electronics Unit 
Science boards. 
Figure 1 shows the basic configuration of the instrument. 
Mass and power budgets are presented in Tables 1 and 2. 
The instrument is not presently configured as stand alone 
but shares some resources with the other subsystems of 
DEEDRI, i.e. data pre-processing unit, experiment 
management unit, power distribution unit (for operation 
and survival), and thermal control of electronics itself. 
Configuration of the TDEM instrument designed for DEEDRI Payload 
DEEDRI 
Drill Facility 
Mars Surveyor 2003 
LANDER 
~ ~~~ ~~ 
Figure 1 - Configuration of the TDEM instrument designed for DEEDRI Payload 
Receiving coil 
Coils Holder 
Fixing bolts etc. 
Proximity Electronics Box 
Proximitv Electronics Boards 
Main electronics & harness I 
Total weight of the system 1 
0.4 mm2 
Cu - coil diamet.er 150 111111, section 55  gr. 
0.4 mm2 
Teflon 130 gr. 
Stainless steel 30 gr. 
A1 70 gr. 
90gr. 
Subsystem Status Operation Power consumption 
Mode 
Proximity electronics 
Proximity electronics 
Main electronics (PC 
excluded) 
Peak of consumntion 
I 
on stand-by 0.8 w 
on stand-by & pulse ,generation 1.05 W 
on conversion & RAM 2.50 W 
on Measurement mode 3.55 w 
management 
I * The survival heaters switch off when proximity electronics reach the storage temperature range. 1 
To overcome limitations on data memory allocation and 
computation time, a MASTER Measurement Cycle 
(MMC) has been defined. MMC is a set of measurements 
and pre-processing procedures , each one taken in 
sequence with small random delays (i.e. 0 to 20 seconds) 
when the drill is not activated and motors are switched off. 
It is aimed at obtaining as much information as possible 
by reducing data exchange and memory needs. 
4. THE OPERATING PROCEDURE AND SIGNAL 
PROCESSING 
Taking into account the computational and transmission 
resources (e.g., ground transmission channel capacity is of 
the order of 200 kBitMartian day), an operating 
procedure based on the comparison of passive (no 
transmitted power) and active measured data has been 
assessed. 
The Modified Frequency Domain Kurtosis (MFDK) 
operator [4] [5] is applied in order to remove local noise, 
such as slowly time varying switching power supply 
sources, thermal noise or EM interferences. It is defined as 
the ratio between the fourth order moment of the Fourier 
Transform (S,(f) ) of the signal s(t) with respect to the 
square of the second order moment of the Fourier 
Transform of the signal, as follows: 
This operator requires one Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), 
two vectors multiplications and four vector sums for 
Computation, but is very powerful i r i  enhancing drifting 
components over stationary sinusoids. Then the data are 
compressed by using FFTIQuick Sort based algorithm and 
integratced with additional information, such as date, hour, 
temperature, and other useful data for interpretation. 
The procedure allows a reduction of on board resource 
employment for a single measuremeint cycle (about 192 
Kbivmartian day required for telemetry). 
In more details, a single experiment consists of the 
following steps: 
1) Acquisition of a number L (default=16) of measure 
vectors in passive mode (no power firom the transmitting 
coil). 
2) Upgrading of the MFDK vector at time T using the 
previous passive measurements and the old states (taken at 
time T-1). If boundary conditions change (e.g. drill 
changes position or orientation angle) or commands from 
ground change, MFDK state vector is reset to zero. 
3) Acquistition of a number Q (deEaulFl6) of measure 
vectors in active mode and average computation. The 
possiblle time delay between wave current transmission 
from transmitting coil and data acquisition must be fixed 
and of the order of microseconds. 
4) FFT computation of the active measure average vector. 
1-342 
5) Filtering of FFT results according to ad-hoc 
interpretation of MFDK state vector. 
6) Compression of result fiom step 5) by using Quicksort 
algorithm, applied to data [(real part)*+(imaginary partI2]. 
7) Selection of the frrst M (defaulF1024) components 
from step 6), obtaining a reduced data vector, made of 
floating complex data and binary integer indexes. 
8) Transmission of the result vector to the Telemetry Data 
Subsystem (TDS), adding label information, such as date- 
time, drill position, external temperature or whatsoever 
foreseen by standard procedures. 
MMC uses primarily data vectors of length N (default = 
16384). All software procedures can be run in background 
in parallel or serial approach. 
The h4h4C can be run K=4 times over a martian day, 
spreading the cycles regularly or randomly. 
Acquisition Fast Fourier 
buffer and Transform 
(step 4) - average 
(active 
mode) 
- 
Data acquisition fi-equency is set to 1 MHz, but we foresee 
the operating option to scale it down to 500 KHz, thus 
extending the acquisition time to 32768 ms. Tele- 
commands from ground control are just a few scalar 
parameters such as a gate timing and sampling acquisition 
interval. 
In the hypothesis of performing two experiments for 
martian day we obtain: 
Total acquisition time = 2*(16+16) * 16384 *1 psec ~ 1 s  
Total required memory = 2*(2*40*1024+16*1024) bit E 
192 Kbit < 200 Kbit. 
The designed compression algorithm, based on the MFDK 
operator, sends to ground a fi-equencylpower data matrix, 
selected on the basis of the most energetic samples. 
Compression factor can be tuned, ranging from 32 to 256. 
Filtering 
and 
compression 
(steps 5,,6,7) 
Signal Processing 
I Acquisition buffer 1 
coil 
MFDK 
--Pl coil 
- 
Ground receiving and 
processing system 
-.I 
TDS 
2_ 
I (passive mode) H operator computation 
Figure 2 - Signal processing procedure block diagram 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
In the paper, MASTER experiment, designed for 
prospecting Martian subsoil by TDEM based 
measurements, was presented. 
The presented solutions meets power and mass budgets. 
The concept results fiom the feasibility study for 
implementation of the instrument on the DEEDIU system. 
Instrument design is still under investigation. 
Technological problems concerning: 
increasing transmitting coil current by using 
supercapacitor recharging systems; 
implementing a receiving coil based on SQUID 
(Superconducting Quantum Interference Device) 
technology; 
optimizing data compression and transmission 
need to be addressed before laboratory performance 
evaluation test of a breadboard. 
An analytical model of order n (TBD), based on a 
parameter selection of the TDEM system in the expected 
operating conditions, will be formulated to define the 
required accurancy of the measurement data, to evaluate 
the precision of the measurement instrument(s) and to 
determine the stability of the parametric estimation needed 
for a correct interpretation of the experimental results. 
algorithms, 
1-343 
Geophysical partners have been involved in the project for 
simulating the geological setting of the investigation 
targets and define the likelihood of collected data, in order 
to verify the congruity of the output of the TDEM 
sounding system with the in situ geological, chemical and 
physical parametric situation (ground-truth). 
Accordingly, a set of experimental tests will be planned on 
the Earth representative of geological areas for planetary 
application. Such measures will be used for instrument 
validation as well as performance evaluation versus 
stringent restrictions imposed by space application. 
The design of MASTER required the solution of complex 
scientific and technological problems to match the TDEM 
performances with the rigid constraints imposed by 
installation aboard DEEDRI. A TDEM system can assume 
in general a Mono-Static (concentric loops), as well as Bi- 
Static (double or separated loops) or Multi-Static 
configuration. The combination of DEEDRI-TIIEM has 
restricted it to a Mono-Static configuration. 
Future Mars missions will probably allow to design Bi- 
Static (or Multi-Static) TDEM systems. Such a type of 
configurations will result a more flexible, robust and 
reliable measurement system. Multi-Static TDEM 
subsurface sounding configurations will be evaluated in 
order to closely follow the continuous conceptual 
scientific and technological upgrading of the planetary 
sub-surface investigation. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  “Special Issue on Time domain electromagnetic 
methods of exploration”, Geophysics, Vol. 49, No.7, July 
1984 
[2] Nabighian M.N. (Ed), Electromagnetic methods 
in applied geophysics, Society of Exploration 
Geophysicists, Vol. 1,2, ISBN 0-93 1830-5 1-6, 1-560800- 
22-4, 1993. 
[3] G. Tacconi, S. Pagnan, L. Minna, R Marcialis, 
G. Bucci, C. Ottonello, “Mars exploration by TDEM 
based measurement system”, Proceedings of PIERS 2000, 
July 5-14,2000 
[4] C. Ottonello, S. Pagnan, G. Tacconi, “Filtering of 
randomly occurring signals by kurtosis in Erequency 
domain”, The 12th International Conference on Pattem 
Recognition, October 9-13, 1994. 
[ 5 ]  C. Ottonello, S. Pagnan, “Modified frequency 
domain kurtosis for signal processing”, Electronics 
Letters, Vo1.30No.14, 1117-1118, July 1994. 
Sergio Pagnan joined Electronics Department at IAN- 
CNR in 1969. In the ‘70 cooperated with CNUCE in the 
RETE project, a net of satellite computer,.leading to the 
study and implementation of emerging Mostek, Fairchild, 
Motorola, Intel and Zilog microcomputers. 
~ 
1-344 
From 1’976 to 1984 he was responsible for the 
development of modular acquisition system for the Italian 
oceanografic vessels and for the MEDJBA project, as well 
as for hardware and sojhvare int<erfaces of marine 
equipment like sonar and gvropilot. He was also involved 
in the ,[talian-Spanish cooperation CNR-CSIC for the 
study of computerized autopilots, autovnatic ship routing, 
radar positioning, anticollision, and main engine 
diagnostic. 
Since 1987 he designed data co1lectio.n systems in hostile 
environment especially built for the Tethers Satellite 
campaigns TSSI, PMG and TSSl-R. He was also 
responsible in 1992 for the electronic equipments used in 
the RUST-SNECO W project. 
Actualb he is the head of STAIUAB (Space and 
Telecommunications Advanced Research Laboratory), a 
research unit ut IAN-CNR devoted to the design of 
hardwarehofivare systems and advanced signal 
processing algorithms. 
Roberto Marcialis received the laurea degree in 
Electronic Engineering in 1995 at the University of 
Genoa. He was involved in the ground station 
installalion at Mount Teide 0b.rewatory (Canary 
Islands), during the Tethers Satellite System missions 
TSS-I (l992) and TSS-IRejlight (1996). 
He worked as project engineer at Marconi - Divisione 
Difesa - Italy, in 1996-1997. In 1998 he joined the 
Advanced Engineering Technology and was involved in 
projects of space research and new material technology. 
At present, he is researcher at the Institute for Naval 
Automation of the National Research Council. 
Giorgio Tacconi got the University degree as doctor in 
Physics at the University of Pisa (Italy) in 1957. He was 
employed m research scientist at NATO Saclant 
Oceanographic Research Center of La Spezia(Ita1y) and 
as staff member engineer at C E m ,  European Center for 
Nuclear Research. Since 1969, he is appointed as 
Associate Professor at the Engineering Faculty of the 
University of Genoa (Italy), where, in addition to the 
teaching activity in Underwater Electroacoustics and 
Electromagnetic Communications and Information 
Systems, he has been the scientijk responsible of several 
researc.h projects, in cooperation with the Institute of 
Naval Automation. He acted as Principal lnvestigator in 
three NASA-ASI space projects: the TSS-I (1992), PMG 
(1993) and TSS-IR (1996), regarding the ELF 
electromagnetic phenomena generated by the orbiting 
satellites interacting with the ionosphere and the Earth’s 
surface 
ActualIy he is the scientiJc respomaoble of ASI-CNR- 
Industry projects and scientiJic consultant of the 
Advanced Engineering Technology. 
Luca Minna received the laurea degree in Electronic 
Engine(ering, from the University of Genoa, Italy, in 
1989. He began his professionai‘ career with the 
Depart,ment of Biophysical and Electronic Engineering 
of the [Jniversity of Genoa, in 1988. 
In October 1990, he joined the space research 
community entering the TSS (Tether,ed Satellite System) 
program as project manager of the OESEE experiment 
(Observations at the Earth's Surface of Electromagnetic 
Emissions by TSS). In 1992 and 1996 he was appointed 
by the University of Genoa as Mission control and 
ground station activity supervisor at NASA-HSOC 
(Huntsville Science Operation Center), Marshall Space 
Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. 
In 1991, he started AET - Advanced Engineering 
Technology, a hi-tech consulting firm doing business and 
applied research in space programs and advanced 
technologies. He moved to Washington DC area in 1994. 
He organized the AET representative oflce in the US, in 
order to better coordinate space projects activitiesivith 
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, 
and Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. In 1995, 
he lead a joint-venture with 2G-Enterprises and Applied 
Physics, Mountain View, California, for advanced 
cryogenic systems in space electromagnetic research. In 
1997, he organised Space & Telecommunications 
Advanced Research in Alexandria, Virginia. He is now 
working in cooperation with Nasa to support the 
development of a space educational program in Europe 
and of the Space Foundation in Italy. 
Cinthya Ottonello received the laurea degree in 
Electronic Engineering in 1992 and the Ph. D. in 1996 at 
the University of Genoa. At the Department of 
Biophysical and Electronic Engineering (DIBE) she was 
involved in several projects funded by the Italian Space 
Agency and the European Commission. In 1996 she was 
responsible for the ground station operations of the 
project OESEE (Observation at the Earth's Surface of 
Electromagnetic Emissions from Tethered Satellite System 
At present, she is scientijk consultant for the Science and 
Space Engineering Group at DIBE and collaborates with 
the Institute for Naval Automation of the National 
Research Council. Her main interests concern 
probabilistic techniques and higher order statistics for 
signal processing, with application to electromagnetic 
signal analysis and vibration analysis. 
1R - TSS1-R). 
1-345 
