A Photonic Wideband Analog-to-Digital Converter 
Henry Zmuda Edward N. Toughlian Guifang Li and Patrick LiKamWa 
University of Florida Electro-optics Products Division Univerity of Central Florida, 
CREOL 
JDSU Uniphase Corporation 4000 Central Florida Blvd. 
Graduate Engineering & Research Center (Advanced Digital & RF Products) 
1350 North Poquito Road 
Shalimar, FL 32579 1289 Blue Hills Avenue Orlando, Florida 32816 
(850) 833-9366 Bloomfield, CT 06002 USA (407) 823-6816 
zmuda@gerc.eng.ufl.edu 
Abstract - This paper provides a comprehensive 
understanding of a novel photonic high-speed analog-to- 
digital converter (ADC) approach and its anticipated 
performance. Compelling analytic models, experimental 
data, and simulation results will convince the reader that 
the system will achieve the goal of developing an ADC 
with a resolution on the order of 12-bits and with 
conversion speeds in excess of 10 Gsps. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
7. 
8. 
INTRODUCTION 
TECHNICAL APPROACH 
FILTER TYPES 
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOTYPE 
ENHANCED APPROACH 
CONCLUSIONS 
REFERENCES 
RING CAVITY ”LE LASER 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The potential for using optical processing as a means of 
achieving a high-speed analog-to-digital converter (ADC) 
has long intrigued system designers. Early realizations of 
photonic ADC’s utilized the speed of electrooptic Mach- 
Zehnder amplitude modulators. Their speed along with the 
inherent periodicity of the Mach-Zehnder output intensity 
as a function of the applied voltage was used to represent 
the applied signal as a (Gray-coded) binary word [l]. 
These systems were generally limited in resolution 
primarily by modulator electrode length, or more 
specifically the limits imposed by practical values of V, as 
well as, though to a lesser degree, by RF signal 
distribution problems. To avoid some of these limitations, 
researchers early on appreciated the use of high-speed 
(860) 286-1 866 
optical processing as a means to enhance the processing 
potential of conventional electronic ADC’s and several 
intriguing architectures were devised [2,3]. These systems are 
termed “optically assisted” ADC’s and generally use an optical 
system to process a finite-time portion of a high-speed signal 
and condition it to the point where convention electronic 
ADC’s may be used to digitize this portion of the signal. High- 
speed signal processing technology will soon be able to 
directly accommodate the needs of broadband RF/microwave 
systems. Since the ADC represents an essential link between 
the sensor and signal processor there is again renewed interest 
in high-speed ADC technology and many novel approaches are 
currently being investigated [4-71. 
This paper presents the design, simulation, and initial 
experimental results for a novel photonic ADC system that has 
the potential to operate at speeds orders of magnitude faster 
than commercial electronic ADCs. It will be seen that the 
approach presented here is simple, amenable to monolithic 
integration with the option of using all-passive components for 
a large portion of the ADC, and allows for versatility in the use 
of a tunable source. 
The basic approach is illustrated in Figure 1, where it is seen 
that the photonic portion of the system is composed of two 
major subsystems, a tunable wavelength source with an 
associated ADC Processor (ADCP). The tunable source (TS), 
which may be either a tunable filter or a tunable laser, converts 
the input signal that is to be digitized to a unique optical 
frequency (or wavelength) at its output, and can be thought of 
as a voltage controlled (optical) osciliator. The TS thus 
converts the ADC problem from one of resolving a voltage to 
one of resolving a wavelength. The mapping between input 
voltage and optical fiequency is ideally linear. If the 
relationship is other than linear, then either the input signal 
must be pre-conditioned to linearize the voltage to optical 
frequency conversion, or alternatively, the deviation from 
linear must be accounted for in the design of the processor 
portion of the system. The ADCP shown in Figure 1 converts 
Supported by DARPA/MTO under contract F30602-99-C-00 17. 
3-1461 
the optical frequency generated by the tunable source to 
the appropriate binary word. 
Tunable 
Filter + z  
It is assumed here that a sample and hold ( S E I )  circuit is 
available that samples the signal to be digitized and 
maintains the sample value for a sufficient time such that 
the correct binary representation of the signal level c:an be 
established. 
- 
0 
5-  s- z- Wavelength . Analyzer 
ADCP : f 
X .  U - +I F l  
The TS plays a critical role in the ADC performance. 
Most commercial tunable lasers are not optimized for 
- 2  
Figure 1 - Basic ADC system block diagram. 
tuning speed, a critical attribute for the present 
application. Tunable semiconductor lasers based on 
forward current injection have a very non-uniform tuning 
response. The electric field iniiuced refractive index 
change due to the quantum confined Stark effect in a 
reverse biased multiple quantum well (MQW) PIN 
structure should, however, offer uniform response up to 
microwave modulation fiequencies, even in exc-ess of 
1OGHz. The ultimate limit to laser tuning speed arises 
fi-om cavity round-trip time effects. It therefore iollows 
that to achieve ultra high rate frequency modulation 
monolithic integration of the laser gain section and tuning 
element is required [7,8]. 
Alternatively, this paper also presents a design for a novel 
ring cavity laser design also capable of high-speed 
wavelength tuning. This high-speed tuning is 
accomplished by using an electro-optic phase modulator 
as the tuning control element as well as by realizing the 
TS as a photonic integrated circuit that results in a small 
cavity length. This basic structure may also operate as a 
tunable filter, which is necessary for some of the 
applications discussed. 
Finally, it will be shown that when the speed-resolution limit 
for an ADC: system (including an electronic ADC) has been 
reached, a second ADC can be added via photonic coupling so 
as to obtain a total bit resolution equal to that of the sum of the 
individual ADC resolutions. In this way iwo electronic ADCs, 
coupled via. the photonic system, can operate both high-speed 
and high-resolution. 
2. Technical Approach 
Let us first focus our attention on the ADCP portion of the 
system. For an N-bit ADC, the voltage-encoded wavelength 
emanating fiom the TL is split N-times and directed to the bit- 
leg processor (optical) filter bank where the correct binary 
digits are established. For the purpose of this discussion let us 
consider as an example the 4-bit ADC system as shown in 
Figure 2. This voltage-encoded wavelength is split and 
directed to the bit-leg processor filters where the correct binary 
digit is eslablished. For example, suppose an input voltage 
level v, tunes the source to wavelength A,, for which the 
desired binary word is B, = blmB blMSE1 bILSB+' blLSB. The 
processor filter would then be designed as follows. If the 
desired binary digit corresponds to a logical zero, then the 
wavelength transfer function of the bit-beg would prevent that 
wavelength fiom reaching the photodelector. Otherwise that 
wavelength would be passed by the processor filter and 
detected as a logical one by the spectrally broad photodetector 
at the bit-leg output. For the purpose of this discussion, the 
filter transfer functions shown in Figure 2 are ideal. In 
practice, thie combined effect of the finite transitions associated 
with realizable processor filters and the finite tunable source 
linewidth would have to be accounted for in the system design. 
This is done by the use of the electronic comparators also 
shown in the figure. As with any ADC, we assume the analog 
input signal may generally first undergo electronic signal 
conditioning such as sign bit extraction level shifting and 
perhaps amplitude conditioning such as llogarithmic amplifiers. 
Also, if the return loss of the splitter does not sufliciently 
suppress optical energy reflected back from the processor filter 
elements to the source, then an isolator would be included in 
the circuit immediately &er the source. Finally, as with any 
digital circuit it is necessary to ensure that each bit arrives at 
the output port at the same time. That is, the daerential path 
lengths of each bit-leg, from the point ckf splitting to detection 
and storage is critical, and the propagation time corresponding 
to those differential lengths should comspond to a very small 
fi-action of the desired ADC system speed. Otherwise all bit- 
leg outputs will not be synchronized to the input signal. This 
delay equalization is easily achieved by adding the proper 
amount of additional fixed lengths of optical fiber (path 
trimmers) to each bit leg as shown in lhe figure. This (fixed) 
path length adjustment need not be induded if accurate path 
lengths ane provided in manufacturing. 
3-1462 
Delay Equalizer 
PROCESSOR FILTERS 
.. . 
PROCESSOR FILTERS Y M S B  
E F  
Photodetector Comparator 
I b 
Sign Bit 
I .h I 
Figure 2 - Basic ADC implementation showing processor filter functions and electronic comparators at the output. 
3. FILTERTYPES 
There are a variety of ways of taking filter elements and 
efficiently configuring them to minimize the total number 
of filtek needed, while still achieving the transition 
requirements. Of course a single broadband filter could be 
used for each stop band required, but realizing these filters 
can be challenging and costly. Other techniques involve 
cascading filters in one form or another. One approach 
would cascade sharp transition, narrow band filters with 
staggered center wavelengths to realize a broadband filter. 
This composite filter provides a sharp transition, namely 
that provided by one of the narrow band filters. 
The filters themselves can be realized through many 
different filter technologies. Three promising approaches 
are thin-film filters (TFF), fiber Bragg gratings (FBG), 
and Mach-Zehnder (Mz),  including active filters. 
Fiber Brags Gratings Filters 
The reflection bandwidth and peak reflectivity of FBG 
filters are readily controlled design parameters. FBG 
filters with reflection bandwidths as narrow as 0.01 
nanometers or as broad as 100 nanometers are available 
from several manufacturers as commercial off-the-shelf 
products. Using a chirped rather than periodic index 
variation obtains broad reflection bandwidths. Reflectivity 
at the Bragg wavelength can be as low as 1% or greater 
than 99.9%, and off-wavelength transmission is nearly 
loo%, making FBG filters an extremely efficient and 
versatile optical design element. The ease of 
manufacturing and mass production as well as the 
emphasis the telecommunications industry has placed on these 
devices for network applications will likely result in FBG 
filters becoming cost effective in the near future. Although 
these devices initially look attractive, it is expected that 
obtaining the bit-leg-to-bit-leg alignment needed to achieve the 
ADCP requirements would be difficult. 
Mach-Zehnder Filters 
Mach-Zehnder filter approaches can be broadly divided into 
two major types, transversal and cascade. The transversal 
Mach-Zehnder filter approach includes a splitting element 
followed by an array of weighted waveguides that have a 
constant differential path length from array element-to- 
element, which are then optically summed, leading to a single 
output. The weights on the waveguides are the Fourier 
coefficients required to approximate an ideal square wave 
(sinc distribution). As few as ten waveguides can provide 
suEcient margin required for an 8-bit ADC. A higher 
resolution ADC however, would require many additional 
weighed waveguides to provide an acceptable transition 
performance. To realize the required weights in a transversal 
filter configuration would be extremely involved and does not 
now exist as a commercial product, and therefore this 
approach is not considered feasible. A cascade configuration 
of weighted MZ filters suffers from similar limitations. 
Another transversal filter approach, one that exists 
commercially and does not rely on weighted waveguides, is the 
popular Arrayed Waveguide Grating (AWG) filter. This 
device can have greater than 150 waveguides yielding good 
isolation (transition margin) between output ports. Once again, 
although these devices initially look attractive, it is expected 
3-1463 
that obtaining the bit-leg-to-bit-leg alignment needed to 
achieve the ADCP requirements would be difficult. 
Thin Film Filters 
Multi-layer thin-film filters represent the third filter 
technology that may be acceptable for the ADCP. It is 
possible, using thin film technology, to fabricate very 
accurate broadband filters with very steep transitions. 8- 
bit filtering is possible. To increase the steepness of the 
transition of these broadband filters in order to achieve 
higher resolution filtering would technologically 
challenging and therefore quite costly. The Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (WDM) telecommunications 
community is driving thin film filter technology for use as 
add/drop devices and a variety of commercial 
configurations exist. Based on the maturity of the thin-film 
technology, its flexibility with regard to design, 
performance characteristics, and the availability of 
manufacturers, it is readily understood that this 
technology would offer the a high likelihood for 
successful realization of a basic ADCP. 
Active Filter Approach 
As previously mentioned, active components can be used 
in the bit-leg structures that will greatly relax the passive 
filter requirements. Specifically, high-speed electronic 
comparators can be used at the bit-leg detector outputs. In 
that case each filters can be as simple as a Mach-Zehnder 
interferometer designed to provide the required 
periodicity at any given bit-leg. This is shown in Figure 2. 
Despite the need for the active component, the simplicity, 
ease of inamfacture, cost, and flexibility of this single 
Mach-Zehder filter approach provides the greatest 
likelihood for successful realization of a basic ADCP. 
4. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOTYPE 
To validate the various computer modeling efforts 
developed to aid in the evaluation of the Performance of 
the ADCP, a 4-bit, proof-of-concept ADCP was 
assembled using arrays of FBG filters as discussed above. 
Static testing was performed using a broadband source as 
input to the bit-leg filters and the output displayed on an 
optical spectrum analyzer. The assembled system is shown 
in Figure 3a and its static performance is illushated in 
Figure 31). 
5 .  ENHANCED APPROACH 
One of the most dBcult technical hurdles to realizing a 
high-speed, high-resolution ADC system, using the basic 
approach a s  described above, is the ability to generate the 
required number of distinct wavelengths at the desired speed. 
For examplle, assume an optimistic tuning range of AA = 100 
nm. A 12-bit system would require a Finesse F of at least 4096 
with a corresponding Free Spectral Range (FSR) of 
approximately 3 GHz (or AM4096 = 0.024 nm). If this 
filtering function were performed by a 'Fabry-Perot resonant 
cavity, this would require a transit time z == I/2FSR .- 163 psec. 
If we approximate the number of cavity passes for 
convergence as being equivalent to the fuiesse, then the tuning 
speed is foimd to be z F = 669 nsec, or a maximum tuning rate 
of about 1.5 MHz. This analysis ignores the gain in 
convergence speed that might be realized due to side-mode 
suppression resulting fiom the feedback in a laser 
configuration, but even with the convergence speed 
improvement that might be provided by a tunable laser, 
achieving lhe speed and resolution required for a high-speed, 
high-resolution system is quite daunting. 
Folding Circuit Enhancement 
An enhanced approach that does achieve the desired speed- 
resolution requirements will now be presented. This approach 
uses two high-speed, reduced resolution ADCs, both working 
together in such a way that their concatenated outputs give the 
overall desired resolution. A block diagram of the enhanced 
approach is shown in Figure 4. Specifically, Figure 4 shows 
two ADCs, a lower N-bit and an upper Nt-bit, coupled through 
a photonic folding circuit. The two lower resolution ADCs can 
be implemented using the basic photonic approach described 
above. Operation at a lower resolution (finesse) in turn allows 
for operation at higher speeds. 
It will now be discussed, how with the aid of the folding 
circuit, the: resolution of the composite :system is N+M. This 
concept is illustrated in Figure 5 using idcalized waveforms for 
the purpose of this discussion. Assume that the input voltage 
varies linearly between zero and its full-scale value (VFS). To 
say that the resolution limit of the lower ADC system has been 
reached mleans that the linewidth of the tunable source (Figure 
5a) and the width of the passband of the lower LSB (LSBL) 
bit-leg filter (Figure 5b) are equal. The detected voltage, which 
is proportional to the integration of the product of the swept 
tunable source and LSBL transfer function, is shown in Figure 
5c. The interesting consequence of this filtering-detection 
process is that as the input voltage varies &om zero to VFS, not 
only is all its information still contained1 in the (appropriately 
conditioned) detected signal, but the periodic nature of this 
signal now allows the use of a second ADC to further resolve 
the input 1.0 a finer degree. This function is performed by the 
photonic subsystem referred to as the folding circuit. 
3-1464 
h g h e  3 - (a) Four-bit prototype using Bragg gratings and (bfstatic performance. 
Now consider how additional idormation (bits) can be 
resolved &om the output of the folding circuit. The 
triangular waveform of Figure 5c can be directly digitized 
by the upper ADC system. However its non-monotonic 
nature would result in an inherent coding structure that 
should ideally be "unwrapped." This unwrapping is 
readily accomplished by incorporating a "toggle" 
capability as part of the folding circuit. Figure 5d shows 
how the LSBL bit output acts as an appropriate toggle 
signal leading to the monotonic (ideally sawtooth type) 
response desired. This toggle can be readily accomplished 
in the folding circuit itself or in the digital regime. 
Referring back to Figure 4 however, it is seen that the 
simple Mach-Zehnder-type folding circuit will result in 
waveforms that vary nonlinearly with applied voltage. 
This nonlinearity must be corrected to extend the 
resolution of the upper ADC to more than one additional 
bit. As will be discussed, this linearization and toggle 
process are most efficiently accomplished together. The 
discussion of how this linearization and other necessary 
signal conditioning are accomplished, along with the final 
ADC system design is now presented. 
The Linearizdion Circuit 
As already noted, the folding circuit is an interferometric 
system, and the voltage output of the folding circuit does 
not vary linearly for a linearly increasing input signal. 
Specifically, the Mach-Zehnder output follows the distinctly 
nonlinear (approximately a raised cosine) curve as shown in 
Figure 5a. Linearization is accomplished with the circuit 
shown in Figure 6, where a portion of the tunable source is 
used to feed another Mach-Zehnder interferometer that acts as 
a correction filter. Operation of the linearization circuit is 
explained with the aid of Figure 7. There it is seen that if the 
output of the correction filter (Figure 7c) is added to the 
toggled folding circuit output (Figure 7b), then the deviation 
from linear would be substantially reduced, as shown in Figure 
7d. Note that the transfer function of the correction filter must 
vary at twice the fiequency of the folding Mach-Zehnder filter. 
This doubling in rate is achieved by using Mach-Zehnder 
having a differential path length (2AL) which is twice that of 
the folding Mach-Zehnder (a) for the correction filter. Due to 
the broadband nature of the source, the (uncorrected) folding 
circuit output is periodic but not purely sinusoidal, hence it is 
not expected that a one-term correction would perfectly 
compensate the nonlinearity. The reduced extinction ratio due 
to the finte linewidth source results in different dc levels for 
the detected correction and folding signals. To properly sum 
these signals, level shifting is required. DC level shifting, for 
example by using ac-coupled amplifiers, can be used to correct 
this situation. 
3-1465 
The linearization process may be continued to yield 
higher-order correction terms as is also illustrated in 
Figure 6. Analysis shows that without employing any 
nonlinear correction terms, only one addition bit will be 
gained by use of the folding circuit. The ability for the 
linearization circuit to yield a significant increase in bit- 
resolution is demonstrated by means of the following 
example. Consider a lower ADC capable of operating at 
the desired speed with a resolution of 7-bits. Again to be 
emphasized is that without using any correction, the 
overall system resolution would be at most eight bits. The 
simulations shown in Figure 8 however illustrate that the 
quantization error is reduced from less than eight system 
bits with no compensation to better than 10-bits (Figure 
The use of a lower ADC with N-bits of resolution requires a 
folding circuit that can produce an output with folds for any 
further increase in resolution for an upper ADC. Recall that 
each level of linearization contains a Mach-Zehnder with half 
the Free Spectral Range FSR, of the previous level, or 
Where L is the level of linearization and FSR, is the free 
spectral range of the folding Mach-Zehndler. Since folds are 
required over the free spectral range of the source FSRs, and 
each cycle of the folding Mach-Zehnder produces two folds, 
then we can relate the free spectral ranges FSR, and FSRs by 
Note the 
Non1 i near 
U response. 
Figure 4 - Interconnection of two lower-resolutions ADC’s via a folding circuit.. 
Sa) and 11-bits (Figure Sb) for one and two linearization 
terms, respectively. 
the equation 
3-1466 
A.U.-- 
(a) Idealized Tunable 
Source 
Center Wavelength h, Proportional to input voltage level. 
b 
I 
A IC) Convolution of 
A.U.-- 
Tunable Source and 
LSBL Filter Function 
VREF 
MSB, = 1 
* "in 
- - (Transmiss ion) 
LSBL Toggled Voltage 
Signal Ready 
for Next ADC 
VREF 
' "in 
Figure 5 - Folding circuit operation. 
Mach -Ze hnder Uncorrected Linearized 
Filter output (Folded) 
First order corrector 
Electrical Lines 
Optical Lines 
~ 
Second order corrector 
Figure 6 - Linearization circuit. 
3-1467 
’ (c) Correction Term ~L\ol\c.- I (First Order) 
(d) First Order 
Linear ked 
C)utput 
Figure 7 - Basic approach showing processor filter functions and electronic comparators at the output. 
1 (a) I I I I I I I I I .............................................................. 1’ 1 Ten bits 
Eleven bits 
1 
Input voltage 
Ten bits 
Eleven bits 
Figure 8 - Redction in quantization error resulting from (a) one and (b) two stages of linearization.. 
3-1468 
Since each linearization Mach-Zehnder has a finesse of 
two, its half-power bandwidth HPB WL is 
FSR, - FSR, FSR, _--- - 
2L+1 2L+N (3) HPBW, = -2 
The limit on the number of linearization terms t possible 
for a given source finesse is reached when the 
HPB W, = HPB W, , or 
L = log, (F, ) - N (4) 
Note that the ability to use linearization terms implies that 
sufficient source finesse is available to increase the 
number of folds in the processor Mach-Zehnder, and 
hence based on this, the option exists to use a higher- 
resolution lower ADC. Of course this option may not be 
possible based on the speed-resolution restrictions of the 
lower ADC. 
A block diagram for the entire ADC system is shown in 
Figure 9. The two ADC subsystems (labeled “upper” and 
“lower”) may be either photonic or electronic and the 
folding circuit shown includes all linearization as well as 
any other signal conditioning as required for a specified 
speed and resolution. 
6. RING CAVITY TUNABLE LASER 
The sources considered are of two types, tunable lasers 
and a tunable filter. Both are different in that the tunable 
laser tunes over discrete wavelengths whereas the tunable 
filter has an envelope that can be tuned in a continuous 
fashion. The optimal configuration of both the laser and 
filter are similar in that both contain two Fabry-Perot 
resonators and an electrooptic phase modulator. The use 
of an electrooptic phase modulator allows for the 
possibility of high-speed tuning using a single control 
voltage. As will be seen, the tunable laser is the tunable 
filter with gain in a closed loop (ring) configuration. 
The basic structure for the ring cavity laser is shown in 
Figure loa, and includes optical isolators that ensures 
unidirectional propagation, an optical amplifier that serves 
as the gain medium, and a directional coupler used to 
extract a portion of the light fkom the ring, which 
establishes the usable laser output. The fvred Fabry-Perot 
(FP) resonator establishes which wavelengths may 
resonate. Tunablilty is achieved by placing an EO phase 
modulator inside the second Fabry-Perot as shown. The 
isolator placed between the FPs to prevents the existence 
of unwanted resonant cavities. 
The modes of the two Fabry-Perots are configured such that 
only a single wavelength can resonate in the circuit for any 
given voltage and hence mode competition is significantly 
reduced. This is readily seen with the aid of Figure lob. 
Specifically, Figure 10b-(i) shows the lines established by the 
fixed Fabry-Perot, while Figure lob-(ii) shows those of the 
tunable Fabry-Perot with zero control voltage applied. It is 
seen that both cavities have a common resonance at a-, while 
the next nearest resonant pair are off-resonance by So. Tuning 
the Fabry-Perot by S o  causes both cavities to have q,,,,+ So as 
a common resonance as shown in Figure lob-(iii), with their 
nearest neighbors out of resonance by at least 60, and so on. 
We also note that for every 2B lines of the fvred Fabry-Perot, 
the tunable Fabry-Perot has 2*+ 1 lines, consequently 
2’ FSR,,, = (2’ +1)FSRTUnab, 
or 
where FShixed, hxd and FSRTlmabler hMable are the Free 
Spectral Ranges and lengths of the fixed and tunable Fabry- 
Perots, respectively. If 2B distinct lines are to be resolved, then 
the Half-Power Bandwidth (HPBV of the tunable Fabry-Perot 
is 
(7) 
which then in turn specifies the complete enhanced ring cavity 
system. 
The above ring cavity laser approach that uses two Fabry- 
Perot resonators, one with an embedded phase modulator, also 
suggests a means for realizing a high-speed tunable filter. The 
goal of the laser configuration must be to minimize or 
eliminate mode competition while the tunable filter, operating 
open loop, can readily support multi-mode operation. Its 
output would consist of a line spectra established by the fixed 
Fabry-Perot with a superimposed (tunable) envelope function 
as a consequence of the overall cavity system transfer function. 
The tuning speed of the filter is determined by the 
convergence time of the Fabry-Perot filters. As a general rule, 
the product of the finesse of the tunable Fabry-Perot and its 
one-way cavity transit time z approximately gives this 
convergence time. A Fabry-Perot cavity with an embedded 
phase modulator can be constructed with a cavity length on the 
order of 500 micrometers. This is discussed further below. 
Using this length, we can estimate the anticipated Fabry-Perot 
tuning speed as a function of the cavity finesse (bits of 
resolution). It is found that this 500-micron cavity limits the 
tunable filter finesse to about 16 for 10 Gsps tuning. 
Therefore, 4 lower bits can be supported with this device, 
3-1469 
Electrical 
Signal ~ 
To be 
Digitized 
Photonic 
System 
I I Togglesignal 
(Lower) Sample 
& Hold 
MSB, 
ADC System 
Figure 9 - Block diagram of complete ADC system. 
hence requiring the folding circuit to support the 
remaining 6 upper bits in order to achieve a 10-bit system 
resolution at 10 Gsps. 
Monolithic Integration 
Monolithic integration is required for high tuning speed. 
In order to implement the unidirectional ring laser 
structure in a monolithically integrated device, a triangular 
waveguide configuration would be used. Etched facets at 
each comer of the waveguidmg triangle provide the 
reflections needed for the laser beam to circulate inside 
the resonator. Two of the corners of the triangle are cut 
such that total internal reflections occur and none of the 
laser energy escapes. The third comer facet is cut such 
that the incidence angle is less than the critical angle for 
total internal reflection and serves as the output coupler. If 
that facet is perfectly symmetric then the output coupling 
from both sides would be equal and the resonator would 
not be unidirectional. However, in practice it is impossible 
to obtain a perfectly symmetric angle and consequently 
there is always an imbalance in the reflectivity of the facet 
for the optical waves incident on it fiom the two branches 
of the triangular resonator. That imbalance is suffjcient to 
cause the laser to oscillate in a unidirectional mode:. 
The three components of the tunable unidirectional ring 
laser are (i) the gain medium, (ii) the fixed Fabry-Perot 
filter and (iii) the tunable Fabry-Perot filter containing an 
electro-optic phase modulator. The gain medium is 
confined to one arm of the triangle by current injection in 
that area alone. The Fabry-Perot filters are achieved by 
etching mirror facets in the other arms of the triangle. 
>r 
C 
k 
I m 
.I 
-
E 
9 
I 
E + 
+MSB 
Injecting some current into the Fabry-P'erot sections provide 
optical gain between the etched facets and controls the Q- 
factor of tlhe filters. The phase modulator is contained within 
the tunable Fabry-Perot filter in the third arm of the triangle. 
The laser material generally consists of' InGaAs/InP multiple 
quantum wells (MQW) as the core material bounded by 
InGaAsP cladding layers. The double heterostructure 
waveguide: configuration is grown lattice-matched on an InP 
substrate. The structure is designed to provide broadband 
optical gain peaked at 1 . 5 5 ~ .  In order for the phase 
modulator section to be integrated monolithically, the optical 
bandgap olf the material in a section of the device needs to be 
blue shifted to ensure that the material absorption is minimized 
and electro-optic phase modulation is not accompanied by 
electro-absorption. The phase modulator section is achieved 
by selective area disordering of the multiple quantum wells. 
The material can easily be blue shifted by 1OOmeV while still 
retaining characteristics attributable to quantum confinement 
of electrons. Consequently the disordered material possesses 
an enhanced quadratic electro-optic coefficient in addition to 
the linear electro-optic coefficient. The approximate lengths of 
the gain and Fabry-Perot filter sections are lmm and 500 pm 
respectivdy. 
Typically, for an InGaAsflnP MQW structure, the voltage: 
required for a n-phase shift is on the order of 2V/mm [9]. I n i  
this structure, since the total modulator length is limited tci 
500p1, the voltage required to achieve .rc-phase shift is on the 
order of 1 V. The drawback is that the dependence of the phase 
shift (Ad) ) with electric field ( E z  ) is not linear owing to the 
quadratic electro-optic components, namely 
3-1470 
Fixed 
Fa bry- 
Optical 
isolator Per& I-. 
nalog 
?ut RF 
Tunable 
Perot Isolator 
Laser 
Coupler 
Fixed 
Fa bryPerot 
Tunable 
Fa bry-Perot 
v = o  
v=6 v 
(Shih3 by6 r )  
v=25 v 
(Shih  by 25 t) 
Figure 10 - (a) Ring cavity laser and (b) principle of operation. 
where r4, is the linear electro-optic coefficient of InP and 
sI1, sI2 are the electro-optic coefficients describing the 
index ellipsoid for the quadratic effect. Consequently, 
some means of electronic pre-distortion amplifier circuitry 
would be needed for the ADC to work properly. 
The sensitivity of the overall device to temperature 
fluctuations is primarily dictated by the thermal 
dependence of the Fabry-Perot cavities. The temperature 
coefficient of the bandgap is on the order of -5x104eV/"C. 
Although the peak of the gain will shift by lnm/"C, the 
gain spectrum is wide enough that temperature effects are 
minimized if the temperature is kept constant to within 
1OC. The same argument applies to the phase modulator 
section. On the other hand, the Fabry-Perot cavities are 
critically dependent on the optical thickness of the etalon. 
The temperature coefficient of the refractive index of InP 
based compounds is on the order of 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~ / ~ C  and the 
thermal coefficient of expansion is 7~10-~/OC. The total 
phase change is given by, 
' A$ =*{An(T)L+nAL(T)} a (9) 
Mere An(T) is the change in refiactive index due to 
temperature fluctuations and AL(T) is the change in 
physical length due to thermal expansiodcontraction. 
Using the above values we find that the phase change per "C of 
temperature fluctuation is about 4% of n-radians. In order to 
hold the Fabry-Perot cavities stable to within 1% of n-radians, 
the temperature of the device needs to be maintained constant 
to within 0.25"C. It is envisaged that the device would be 
mounted on a thermo-electric Peltier cooler similar to 
conventional laser diode packaging. The device temperature 
will be controlled using an electronic temperature controller 
with a thermocouple or thermistor temperature monitor and 
feedback, and the whole package will be properly heat sunk. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
A photonic ADC approach has been presented having several 
distinct advantages, including the potential for monolithic 
integration, a simple architecture with potentially all passive 
processing, and tuning using a single control signal. Analysis, 
simulations, and experimental results indicate that the 
proposed ADC will be able to operate at conversion speeds in 
excess of 10 GHz with up to 10- to 12-bits of resolution. 
8. REERENCES 
[l] H.F. Taylor, "AN Optical Analog-to-Digital Converter - 
Design and Analysis," IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 
vol. QE-18,no.4, pp. 210-216, April 1979. 
[2] J.A. Bell. M.C. Hamilton, D.A. Leep, "AD Conversion of 
Microwave Signals Using a Hybrid Opticfilectronic 
Technique," Proc. SPIE, vol. 1476, pp 326-329, 1991. 
3-1471 
[3] P.E. Pace and D. Dtyer, “High-Resolution Encoding 
Process for an Integrated Optical Analog-to-Digital 
Converter,” Optical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 2638- 
2645, August 1994. 
[4] B. Jalali, F. Coppinger, A.S. Bushan, “Time-Stretch 
Reprocessing Overcomes ADC Limitations,” Microwaves 
& RF, pp. 57-66, March 1999. 
[ 5 ]  J.U. IKang, M.Y. Frankel, and RD. Esman, ”Highly 
Parallel Pulsed Optoelectronic Analog-Digital Converter,” 
IEEE Photonic Technology Letters, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 
1626-1628, Nov. 1998. 
[6] M.J. Hayduk, R.J. Bussjager, and M.A. Getbehead, 
“Photonic Analog to Digital Conversion Techniques 
Using Semiconductor Saturable Absorbers,” Proc. SPIE, 
pp. 1-7, April, 2000. 
[7] M. Johansson, B. Lofiing, S. Hard, L. Thylen, M. 
Mokhtare, U. Westergren, and C. Pala, “Study of an 
Ultrafast Analog-to-Digital Conversion Scheme Based on 
Dif&active Optics,” Applied Optics, vol. 29, no. 17, pp. 
2881-2887,lO June 2000. 
[SI X. HUimg, A.J. Seeds, J.S. Roberts, and A.P. Knights, 
“Monolithi~cally Integrated Quantum-Co’died Stark Effect 
Tuned Laser with Uniform Frequency Modulation Response,” 
E E E  Photonic Technology Letters, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 1697- 
1699, Dec. 1998. 
[9] P. Li KamWa, “Intermixing of Multiple 
Quantum ’Wells for All-Optical Integrated 
Circuits”, Optical and Quantum Electronics, 
23, pS925,1991. 
Henry Zmzida received his B.E. DegreejFom 
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 
in 1979, m d  his MS.  and Ph.D. Degrees JLom Come11 
Universitjy Ithaca NY in 1982 and 1984, respectfvely, all in 
Electrical Engineering. From 1984 to 1995 he was a member 
of the faculty at Stevens Institute of Technology. In 1995 he 
joined the Electrical Engineering faculty of the University of 
Florida, Graduate Engineering and Research Center. His 
research interests are primarily focwed in the area of 
photonics jbr microwave system applications 
3-1472 
