Dynamic Telemetry Bit Rates for Deep Space 
Communications 
Jeff B. Berner Peter W. Kinman Miles K. Sue 
Mail Stop 238-737 EECS Department Mail Stop 161-260 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Case Western Reserve University Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
10900 Euclid Ave 
Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 Cleveland, OH 44106-7221 Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
(818) 354-3934 (216) 368-5550 (818) 3544394 
jeff.b.berner@jpl.nasa.gov pwk@eecs.cyu.edu miles.k.sue@jpl.nasa.gov 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Abstract-A new telemetry playback scheme promises 
to maximize telemetry return for deep space missions. 
For a given effective isotropic radiated power from the 
spacecraft, the received signal-tenoise spectral density 
ratio and hence the supportable bit rate vary during a 
tracking pass as the elevation angle changes. In the past, 
spacecraft would use just one bit rate or perhaps a few 
different bit rates during a pass. However, large bit rate 
changes sometimes cause the ground receiver to go out 
of lock. The new scheme, which is examined here, allows 
the spacecraft to change its bit rate in frequent, small 
steps to match the signal-tenoise spectral density ratio 
profile. Because the rate changes are small, the ground 
receiver will be able to remain in lock. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. ACHIEVABLE BIT RATES 
3. LOOP TRANSIENT RESPONSE 
4. DYNAMIC BIT RATE 
5. OPERATIONAL COMMENTS 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the tracking of radio downlinks from deep space 
vehicles, the profile with which the received total 
power to noise spectral density ratio (&/NO) at the 
ground station varies during a tracking pass is largely 
predictable, resulting as it does from the well-defined 
progression from low elevation angle to high and back 
to low. Figure 1 shows an example PT/No profile for 
an X-band downlink. This curve represents a typical 
profile when tracking a spacecraft with 25" declination 
[l]; the dimple in the curve at 6.7 hours is due to gravity 
deformation of the antenna's primary reflector. (The 
deformation of this surface, with a diameter of 70 m, 
is a function of elevation angle, and the boresight gain 
has been optimized for an elevation angle of 45 deg; at 
larger elevation angles, the gain is slightly less.) If the 
telemetry bit rate is dynamically changed to follow the 
PT/No profile, so that a relatively large bit rate is used 
near zenith and relatively small bit rates are used near 
the beginning and end of the pass when the elevation 
angle is low, then it is possible to maximize the number 
of total bits returned during the tracking pass. 
I I 
36 I I I 
0 5 10 15 
t, hours 
Figure 1: Example X-band PT/No curve 
A typical telemetry signal structure for deep space com- 
munications is considered here. The symbols are phase- 
reversal keyed onto a squarewave subcarrier, and the 
modulated subcarrier is phase modulated onto a car- 
rier with a modulation index of less than go", so that 
a residual carrier is present. Mathematically, the signal 
structure is 
JZPT cos[27rfct + Pd(t)S(t)l, 10-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 @ZOO1 IEEE 
3-1143 
where .PT is the total received signal power, .fc is the 
carrier frequency, is the modulation index, d ( t )  = f l  
are the binary symbols, and S ( t )  = f l  is the squarewave 
subcarrier. The residual carrier is used by the receiver 
for carrier synchronization. The subcarrier frequency 
is harmonically related to the symbol rate, so both the 
subcarrier frequency and symbol rate change together. 
The suppressed carrier case is considered in [a]. 
The challenge for the receiver is to maintain subcarrier 
lock and symbol lock despite changes in the subcarrier 
frequency and symbol rate. If either of these loops loses 
lock, then succeeding stages - the node synchronizer in 
the Viterbi decoder and the frame synchronizer - will 
be impacted. If enough time is lost in the reacquisition, 
there is no net advantage to be gained by changing the 
bit rate. 
In principle, if sufficiently accurate predictions of the 
subcarrier frequency and symbol-rate changes are made 
available to the receiver, the subcarrier and symbol loops 
can be programmed to follow the changes with minimal 
probability of falling out of lock, even if the changes are 
large. Often, however, it will be impractical to deliver 
predictions of subcarrier frequency and symbol rate 
change that are of sufficient accuracy to the receiver. 
This will especially be true in the case of higher bit rates. 
In the remainder of this paper it is assumed that only 
relatively coarse subcarrier frequency and symbol rate 
predictions are made available to the receiver. These 
coarse predictions are needed for acquisition. But 
the predictions are assumed to be inadequate for a 
programmed tracking of the subcarrier frequency and 
symbol rate. It is assumed that the clock onboard the 
spacecratft that determines subcarrier frequency and 
symbol rate has a continuous phase; the rate-of-change 
of its phase will abruptly change, but its phase will be 
always continuous. 
The telemetry playback scheme to be examined in this 
paper is now explained. The bit rate is changed in 
small steps; these steps occur periodically. Each step 
in bit rate is effected by a (phase-continuous) step in 
the frequency of the spacecraft clock that determines 
symbol rate and subcarrier frequency. The steps are 
small enough that neither the subcarrier loop nor the 
symbol loop loses lock. The receiver can t:herefore 
track the downlink without having access to precise 
predictions of these phase-rate changes. 
In the section immediately following, the achievable sta- 
tic bit rate is related to PT/No. In the section after 
that, the transient responses of subcarrier and symbol 
loops are calculated. These calculations provide guid- 
ance to the size and the frequency (of bit rate steps that 
are pos,sible. With this preliminary material as back- 
ground, it then becomes possible to calculate the total 
data return for the proposed telemetry playback scheme 
with dynamic bit rate. 
2. ACHIEVABLE BIT RATES 
For a given &/NO, the largest bit rate that may be 
supported depends on the code being used, the thresh- 
old bit error rate (BER), as well as several receiver 
parameters. The following paralgraphs characterize 
these relationships. Only one code is considered in this 
paper: a constraint length 7, rate 1/2, convolutional 
code. The threshold BER is taken to be This 
BER is typical for the output of the Viterbi (inner) 
decoder in a concatenated coding scheme when the 
output of the (outer) Reed-Solomon decoder is about 
In this paper, symbol rate will refer to the rate 
of convolutional code symbols and is denoted here R,. 
This symbol rate equals twice the bit rate R b .  
An Rb can be supported by a given P T / N ~  if four con- 
ditions are met. The first of these is that there must 
be an adequate energy per bit to noise spectral density 
ratio at the detector. For residual-carrier telemetry, this 
conditicm is stated mathematically as 
The modulation index is p, and the system loss is qsYs, 
where 0 5 vsys 5 1.[3] The second condition is that the 
signal-ttrnoise ratio in the carrier loop must be at least 
10 dl3, 
B, is the noiseequivalent bandwidth of the carrier loop. 
The third condition is that the signal-to-noise ratio in 
the subcarrier loop must be at least. 20 dl3, 
(3) 
W,, (W,, 5 1) and B,, are the subcarrier loop win- 
dow factor and noiseequivalent bandwidth, respectively. 
(The subcarrier window factor is the ratio of the inte- 
gration time in the quadrature channel of the subcarrier 
synchronization loop to the subcarrier period.) B,, has 
a maximum value of 50 Hz (this constraint is due to the 
update rate of the digital loop). S, is a squaring loss, 
where 0 5 S, 5 1.[3] The fourth condition is that the 
signal-ttmnoise ratio in the symbol loop must be at least 
15 dl3, 
3-1144 
Wsym (W,,, 5 1) and Bsym are the symbol loop 
window factor and noise-equivalent bandwidth, respec- 
tively. (The symbol loop window factor is the ratio of 
the integration time in the quadrature channel of the 
symbol synchronization loop to the symbol period.) 
Bsym has a maximum value of 50 Hz (again, the 
constraint is due to the loop update rate). Ssym is 
a kind of squaring loss, where 0 5 Ssym 5 1.[3] The 
largest R b  that simultaneously satisfies Inequalities (I), 
(2), (3), and (4) is the achievable bit rate for a given, 
static PT/No. In practice, however, PT/No is not static 
but varies significantly during a tracking pass. 
In all that follows, PT/No is assumed to have a pro- 
file whose shape is that of the curve shown in Figure 1. 
As part of the analysis leading to this paper, a family 
of PTINO curves were generated for X-band, with each 
curve having the shape shown in Figure 1 but with a dif- 
ferent vertical displacement. The individual curves are 
distinguished by specifying the &/No at zenith. 
3. LOOP TRANSIENT RESPONSE 
A common analysis serves to characterize both the sub- 
carrier and the symbol loop. Both loops are assumed to 
be third order. The differential equation relating loop 
phase error 4(t) to input phase 8(t) is 
(5) 
d34 d24 d4 d38 
dt3 dt2 dt dt3 
where the coefficients are related to the noise-equivalent 
loop bandwidth B by[4] 
- -k 61- + K p -  -k 634 = -, 
A single step in phase rate, occurring at t = 0, is modeled 
as 
8(t) = 27r A f t, (7) 
where Af is the phase-rate step size in cycles per sec- 
ond. (For the subcarrier loop, this is the change in fre- 
quency, measured in hertz. For the symbol loop, this 
is the symbol-rate step size, measured in symbols per 
second.) A solution to Eq. (5) is sought for the case of 
a single, isolated phaserate step, corresponding to the 
8(t) of Eq. (7). With initial conditions 
4(0) =o ,  -(O) d4 = 27r-A.f, %(O) = 0, dt 
the solution, here denoted 41 (t), is 
4l(t) = - 27r . Af [2 - 2 cosbt) + sinbt)] e - p t ,  
P 
valid for t 2 0, where 
A solution 4(t) of Eq. (5) is also sought for the case of 
periodic steps in phase rate. The steps are here assumed 
to be all of the same size and spaced T seconds apart. 
The solution, in this case, is periodic with period T .  For 
the interval 0 5 t 5 T, the solution is 
00 
n=O 
The peak value of phase error is here denoted d P e a k .  
For a given Af, T and B,  it can be found numerically 
from Eqs. (9) and (11). 
It is assumed here that the subcarrier frequency and 
the symbol rate are coherently generated from the 
same frequency source and that the former is exactly 
5 times the latter. The new transponder currently 
being developed for future deep space missions has 
been designed to provide such capabilities. The ratio of 
5 is expected to be typical for future deep space missions. 
For the remainder of this paper, we assume that 4ppeak 
for the subcarrier loop and 4ppeak for the symbol loop 
are both required to be below 0.1 rad. In other words, 
the periodic step changes in symbol rate shall not cause 
the peak phase error in either the symbol loop or the 
subcarrier loop to exceed 0.1 rad. The subcarrier loop 
is an issue here because changing the symbol rate also 
changes the subcarrier frequency, since the two are co- 
herently related. 
4. DYNAMIC BIT RATE 
The traditional deep space telemetry playback strategy 
has been to use a single bit rate during the tracking pass. 
Based on the analysis of the two previous sections, a 
new strategy is proposed for increasing total data return 
of a tracking pass above that which is possible by using 
the best single bit rate. The proposed strategy features 
a dynamic bit rate. Rb is increased by periodic, small 
steps. Actually, there are two versions of this strategy. 
In the first version, Rb is stepped once each telemetry 
frame. In a second version, R b  is increased once each 
symbol. These two methods were selected because 
they are relatively straight forward to implement on a 
transponder 
The step size of R b  is limited by the following con- 
straints: 
R b  must not exceed the maximum bit rate achiev- 
able for a given &-/No. In other words, R b  must, 
at every point in time, satisfy Inequalities (I), (2), 
(3), and (4). 
The corresponding symbol step size shall not cause a 
4ppe.k in the symbol loop or a 4ppeak in the subcarrier 
loop of more than 0.1 rad. 
3-1145 
The bandwidths B,, and Bsym are constants for each 
tracking pass. B,, is chosen as the largest value satisfy- 
ing Inequality (3) at the start time for the tracking pass, 
subject to the existing hardware constraint B,, 5 50 Hz. 
Bsym is chosen as the largest value satisfying Inequal- 
ity (4) at the start time for the tracking pass, subject 
to the (existing hardware constraint Bsym 5 50 Hz. It 
is important to use the largest permissible B,, and 
Bsym; this maximizes the bit rate step size allowed by 
constraint 2. 
The modulation index is taken to be constant during 
a tracking pass. In principle, the optimum modulation 
index is a function of the bit rate. In practice, however, 
very little efficiency is sacrificed by using a modulation 
index that is unchanging and optimum at some point 
in the tracking pass. We assume that the modulation 
index is optimum at zenith. 
Figure 2 shows R b  as a function of time during a 
tracking pass for the above dynamic R b  strategy in the 
case of a PT/No profile of the shape given in Figure 1 
and a zlenith PT/No of 53 dB-Hz. We assume no link 
margin. The curve labeled “m” in that figure is the 
achievable static bit rate for the instantaneous value of 
PT/No; this is an upper bound to what may be achieved 
by a practical dynamic R b  strategy. The traditional 
telemetry strategy of using the best single rate is shown 
in the figure as a horizontal line at 73.5 kHz during that 
portion of the tracking pass for which this rate can be 
supported. (This single rate is best in the sense that the 
total data return has been optimized over the si;art/end 
times. This optimization amounts to a simple geometric 
proposition: of all the rectangles that fit completely 
under the “m” curve, the one with the largest area has 
a height equal to the best single bit rate and an area 
equal to the total data return.) The curve labeled “s” 
shows what can be achieved by using the dynamic R b  
strategy with a bit rate step every symbol. The curve 
labeled ‘Y“ shows what can be achieved with a bit rate 
step once per 10232 bit frame. The receiver parameters 
assumed in the generation of this curve are as follows: 
B, = 1 Hz and W,, = Wsym = 0.25. An optimization 
was done over start/end times, and the bandwidths B,, 
and Bsyln were chosen as described above; for this case, 
their values are both 50 Hz. In optimizing the start/end 
times, there are two advantages of starting later and 
ending earlier: the starting R b  is larger; and ,B,, and 
Bsym are larger, permitting larger bit rate steps. There 
is, of course, one obvious advantage to starting earlier 
and ending later: there is more time to collect hits. 
The ratio, in decibels, of the total bits returned by the 
dynamic Rb strategy to the total bits returned by the 
&!b 
kbps 
1 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
0 5 10 15 
t , holm 
Figure 2: R b  variation during a tracking pass; zenith 
P T / N ~  = 53 dB 
best single rate strategy (for a common PT/No profile) 
is used in this paper as a figure-of-merit for the dynamic 
R b  strategy. For example, the “s” curve of Figure 2 
yields 0.92 dB more total bits for the tracking pass 
than does the best single rate strategy. (The ”f’ curve 
yields 0.44 dB more total bits than the best single rate 
strategy:) 
Figure 3 shows the gain, as defined in the previous 
paragraph, for the dynamic R b  strategy relative to the 
best single rate strategy. This one figure shows the 
gain for an entire family of PT/NI, profiles, each the 
same shape as that of Figure 1, with different maximum 
values. The abscissa is the zenith &/No, and the 
ordinate is the gain relative to tlhe best single rate 
strategy. The curve labeled “m” is not achievable in 
practice; it represents the hypothetical case where only 
constraint 1 is a consideration, not constraint 2. (This 
is what the gain would be if the 1’~/No profile could 
be matched exactly.) The curve labeled “f” is for the 
dynamic R b  strategy with bit rate changes once per 
frame with a frame size of 10232 bits. The curve labeled 
“s” is for the dynamic R b  strategy with bit rate changes 
once per symbol. For Figure 3, the receiver parameters 
are as follows: B, = 1 Hz and W,, := Wsym = 0.25. As 
before, there is no link margin. 
Beginning with 25 dB-Hz, the gain of the dynamic R b  
strategy increases as the zenith P?/No increases: the 
dynamic R b  strategy does an incr’easingly better job 
of huggi:ng the maximum R b  curve (that is based ody  
on constraint 1). The onceper-symbol approach gives 
larger gains than does the once-per-frame approach. 
Both curves level off and finally begin to fall, due to the 
maximum allowed bandwidth limiting the step size. For 
intermediate values of zenith P T / N ~  (corresponding to 
3-1146 
2.0 
1.5 
Gain l.o dl3 
0.5 
small and intermediate values for best single bit rate), 
the dynamic Rb strategy that permits a bit rate change 
with each symbol works quite well. 
I I 5. OPERATIONAL COMMENTS 
There are two operational issues that need to be con- 
sidered when using the dynamic R b  strategy: acquiring 
the signal and determining the profile to be used. With 
a fixed bit rate strategy, the acquisition process is fairly 
straight forward; the aquiring system only needs to 
consider the drift of the oscillator on the spacecraft and 
m -  .ci 
- 
- f 
For small values of zenith PT/No, the dynamic R b  
strategy does not offer much gain because B,, and 
Bsym must be very small in order to achieve acceptable 
subcarrier and symbol loop signal-to-noise ratios, but 
as a result only small steps in R b  can be tolerated. 
The onceper-symbol performs better because the low 
bit rates mean that the time between symbols is large, 
relative to the decay time of the step transient; this 
allows the sum of the steps over a frame to be more 
than the single step for the onceper-frame approach. 
For intermediate values of zenith PTINO, B,, and B s y m  
are large enough to permit significant step sizes in Rb. 
For large values of zenith PT/No, B,, and B s y m  are at 
their upper limits of 50 Hz and the dynamic R b  strategy 
does not offer much gain; this is not a serious concern 
because for large Rb there are better signal structures 
to use than the one considered in this paper. (In 
particular, the subcarrier is unnecessary for large Rb. )  
The two approaches converge to the same gain because 
The other issue is the determination of the profile to be 
used by the spacecraft. This will require knowledge of 
the tracking schedule ahead of the transmission of the 
data. Also, issues of station handovers (tracking moving 
from one station to another) need to be factored into 
the profiling; while one station’s PT/No is decreasing, 
the other’s is increasing. The spacecraft operations team 
will need to tradeoff the additional planning complexity 
against the data return gain. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Changing the bit rate during a tracking pass can result 
in significant increases in total data return relative to 
a single rate strategy, especially when the changes are 
once-per-symbol. The bit rate can be changed in small 
steps so that the receiver subcarrier and symbol loops 
have only small transient phase errors. No very precise 
predictions of the subcarrier frequency and symbol rate 
changes need be made available to the receiver. This 
dynamic R b  strategy works well for those tracking passes 
for which the best single rate is of intermediate value. 
For example, for onceper-symbol changes, the dynamic 
Rb strategy yields significant gain for tracking passes 
having maximum P T / N ~  between 25 and 55 dB-Hz. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
for the higher bit rates, the time between SYmbOlS is 
small, relative to the step transient decay time; this 
forces the sum in one frame time of the OnCe-Per-sYmbol 
steps to be equal to the step size of the onceper-frame 
method. 
The research described in this paper was carried out at 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aero- 
nautics and space Administration. 
REFERENCES 
The gain of a dynamic Rb strategy could be better if the [l] S. D. Slobin and M. K. Sue, “DSN 34-m Beam- 
subcarrier frequency and symbol rate were not harmon- Waveguide Antenna Gain and Noise Temperature 
ically related, so that the symbol rate could be dynamic Models for Telecom Systems Analysis,” Report D- 
while the subcarrier frequency is static. However, there 11591, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 
are unrelated practical reasons for preferring the har- March 1, 1994. 
monic relationship. 
3-1147 
[2] M. .K. Sue, A. Mileant, J .  F. Weese, J. B. Berner, 
P. W. Kinman, and H. H. Tan, “Increased Suppressed- 
Carrier Telemetry Return by Means of Frequent 
Changes in Bit Rate During a Tracking Pass,” Telecom- 
munications and Mission Operations Proqres:? Report 
42-137, Jan-March 1999, pp. 1-17, May l!j, 1999. 
http://t m o  . jpl. nasa . gov/tmo/progress- report/4 2- 
137/13KI.pdf 
[3] “207: 34-m and 70-m Telemetry Reception”, 
November 30, 2000, in Document 810-005, DSMS 
Telecorrununications Link Design Handbook, Rev. 
E, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. 
http://eis.jpl. nasa.gov/deepspace/dsndocs/810-/~05/ 
[4] S. A. Stephens and J. B. Thomas, “Coiitrolled- 
Root Rormulation for Digital Phase-Locked Loops,” 
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Sys- 
tems, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 78-95, January 1995. 
Laboratory since 
Jeff B. Berner (S’82, M’84, SM’98) 
earned his B.S. (with honors) in 
Electrical Engineering in 1983 and 
his M.S. in Electrical Engineering in 
1984, both from the California Insti- 
tute of Technology. With the excep- 
tion of a six-month period in 1984, 
he has been at the Jet Propulsion 
1982, where he is a Principal Engi- 
neer. Early in his career, he worked on projects such as 
the Galileo and Mars Observer spacecraft, and the Mo- 
bile Satellite Experiment (MSAT-X). More recently, he 
was the Cognizant Development Engineer of the Block 
V Receiver, the tracking and telemetry receiver of the 
Deep Space Network. In 1996, he was awarded the 
NASA E:xceptional Service Medal for his work with the 
Block V Receiver for the Galileo project. Currently, 
he is the Telecommunications and Mission Operations 
Directorate Telecommunications Services System Devel- 
opment Engineer, where he is responsible for the up- 
link, downlink, and tracking equipment design and per- 
formance, and for the Spacecraft Transponding Modem 
signal processing architectural design. He is stlso the 
task manager for the turbo coding implementation in 
the DSN. 
Peter W. Kiiiman (S’73, M’79, 
SM’91) was born in St. Louis, 
Missouri, in 1!355. He received 
B.S. degrees in Electrical Engineering 
and Physics from the University of 
Missouri-Rolla and a Ph.D. in Elec- 
trical Engineering from the Univer- 
sity of Southern California. He was 
employed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1979 
to 1993 where he worked on telemeixy and 1)oppler and 
range rneasurements in support of deep space explo- 
ration. Since 1993 he has been a researcher at Case 
Western Reserve University, specializing in radio tech- 
nology for space communications. 
Miles K. Sue received his B.S. and 
M.S degrees in Electrical Engineer- 
ing from the University of Hawaii and 
University of Southern Ca.lifornia, re- 
spectively. He has been employed by 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory since 
1974. He has worked in various areas 
in deepspace communications, satel- 
lite communications, and spectrum engineering, includ- 
ing mission flight operations, testing, analysis, and ad- 
vanced studies for deepspace communications and mo- 
bile satellite systems. He is currently working in the area 
of deepspace frequency utilization and Mars proximity 
communications frequency and multiple access. 
3-1148 
