 Enabling and Measuring  
Electronic Customer Relationship Management Readiness 
 
Dawn Jutla, Faculty of Commerce, Saint Mary's University, Halifax, Canada dawn.jutla@stmarys.ca 
James Craig, Aliant Communications, Halifax, Canada; james.craig@aliant.ca 
Peter Bodorik, Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada bodorik@cs.dal.ca 
 
 
Abstract 
This work provides a comprehensive customer-focused 
evaluation framework that businesses can use to assess 
their electronic customer relationship management (e-
CRM) readiness. The framework is intended to provide 
a big picture of the overall composition of e-CRM, to 
facilitate gap analysis, and to support a monitoring and 
feedback process. Knowledge management, trust, and 
technology are identified as key enablers of e-CRM. 
Finally, we propose weighting and rating scales to aid 
in assessing customer relationship management 
readiness, and provide examples of their use. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a 
broad term for managing a business’ interactions with 
customers. Effective CRM is about acquiring, analyzing 
and sharing knowledge about and with your customers. 
Total CRM covers your direct business contacts with 
customers, your channel partners’ indirect contacts with 
customers, and customer contact management in your 
supply chain. More importantly, it allows a business to 
focus on the customer.  
Electronic CRM or e-CRM is the customer 
relationship care component of e-Business. Customer 
care linkages in the value chain for B2C and B2B 
electronic commerce are critical elements for successful 
adoption of new products and for the evolution of 
existing products [26]. Technology is being deployed to 
an ever-broadening set of businesses and the challenge 
for developers is to not only have the correct customer 
care mechanisms in place, but in order to differentiate 
themselves from the competition, it must be done either 
more cheaply or better than its competitors. Customer-
focused implies that there is a demand-pull of 
information that ultimately focuses on the customer.  
e-CRM extends to all of the stakeholders that create 
value for the customer. Value for the customer may be 
lower prices, higher quality products and services, 
continuous stream of innovative new products and 
services, speedier responses, convenience, and 
customization of products and services. Value is 
essential - it is what customers are willing to pay in 
exchange for some offering. When a company is the 
customer, Anderson [1] defines value as “the worth in 
monetary terms of the technical, economic, service, and 
social benefits a customer company receives in exchange 
for the price it pays for a market offering.” Customer 
characteristics have changed. Although value is what 
customers have always wanted, today’s customer has 
greater access to it. The new customer is fickle, 
demanding, informed, and in the driver’s seat.  
A natural extension of value that the customer 
receives is a progression from commodities, through 
goods and services to ‘experiences’ – each one 
progressively adding more value through increased 
differentiation and increased price willing to be paid. 
Commodities are fungible, goods are tangible, services 
are intangible and experiences are memorable [9].  
Many studies show traditional companies are 
insufficiently equipped to meet converging consumer 
needs, tastes, and preferences in developed economies 
[25, 11]. With increased market complexity, customer 
demands for greater quality at lower cost with more 
expedient delivery, organizational access to new 
knowledge and capabilities is becoming the critical 
success factor necessary to compete globally [22]. 
Nooteboom [24] further proposes that the only way for 
firms to produce this demanded added value is by using 
complimentary competencies found within alliance 
structures.  
The CRM framework proposed in this paper can be 
used for assessment and for ongoing performance 
monitoring of CRM initiatives. Metrics are used to 
gauge the effectiveness of customer relationship 
management systems and can also be used for alerts or 
for control.  
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we 
present the e-Business stakeholder model and discuss the 
major enablers and metrics for CRM. Section 3 details 
the key e-CRM components. The scales used in 
assessing CRM readiness are outlined in section 4. 
Section 5 illustrates the assessment method with 
application examples. Section 6 gives a synopsis of 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 1
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
related work. Finally a summary and conclusions are 
provided in Section 7. 
 
2. The Customer-Focused Approach 
 
The external stakeholders of any e-Business are 
community, governance, customer, and partners [6]; see 
Table 2.1. The customer will pull maximum value from 
summing the value created from each external 
stakeholder and the business itself. The previous section 
motivates the customer demand-pull of value from the 
business and its partners. The value propositions we 
present next for the community and governance 
stakeholders motivate their presence in our e-Business 
stakeholder model. Full details on the model can be 
found in [7]. 
 
• Governance has a crucial role to play in developing 
opportunities, rules, trust, and legality for the e-
Business applications. It is required to manage 
workforce, localization, clusters, access, e-business 
education, jurisdiction, liability, intellectual property, 
dispute settlement, taxation, privacy, trust, and e-
business architecture issues. 
• The online community value propositions to the 
customer are fast knowledge access, leveling the field 
for making new contacts, aggregation of content, 
access to useful, often free services, and ability to 
compare a business’ services and products with 
competitors. The community stakeholder adds team 
spirit, enhances customer service through extended 
product and service support knowledge base, enhances 
trust and perception, and increases the number of 
preferred customer profiles.  
 
The e-CRM framework we propose to support the e-
Business stakeholder model has two main aspects:  
• identification of components and their associated 
enablers to support e-CRM and  
• measures or metrics to assess the performance of the 
stakeholder interaction.   
The components may be whole processes, or at a 
finer grain such as subtasks contained in a business 
process. Components can also be infrastructure or 
technology components, or cultural organizational 
components, or people components. The enablers are the 
technology, trust, management, or other supports 
required for a component to execute correctly and 
effectively.  
 
Community
Strategic 
Governance
CustomerOperational Business
Partners
Trust
Knowledge Management
Enablers
Technology
 
Figure 2-1 e-Business Stakeholder Model 
 
2.1. Enablers 
 
Three primary enablers are present for e-Business [7] 
and hence e-CRM. These are knowledge management, 
trust, and technology. Each is discussed next.  
 
2.1.1 Knowledge management.  We define knowledge 
management (KM) as encompassing all forms of 
business relationship management, intellectual assets 
management, and content management. Business 
relationship management includes relationships with 
customers, partners, and regulatory bodies. Content 
management covers document management, web content 
management, media asset management and syndication 
of content. Management of intellectual assets umbrellas 
employee knowledge and expertise. A key trend in 
knowledge management is the move to real time 
availability and analysis of data, allowing for immediate 
customer response and more informed and faster 
decision making. 
 
2.1.2 Trust.  Trust in all its many definitions [2], [13], 
[23], [27] is a necessary enabler to e-CRM and indeed e-
Business. Lewicki and Bunker [20, 21] discusses three 
different forms of trust: (1) personality’s theorists view 
of trust as an individual difference, (2) economists’ and 
sociologists’ view of trust as an institutional notion, and 
(3) psychologists’ view of trust as an expected behavior 
and outcomes of another party in a transaction. All these 
definitions apply to e-CRM. Many studies have shown 
that trust is an integral part of the selling equation to 
customers [12, 10]. Customers need to trust the business 
before they will open-up their purse. Furthermore, the 
more trust they put in the business, the easier it is for the 
business to retain them as customers.  
 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 2
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
2.1.3 Technology. The “low cost” Internet 
communication platform delivers functionality that 
makes it the most strategic killer application of 
technology for business in the 20th century. The low 
costs of transactions, the global reach to multiple 
markets, the ability to deliver data anywhere, and 
scalability of the platform in terms of the numbers of 
participants it can intimately handle makes it extremely 
useful to the entire human race. Sharply decreasing 
computer and network hardware prices, increasing 
power of hardware servers, and increasing network 
bandwidth have made business and consumer 
connectivity to the Internet possible. 
Accompanying Internet-enabled software 
applications such as enterprise resource planning 
packages, eCommerce applications, relationship 
management packages, and enterprise portal applications 
have caused business to change processes, adopt best of 
breed practices, slash costs and introduce efficiencies 
into supply chain, customer relationship management 
and internal operations.  
 
2.2 Metrics 
 
In 1999, the European market for IT measurement 
and benchmarking was valued at 1.5 billion dollars 
accounting for approximately 2% of total IT 
expenditure. Performance measurement and 
benchmarking are recognized as important mechanisms 
for communicating whether tactical execution is aligned 
with corporate strategic goals and vision. Metrics can be 
used to gauge changes in performance, costs and 
effectiveness of e-CRM business processes.  
Instrumenting your e-CRM initiatives to measure 
performance allows understanding of strengths and 
weaknesses and detection of emerging trends that 
contribute to effective management. 
From Table 3-1, it is apparent that explanation for 
metrics, such as customer satisfaction change, relies on 
interrelated measures for various business components. 
That is, some metrics are functions of other metrics. For 
example, the change in the customer retention rate 
depends on change in the ratio of actioned feedback, 
ratio of missed deliveries to on-time, rate of new 
product/service introductions, and/or degree of price 
innovation. We refer to retention rate as a higher-level 
aggregate metric that depends on other, lower-level 
metrics. The customer satisfaction metric depends on 
research and development processes, since one of the 
factors that contribute to customer satisfaction is the rate 
of introduction of innovative products and services. 
Value, such as reduced costs to customers, may depend 
on changes to procurement processes due to introduction 
of price innovation based business models at the supplier 
end, and innovations to supply chain and/or 
manufacturing processes.  
Table 3-1 Customer Metrics 
 
 
3. e-CRM Components 
 
e-CRM processes are comprised of four main 
components: engage, purchase, fulfill and support, as 
illustrated in Figure 3.1.  
Engage Order
Fulfill Support
•Browse
•Search
•Compare
•Configure
•Interact
•Question
•Listen
•Advertising
•Real-time information
•Broad coverage of aspects
•Cross channel coordination
  for marketing, sales
  and service
•Selection mechanisms
 (including pricing,
 product availability,
 shipping, export
 and tax rules)
•Payment mechanisms
•Contracts
•Billing
•Order transaction
 management (including
 fraud transaction
 mechanisms,
 historical transaction
 details)
•Back end process integration
•Delivery capability
•Returns handling
•Global sales governance
•Complete customer history in real time
•Maintenance and access to corporate
 knowledge bases or industry knowledge sets
•Automatic product updates
•Self serve applications
•Single interface
 or portal to business knowledge
Figure 3.1 Customer Components 
 
 
The call-outs detail specific ancillary enablers for 
each component. They are specific forms of the 
technology, KM, and/or trust enablers. Information 
required for customer care is derived primarily from 
• Customer retention 
- existing customer loss rate (just for repeat 
customers), customer retention rate (includes 
old and new customers), degree of customer 
satisfaction  
• Customer satisfaction 
- lead times, on time delivery, continuous 
stream of innovative products and services, 
anticipation of emerging needs, product 
customization, personalization, convenience, 
team spirit (community), reduced costs to 
customers as compared to competitors, 
product/service availability  
• Customer acquisition  
- change in look-to-buy ratio, eyeballs increase 
• Customer profitability 
- ratio of customer costs per market segment, 
percentage of preferred customer profiles, market 
and wallet share in targeted segments 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 3
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
customer data warehouse for linking to multiple touch 
points and marketing knowledge bases.  
Furthermore, these must be integrated with (1) 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems , (2) partner 
relationship management systems, and (3) supply chain 
systems. 
 
3.1 Engage Component  
 
e-Business-izing the engage component means 
network enabling the process of enticing the right 
customers to buy a product or service. Some forms of 
proactive engagement are having your product or service 
appear prominently in the results of a popular search 
engine, or via advertising banners pushed to an idle cell 
phone display. The e-CRM aspect is not only doing 
online marketing, sales and service but also supporting 
these functions in traditional channels (e.g. storefront, 
reseller) through use of Internet and/or wireless 
technology. Here we focus on Internet supported 
enablers for engagement. The discussion applies for 
businesses from pure dot coms, to physical companies 
with a web channel (clicks and mortar), to net market 
makers and breakers.  
Software companies like Netscape used giving a 
product away “for free” as an effective engage 
instrument. Revenues could be obtained later through 
another product. In Netscape’s case, it is the quarter 
million dollars plus suite of XPert e-Commerce tools. In 
RedHat’s case, millions were made in escalating share 
price. Some companies give away “ teasers”, or stripped 
down products or services. After the customer is 
engaged, revenue may be obtained from the company 
offering billable add-on features. These strategies 
complement other marketing campaign strategies such as 
spreads of limited time price reductions, sales, or 
clearances.  
Interactive marketing effectively “tracks” customer 
movements and pushes suggestions or advertisements 
out to that customer. Online interactive marketing uses 
customer profiling, personalization and contextual 
advertising extensively. When a customer starts looking 
for product or service information, online or offline, he 
or she engages in browsing content, searching, 
comparing, configuring, interacting, questioning, and 
listening. e-CRM must support these activities as well as 
identify needs and solve customers’ problems. 
Throughout these stages, advertising is effective to get 
the customers to look at product.  
Interacting, configuring, listening and questioning 
are the ways that a merchant presents personalized views 
to the customer. This comprises the themes for 
personalization/trust, marketing and content for points of 
contact. The themes range from picking and choosing 
products to pushing specific information to the 
customer. Personalization in the search context is the 
process of tailoring information to the specific user. This 
includes localization of content, contextual presentation 
of data and iterative learning based on user inputs. 
Localization of content is the ability to understand the 
customer requirements at each location and the tailoring 
of content to suit them. This is made more difficult by 
the nature of globalization of business. A good example 
is presentation of prices to a customer. Localized content 
would be required to present to the customer a true price 
to them, reflective of all of the pertinent costs, rules and 
regulations. Locality also dictates how a customer 
interacts with the presence. The customer may speak 
another language or be visually impaired to name two 
very large localization issues. Providing hooks such as 
voice buttons on web pages for escalation to human 
contact is another engage enabler. 
Identifying needs and solving customer problems in 
the context of engage enablers means explaining the 
product or service to fit the customer needs. Marketing 
at the engage stage can act as a conduit for new product 
or service development.  
Access to a common customer database allows 
businesses to more effectively cross-sell and up-sell. The 
access to complete customer information can facilitate 
business to create a richer customer experience. Another 
aspect of engaging a customer is the coordination of 
effort with channel partners. Most customers do not 
want to have to say no to the same product or service to 
multiple companies in a short time period. To avoid 
potential customer annoyance, channel partners need to 
share and manage lead information on prospects or 
potential customers. Another point is that online 
prospects are directed to the channel partner that can 
offer the best service to the customer. All online 
prospects are automatically recorded in a database. The 
leads are then available for follow-up by sales personnel.  
Dot com companies also use traditional media such 
as newspapers, radio and television to engage new 
customers. In fact, it is well known that dot com 
companies reinvest from 50 to 85% of their revenues in 
marketing to build brand. Clicks and mortar companies 
use the web channel to complement traditional 
engagement methods. Both types of companies advertise 
web sites through regular media such as brochures.  
All types of business use profitability and competitor 
analyses to target the right prospects, customers, and 
partners in the first place. Data mining of the customer 
data warehouse supports these types of analyses and 
allows the business to effectively create marketing 
campaigns. Full knowledge management allows 
personalization and one-to-one marketing. Sales order 
history can be used to personalize and create a customer 
service offering by allowing customers to view their past 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 4
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
transactions. Best of breed examples include full 
customer care suites that have integrated sales order 
history with the marketing systems.  
 
3.2 Order Component 
 
Ordering is the process where a customer selects and 
makes a commitment to purchase a product. This 
includes a variety of selection, payment mechanisms, 
and order management mechanisms. Ordering has 
traditionally been a sales process. However interactive 
marketing threads through this process and there is 
opportunity for service also. The customer does not 
distinguish between dealing with the marketing, sales, or 
support areas – he/she is dealing with the business. The 
web channel particularly blurs these functionalities as 
customers expect view the business all at once. 
Product or service selection is facilitated by real-time 
shopping environments created to give consolidated 
views of price, availability, shipping and tax rules, and 
any other pertinent information that would alleviate the 
ordering process. Customer ordering ties to the 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) or back office 
system for dynamic pricing, just-in-time (JIT) inventory 
control and other logistical and customer-centric 
mechanisms. This is why supply chain visibility is 
important to CRM. It generates customer expectations 
that are more accurate because the customer is presented 
with accurate delivery date and order status information. 
Customers want to make incremental changes to orders 
until the time of shipment; they want to see past order 
history.  
For these reasons, an order system must go beyond 
order capture to create real value to the customer. It 
must access real time supply chain management data  - 
demand planning and forecasting, manufacturing 
planning and scheduling, distribution and deployment 
planning, and transportation planning and scheduling 
data. Supply chain management optimizes the delivery of 
goods, services and information from supplier to 
customer. Based on this real time supply and demand 
data, a business can differentiate itself by creating 
dynamic pricing, nimble product or service 
configurations, promotion and product mix 
optimizations. Global sales drive the integration of other 
information such as custom and excise duties, and 
governance rules for export to a country in the order 
management systems for e-Business.  
The payment mechanisms for B2C e-Commerce 
include credit cards, micropayments, and electronic 
funds transfer and other types of non-cash settlements 
such as contracts and invoices. These mechanisms must 
allow for non-repudiation of the transaction.  
Order management refers to the management of the 
order details. This varies from single consumer views to 
corporate views where the details are for a single 
individual versus a corporate purchasing process. Order 
entry system must address service orders, not just 
product orders, justifying the need for warranty 
management integration within the order management 
system. Warranty information is the types of warranty 
that is available to the customer. This is very critical 
with non-digital goods where the warranty reflects the 
actions taken for defects and returns. Ensuring the 
capture of customer information at the point of purchase 
can be difficult and challenges the online world. Yet, it 
is important as proof of purchase for returns and service. 
Retention of sales receipts is bothersome for most 
customers – the capture of customer information at the 
point of sales takes the onus off the customer to retain 
their sales receipt. 
 
3.3 Fulfillment Component 
 
Fulfillment is about managing information on 
product or service movement. It is a subset of 
knowledge management since it requires knowledge of 
product movement or supply chain information. Many 
businesses track orders to the point of shipment not to 
the point of delivery to the customer. The fulfillment 
role is sending a product, delivering a service or any 
situation where the terms of agreement are completed 
with the customer. Your customer cares that you get the 
right product to the right place at the right time. You 
want to do all that at the lowest delivered cost. A 
fulfillment strategy may mean a relationship with your 
supplier to deliver direct to your customer instead of to 
your business. 
Returns are an iterative loop between fulfillment and 
support planned for when the customer has a problem, 
needs to send products back and potentially get 
replacements. This is often an overlooked area for many 
on-line businesses. 
The critical enablers in fulfillment are back end 
process integration, delivery capability and global sales 
governance. Back-end process integration is how 
integrated into the company’s internal systems are the e-
CRM processes that facilitates access to product 
availability and information about lead times. All the 
systems interact with common database(s) in order to 
gain access to the required data.  
Many enterprises fail to capture the true cost of 
fulfillment since the backend fulfillment process is not 
integrated, so many think their web-commerce 
transactions are profitable. Enterprises must plan a 
strategy to sell products over the multiple mediums and 
develop a strategy for back-end fulfillment.  
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 5
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
Delivery capability is how the products or services 
are fulfilled. This can range from having a server deliver 
electronic goods to fulfillment of tangible goods. The 
digital goods are the easiest to fulfill but might also be 
tied to an ecommerce transaction engine. The entire 
procedure for digital goods delivery capability should be 
totally automated. When goods are non-digital in nature, 
the equation becomes more complex. Enterprises in a B-
to-C model may employ a “pick and pack” strategy for 
their fulfillment. Other businesses may require partial 
pallets versus full loads. These needs have given rise to 
container aggregation shipping models and e-Businesses 
such as iShip.com. Many companies are employing the 
services of outsource fulfillment agencies such as UPS 
and Fedex who will deliver the capabilities the firm does 
not have. 
Integrated resourcing (IR) encompasses fulfillment 
and communications with the customer around flexible 
manufacturing and distribution of products. Key to the 
success of IR is having multi-modal transportation 
systems, integrated communications networks and 
enterprise knowledge about the product [16].  
Multi-modal transportation systems include the 
ability for the organization to interface with many types 
of transportation components including container, truck, 
rail, air, and others. Materials handling systems will 
serve as inter-modal integrators, providing seamless 
connections among different transport modes and to 
manufacturing and distribution facilities. Integrated 
communications networks are the backbone allowing for 
all components of the virtual integration team to 
communicate with each other. The openness of the 
network will allow for interoperability by all versus 
having a proprietary network. Enterprise knowledge 
about the product is focused on having a knowledge 
management system that allows the entire enterprise to 
tap into the knowledge about the product including 
design, support, and upgrades. This is important to the 
integrated resourcing function because it helps dictate 
what types of fulfillment options are available for 
delivery and returns.  
One area of major concern for fulfillment is global 
sales. Many enterprises get very excited about 
potentially selling products and services to customers 
over the globe. The difficulty is that the enterprise may 
not have all the policies and procedures in place to do 
global export. They can often expose themselves to too 
much risk of violating customs or trade compliance 
laws, which can lead to fines and negative publicity. 
This is an integration of the governance stakeholder 
functions. If the back-end integration, delivery and 
governance factors are not considered, the operation 
could incur lower profitability and could permanently 
damage customer relationships. 
 
3.4 Support Component 
 
The historic term of customer service was to support 
the customers after a sale. Merchants are now realizing 
that well executed, proactive customer service can also 
convert shoppers into buyers, turn buyers into repeat 
purchasers and even increase the incremental purchase 
value of each customer [26]. Self-service is an 
application of personalization and trust that encompasses 
the ability of the system to handle customers’ desires. 
Best of breed examples include having all of the 
information available to the customer placed in a net-
centric environment with allowances for modifications 
and updates of customer information to occur at the 
customer level. Order tracking is one of the best known 
self serve applications. 
A critical enabler of good customer support is 
knowledge management in the form of the integration of 
customer contact points because it is recognizing that 
customers can speak to an organization in many ways.  
Product updates and upgrades notification presents 
another means for support and engagement. From a 
customer-focused prospective, the customer should be 
notified when updates and upgrades are available. This 
is based on the customer contact information that resides 
in the system. 
Current contact management software features 
include collaborative white-boarding, real-time 
application demonstrations and sharing, text chat, voice 
chat, form sharing, and website co-navigation. Web site 
co-navigation or “follow me” browsing is where each 
web page viewed by a customer or agent is visible to the 
other party. Collaborative white-boarding allows 
customers or business partners and agents to draw 
diagrams or circle and highlight points in real-time over 
the network. Form sharing enables agents to help 
customers fill out fields. Some assessment features of 
contact management software include presentation tools 
and performance, integration of multiple media, security, 
ease of use, management, online help, archiving and 
reporting.  
Users can schedule and conduct live (audio and 
voice integrated) Web based meetings or sales 
presentations with customers or other business partners. 
Software demonstrations, document sharing, document 
annotation, and website co-navigation are supported. 
Other features include contact routing ability that 
matches agent profiles to customer profiles. That is, an 
agent with the appropriate skill level handles the 
customer calls.  
The ways in which knowledge management enables 
support is in the provision of complete customer history 
in real time, maintenance and access to corporate 
knowledge bases or industry knowledge sets such as 
IndustrySupport.com that contain problem resolution 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 6
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
descriptions and suggested email responses. The low end 
of the KM enabler would have contact points with 
disparate systems and inconsistent interfaces and the 
high end would have total integration across all 
customer contact points with one consistent interface to 
the information.  
 
4. Scales for the e-CRM framework 
 
The method we use to measure e-CRM readiness 
consists of determining whether each of the four 
customer components (engage, order, fulfill, support) 
are fully enabled. The enablers for each of the 
components were summarized in Figure 3-1. A rating is 
assigned to each of the four components using the rating 
scale shown in Table 4-1.  
 
Table 4-1. Rating scale for component 
Rating Description 
0 This is not a part of this system. 
1 This has rudimentary features of the 
component available but does not have the 
‘common’ features. 
2 All available enablers are present but are 
separate in how they are administered. 
3 All enablers are present and interoperate 
with each other. This is the benchmark to 
aim for when evaluating systems.  
4 Flexibility for additional enablers and 
interoperability are available (future 
growth. This is the target for companies 
that are pushing the envelope! 
 
 
Table 4-2. Weighting scale for component 
Weighting Description  
0 Not required. 
1 Could be in the system. 
2 Should be in the system 
3 Necessary  
4 Necessary and Essential  
 
The assigned value is based on completeness and 
interoperability of enablers for the component. Each 
component has a weighting factor that is based on the 
level of need for the component in the system. The 
weighting scale is motivated by the fact that some 
components are more important to one company than to 
others. For example a 2-3% savings in a procurement 
process costs may be worth millions to a big company, 
but only hundreds to a small company. The small 
company may weigh another process or component 
much more heavily.  
Ratings and weightings are multiplied to produce the 
overall score for each component. The components are 
plotted on a polar plot diagram to pictorially show the 
strengths and weaknesses of the associated e-CRM 
areas. The next section illustrates application of the 
readiness assessment proposed in this paper and usage of 
the scales. 
 
5. Example Application 
 
We consider an example case for customer care 
components. This gives a macro view of e-CRM.  
 
5.1 Customer Readiness Assessment  
 
This case is about a SME distributor of business 
machines – fax machines, photocopiers, computers, and 
typewriters - currently selling to the Latin American and 
Caribbean markets. The company’s motto is People, 
Solutions and Commitment to Service. SMEDistributor 
also sells software packages and provides software 
training packages for customers. The company is small 
size; it has revenue of 10 million annually. Its financial 
systems are computerized. Present points of contact are 
through fax, telephone, marketing representative visit, 
and web. The distributor has a mobile sales force and 
two reselling channel partners. Together, they sell 
mainly to seven industry verticals – manufacturing, oil 
and gas, retail, insurance, education, media, and 
government.  
The service department has a history of good and 
bad customer press. Customers are often not happy if it 
takes multiple service calls to fix the problems. They are 
also unhappy when the time between the breakdown rate 
of the equipment is high, resulting in more frequent than 
anticipated service calls. Some customer differentiation 
and prioritization exists in that the managing director 
ensures that the service reps are aware of who the big 
customers are. Missed service appointments are also a 
problem. Sometimes rescheduling occurs because parts 
have not arrived on time, leaving customers with 
inoperable equipment for longer periods of time than 
first estimated.  
The company receives sales leads from a variety of 
sources. Sometimes it is an inquiry that a secretary 
receiving the incoming call writes down on a scrap of 
paper and puts on a sales rep desk. Whether this lead 
falls into a black hole or is followed up depends on the 
sales rep. SMEDistributor would like to have more 
management control over leads. Lead accountability and 
management is a requirement of any CRM package in 
which SMEDistributor invests. Sales personnel often 
complain about erroneously using old price lists and the 
amount of time it takes to create quotes for customers. A 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 7
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
sore point for SMEDistributor’s mobile sales force is the 
lack of real time access to up-to-date price lists and new 
marketing information.  
When a salesperson follows up a lead or receives a 
call from a customer, she should be able to quickly pull 
up all pertinent customer information on screen. A scan 
of a customer’s buying history can quickly identify cross 
sell or upsell opportunities. If the customer were online, 
the opportunity to obtain and record more knowledge on 
this customer would have presented itself.  
The distributor routinely sends new price lists and 
marketing literature to its resellers. Most times the 
marketing literature sent is a subset of what exists. The 
sales personnel doing the selection of material to pass on 
to the resellers make subjective judgements as to what is 
important enough or whether it is cost effective to 
distribute the whole marketing literature. The indirect 
channel partners complain then that they do not have as 
many marketing resources to work with as compared to 
the distributor. SMEDistributor recognizes that it needs 
to address this concern because knowledge or content 
needs to be present at every customer contact point. 
Another area that needs redressing is that sometimes 
distributor and reseller would target the same customer, 
and sales people from the different companies compete 
against each other to sell the same product.  
Orders from other countries are faxed to 
SMEDistributor. There is double entry in entering the 
information on the fax to the order system. 
SMEDistributor has its own “customs” department that 
deals with the rules and regulations of import and export 
to the countries that are part of the business’ market. 
Delivery capabilities are well developed. Delivery lead 
times are rarely a problem. Although, the stores and 
delivery process systems are computerized, they are 
standalone. Items can be tracked via phone using 
confirmation numbers. Customers often tie up 
accounting personnel (there are no dedicated customer 
service agents at SMEDistributor) time in calls to verify 
bills and terms of agreements.  
SMEDistributor wants to improve overall customer 
satisfaction, customer retention and customer 
profitability ratios. The company aims to: 
• reduce the number of service calls for resolution to 
one; 
• integrate supply chain management into service so that 
replacement parts will arrive on time;  
• identify those customers whose service costs are very 
high as compared to the revenue derived from them; 
• identify those customers who would buy service 
packages; 
• increase revenue through higher sales 
• improve the ratio of accurate quotes 
• improve the ratio of accurate orders 
Another business goal is to turn the computer 
software support calls into selling opportunities for 
training on software packages.  
5.2 Framework analysis of the case  
 
The engage, order, fulfill and service components are 
all equally weighted at 4 – very important. Browsing 
through product catalogs and price lists are available. 
Sales agents are available to help in comparing, 
configuring, interacting and listening. Up sell is 
relatively easy to do. Cross sell is more difficult without 
a common customer database. The missing sales’ leads 
and use of outdated price lists begs for real time access 
to information and lacks the ability to reach each 
customer. Cross channel coordination has some of the 
requisite pieces but at the same time, others are missing 
such as full distribution of material and customer 
assignments. Collectively the engage component is 
assigned a rating of 1 (rudimentary features available, 
but not all common features).  
The lack of integrity in pricing lists and non real-
time information affect product or service selection. 
Otherwise, taxes and shipping procedures are well done 
as SMEDistributor has its own customs department. 
Payment and billing systems are working well. 
Transaction details are all logged.  
Collectively, the order component is assigned a 2 (all 
criteria are present but are separate in how they are 
administered).  
The fulfill capability is standalone. The stores and 
delivery processes are not integrated in the back-end 
financial systems. The fulfill governance is well done 
again because of the presence of a good “customs” 
department. Collectively, the fulfill component is 
assigned a 2 (all criteria are present but are separate in 
how they are administered).  
Service is the worst done component at 
SMEDistributor. Customer information is maintained 
solely in the financial system. The data is not available 
to the marketing or service representatives. There is no 
common database to collect all customers’ interactions 
with the business. Phone conversations about products 
and services and complaints are often unrecorded. No 
automated knowledge bases exist. Collectively, the 
support component is assigned a 1 (rudimentary features 
available, but not all common features). Since the 
components are all equally weighted, it is sufficient to 
plot the evaluated ratings versus the benchmark rating. 
The customer over-all assessment, displayed in 
Figure 5-1, shows that SMEDistributor is starting out. 
They have many gaps to fill as identified by the 
framework. The plot in Figure 5-1 shows the weakest 
areas are in Engage and Support. The standard CRM 
packages on the market substantially address both these 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 8
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
components. The spines of the polar plot, labeled with 
component names such as engage, order, fulfill and 
support are all axes. The score for each component is 
plotted on its corresponding axis.  
Figure 5-1 Customer Assessment Plot 
 
To solve the time problem created by customer call-
ins to verify bills and credit terms, SMEDistributor has 
decided to web enable the functionality. The company 
will allow customers to log in to a secure site to review 
the billing history and payment terms. SMEDistributor 
further proposes to automatically alert its customers by 
sending a reminder email a few days before the preferred 
terms expire. Customers are happy to be reminded so 
that they can save money by either paying no or lower 
interest amounts. SMEDistributor is satisfied because it 
may reduce its overall average cash-to-cash cycle time, 
that is, the time between which SMEDistributor paid for 
the item and the receipt of the customer payment for the 
same item. Another customer self-serve application is 
allowing the customer to view current lead times and 
tracking status for products on order. 
 
6. Related Work 
 
An increasing number of companies are studying the 
satisfaction of customer contacts with their 
organizations. A technique called “critical incident” [28; 
30] has been used in many of these endeavors. The 
critical incident technique is a procedure for collecting 
descriptions of interactions between customers and the 
sales, marketing and service functions of companies. 
Descriptions are qualitatively arranged by category, and 
then quantified to determine a rating. Bittner [3] 
provides a technology infusion matrix that serves as a 
framework for how service encounters can be improved 
through technology. Jutla [14] provides a generic 
framework for e-Commerce encompassing functional, 
operational, and architectural components.  
Shostack [29] provides a graphical method known as 
“service blueprinting” for identifying all of the 
operations involved in delivering a service. Blueprinting 
maps the processes involved in a service and clearly 
identifies where contact with the customer is made.  
Christie [5] provides a list of success factors for 
virtual corporations: customer focus, alliances with 
partners with the necessary core competencies, trust, up-
to-date information technology, adequate measures to 
protect corporate secrets and a new breed of computer 
literate managers and workers. Dunn [8] details only a 
subset of the information systems infrastructure required 
for linking online businesses. Both works ignore the 
community and government linkages.  
Works on inter-business linkages include [4], [19] 
and [17] that specifies the nature of transnational firms' 
alliances and details their dependence on and the 
advantages gained from information systems 
infrastructure to support their online activities.  
In the early 1990s, Kaplan and Norton [18] proposed 
the balanced scorecard approach for identifying key 
business performance measures from financial, 
customer, internal, and learning and growth 
perspectives. “Balancing” occurs because measures with 
an outward customer focus as well as internal employee 
and financial measures are used to assess the business. 
However, for e-CRM application, other stakeholder 
perspectives are needed. Jutla [15] details creation of e-
Commerce benchmarks including customer order, fulfill, 
and support transactions.  
In summary, many of these works provide various 
elements and narrow specific views of customer 
relationship management whereas the e-CRM 
framework presented in this paper is a strategic “big 
picture” approach and is focused in the context of e-
Business.  
 
7. Summary and Conclusions 
 
The e-Business Stakeholder model intuitively shows 
how customer value is pulled from the partner, 
community, governance, and internal business 
stakeholders. It seems obvious that managing knowledge 
among all these entities should be a part of customer 
relationship management. Indeed knowledge 
management, trust, and technology are primary enablers 
of e-CRM. 
The e-CRM framework presented in this paper was 
developed to address a current business need to become 
e-CRM ready and to lessen the slope of the learning 
curve required to get there. The framework first provides 
a macro or “big picture “ view of e-CRM. Secondly the 
framework allows you to dig deeper and identify what 
components and enablers must be in place to support e-
1
1 2
2
3
3
33
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Engage
Order
Fulfill
Support Overall
Benchmark
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 9
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
CRM. Finally, the framework identifies metrics that can 
be used to monitor and infuse feedback to assess the e-
CRM readiness of a business entity. The framework has 
been used successfully by a mid-size 
telecommunications company to create an e-CRM 
strategy and tactical plan. 
 
References 
 
 [1]Anderson, James C., “Business marketing: understand 
what customers value,” Harvard Business Review, 
November-December, 1998, pg. 54. 
[2] Bromiley P. and Cummings L.L., Transaction costs in 
organizations with trust. Research in Negotiation in 
Organizations, Vol. 5., pg. 219-147. 
[3] Bittner, MJ., Brown S.W., Meuter, M.L., “Technology 
infusion in service encounters,” Academy of Marketing 
Science, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 138-149, Winter 2000.  
[4] Boudreau, M., Loch K., Robey, D., Straud, D., "Going 
Global: Using Information Technology to Advance 
Competitiveness of the Virtual Transnational Organization," 
The Academy of Management Executive, Vol. 12, No. 4, 
Nov 1998, 120-128. 
[5] Christie P., Levary R., "Virtual Corporations: Recipe for 
Success," Industrial Management, July-August 1998, 7-11. 
Craig, J., " A Customer-Focused E-Business Evaluation 
Framework ", Masters Research Project, Saint Mary's 
University, September 1999. 
[7]Craig and Jutla 2000, eBiz Readiness: A Customer Focused 
Approach, Addison Wesley, In Press. Launch date: 
November 2000.  
[8] Dunn J., Varano M., "Leveraging Web-based Information 
Systems," Information Systems Management, Fall 99, 60 -
69. 
[9] Gilmore, James, “Welcome to the experience economy,” 
Harvard Business Review, July-August, 1998, pp. 97-105. 
[10] Goodwin, C., “Privacy: Recognition of a consumer right, 
Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 106-119, 
Spring 1991. 
[11] Hickens, M., Searching for Allies, Management Review, 
New York, Jan 2000, Vol 89, 54-57 
[12] Hoffman D.L., Novak, T.P., Peralta M., “Building 
consumer trust online”, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 
42, No. 4, pp. 80-85, New York, Apr. 1999. 
[13] Hosmer L.T., Trust: The connecting link between 
organizational theory and philosophical ethics. Academy of 
Management review, Vol. 20, pp. 379-403. 
[14] Jutla, D., Bodorik, P. and Hajnal, C. and Davis, C., 
"Making Business Sense of Electronic Commerce, " IEEE 
Computer, Vol. 32, No. 3, March 1999a, 67-75. 
[15] Jutla, D., Bodorik, P., Wang Y., "Developing Internet E-
Commerce Benchmarks," Information Systems Journal, 
Vol. 24 No 6, 1999b, 475-493. 
[16] Kasanda, John D., “Innovation Infrastructure for Agile 
Manufacturers”, Sloan Management Review, Winter, 1998, 
pg. 76. 
[17] Ivarsson I., Competitive Industry Clusters and Inward 
TNC Investments: The Case of Sweden, Regional Studies, 
Vol. 33, 1, 37-49. 
[18] Kaplan, R., Norton, D., The Balanced Scorecard, Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, 1996 
[19] King W., Sethi, V., "An Empirical Assessment of the 
Organization of Transnational Information Systems", JMIS, 
Vol. 15, No. 1, Spring 1999, 7-28.  
[20] Lewicki R.J., and Bunker B.B., 1995a; Developing and 
maintaining trust in work relationships. In R.M. Kamer and 
T.R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of 
theory and research, 114-139, Thousand Oaks, California, 
Sage Press. 
 [21]Lewicki R.J., and Bunker B.B., 1995b; Trust in 
relationships: A model of development and decline. In B.B. 
Bunker, J.Z. Rubin and Associates (Eds.), Conflict, 
cooperation and justice, 133-173, San Francisco, Jossey-
Bass. 
[22] Lipparini, A., Fratocchi, L., The Capabilities of the 
Transnational Firm: Accessing Knowledge and Leveraging 
Inter-firm Relationships, European Management Journal, 
London, Dec 1999, 655-667 
[23] Mishra A.K., Organization responses to Crisis, The 
centrality of trust. In R.M. Kamer and T.R. Tyler (Eds.), 
Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of theory and research, 
114-139, Thousand Oaks, California, Sage Press. 
[24] Nooteboom, B. Innovation and Inter-Firm Linkages:  
New Implications for Policy, Research Policy, Amsterdam, 
Nov 1999, Vol 28, Issue 8,  793-805 
[25] Ohmae, K., The GLobal Logic of Strategic Alliances, 
Harvard Business Review, March-April 1989, 143-154 
[26] Seybold, Patricia. “Strategies for Winning the Customer 
Loyalty Race”, Presentation to Electronic Commerce 
World, Denver, CO, 1998. 
[27] Sitkin, S.B., and Roth N., Explaining the Limited 
Effectiveness of Legalistic Remedies for Trust/distrust. 
Organization Science, 4: 367-392. 
[28] Schneider B., Bowen, D. E., “Understanding Customer 
Delight and Outrage”, Sloan Management Review, Vol. 41, 
No. 1, pp. 35-45, Fall 1999. 
[29], G.L, "Service positioning through structural change", 
Journal of Marketing (1987), 34-43. 
[30] Smith A.K., Bolton R.N., Wagner J., “A model of 
customer satisfaction with service encounters involving 
failure and recovery,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 
36, No. 3, Aug. 1999. 
 
 
 
0-7695-0981-9/01 $10.00 (c) 2001 IEEE 10
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001
