Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation Conference 
B. A .  Peters, J. S. Smith, D. J. Medeiros, and M. W. Rohrer, eds. 
PRODUCTION SCHEDULING VALIDITY IN HIGH LEVEL SUPPLY CHAIN MODELS 
David J. Parsons 
Richard A. Phelps 
Simulation Dynamics 
416 High Street 
Maryville, TN 37804, U.S.A. 
ABSTRACT 
Although they focus on the big picture, high level supply 
chain models cannot gloss over the capacity of production 
nodes to meet production allocations. Capacity is not sim- 
ply a reflection of equipment production rates. Short runs 
drive down utilization by increasing total time lost to 
changeovers. Multistage plants require coordination of ca- 
pacities at the several production stages. In short, produc- 
tion capacity is crucially affected by the way production 
runs are scheduled through plants. Modeling actual sched- 
uling practice is often unrealistic, since methods vary from 
plant to plant, and involve a blend between planned sched- 
ules and on-the-fly adjustments. This paper suggests that 
there is a range of approaches to modeling production 
scheduling. In the modeling of supply chains, modeling al- 
ternatives must be assessed in terms of cost of develop- 
ment and implementation versus validity. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Although industrial processes have been successfully mod- 
eled at different levels of detail, from chemical reactions to 
global trade, vertically integrating models is often viewed 
as fools gold, with time management alone trapping the 
modeler at one scale or another. However, we have found 
that putting a one or more production plant into its supply 
chain context can provide essential information about their 
interaction that modeling either system without the other 
cannot provide. Many interactions which are not “pro- 
grammed” into the simulation, but occur “naturally” can be 
observed that would otherwise be missed. 
2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
In order to explore this topic we will adopt the conceptual 
framework underlying Supply Chain Builder. 
2.1 Elements 
The basic elements that define a supply chain are locations, 
inventories, orders and shipments. Items exist in invento- 
ries or between inventories in shipments. Inventories exist 
at locations. 
A supply chain link consists of two inventories be- 
tween which items flow. Each link has a supplier end and a 
customer end, as shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1 : Prototype link 
2.2 Structure 
Supply chain structure is defined by the supplier/customer 
relationships that connect raw material supplies at the up- 
stream end of the supply chain to the consumption points at 
the downstream end. 
2.3 Processes 
A four-step process controls the flow of items from sup- 
plier to customer: 
Order: orders are generated based on re-ordering 
rules. 
560 
Parsons and Phelps 
Assign: Orders are assigned to a supplier. 
Fill: Orders are filled by removing items from the 
supplier inventory and putting them into a ship- 
ment. 
Route: The shipment is routed from the supplier 
to the customer, where it is put into stock. 
storage space, cycle times, order processing costs are basic 
Parameters in both Cases. 
2.4 Demand 
Typically, demand depletes inventories at the downstream 
end of the supply chain, triggering movement of materials 
within each link. Each inventory in the supply chain may 
be the supplier of one or more downstream inventories, and 
the customer for one or more upstream inventories. 
2.5 Types of Locations 
In this scheme, there are four types of locations: suppliers, 
customers, warehouses and plants. 
Figure 2: Production as a Link 
As illustrated in Figure 2, production is a critical link - . -  
in determining the length of a supply chain from raw mate- 
* Suppliers: Suppliers have unlimited supplies of rials suppliers to 
raw materials; they define upstream nodes in the 
3 WHY ARE WE CONCERNED ABOUT 
PLANT SCHEDULING? 
supply chain structure. 
Customers: Customers are points where materials 
are consumed; they define the downstream nodes 
in the supply chain. 
Warehouses: Warehouses receive, store and ship 
materials. The same items come in that go out, 
and are not transformed. 
Plants: Plants, by definition, transform materials. 
There must be a bill of materials that defines the 
inputs and the outputs of the transformation. Even 
if a product is only being repackaged, the quanti- 
ties before and after the repackaging must be 
tracked, as well as the packaging materials them- 
selves. Only the repackaged product is available 
to meet downstream demand. Only the unpack- 
aged product is ordered from upstream. 
2.6 Production As a Supply Chain Link 
Production operations can be viewed as moving material 
from raw materials inventories to finished goods invento- 
ries. The elements and processes involved are completely 
analogous to links in a supply chain. Raw materials are the 
supplier inventories; finished goods inventories are the 
customers. Production orders are generated, assigned, 
filled, and routed, just as between supply chain locations. 
(Assignment could be the decision on whether to make or 
buy a product.) 
The policies that determine when production orders 
are placed, and production order amounts may be very 
similar to policies for reordering at a warehouse or cus- 
tomer distribution center. Economies of scale, available 
Any factor that affects the time required to fill orders in a 
supply chain link will impact the overall responsiveness of 
the supply chain. Production facilities are typically more 
complex than other links in the way that resources are ap- 
plied to order filling. We often must go beyond considera- 
tion of the capacity of the plant as a whole and define the 
capacity of production systems within the plant. System 
capabilities may be overlapping with some systems able to 
make many products while others can make only one or 
two. Multiple stages of production put additional stress on 
plant management. Limited in-process inventories require 
that production across multiple stages be coordinated. In 
practice, such scheduling is often considered an art, rather 
than a science, with continual modification of schedules 
'on the fly'. 
4 WHAT IS A PRODUCTION SCHEDULE? 
A production schedule is a plan for what product will be 
made at what time utilizing what resource. The function of 
the plan is to control plant operations. In the reality of plant 
operations, many factors intervene to take actual plant op- 
erations away from the plan. For example, if the plan is to 
make 1000 cases of Product A starting at 1O:OO am, it can- 
not be certain when that production run will end. The 
schedule may call for switching to product B at 1:OOpm. 
What if the run of Product A is not completed? What if raw 
materials for Product A have run out? 
561 
Parsons and Pheks 
If we take the view that a production schedule is a plan 
that controls production operations, the definition of a 
schedule must be broadened to include the rules that guide 
its generation and implementation. In the above example, 
the rules for when to start a run when a prior run has not 
been completed would be considered part of the schedule. 
Scheduling practices differ widely in the duration of 
their planning period. In some plants, a tentative schedule 
is laid out for an entire year, establishing production cycles 
for each product. The schedule is then varied during the 
course of the year as inventories exceed or fall short of tar- 
gets. At the other extreme, some plants are scheduled ‘on 
the fly’, with production runs changed only when invento- 
ries hit certain trigger points. The predictability of demand 
is a key factor in dictating the ability to plan out production 
schedules over longer periods. 
Where ever scheduling methods lie on the spectrum 
from reactive to planned, there are certain factors that all 
scheduling practices have in common. They must take into 
account demand for the product being made. This may be 
done by simply monitoring the levels of inventories of 
produced items. It may further take into account rate at 
which these inventories are being depleted. Scheduling 
must take into account the capacity of productive resources 
to make the schedule products. A key issue impacting 
overall capacity is the time required to changeover from 
making one product to making another. 
5 MODELING PRODUCTION SCHEDULES 
There are several potential goals in modeling production 
scheduling. One goal might be to develop scheduling algo- 
rithms that can be used to schedule actual production as 
well as scheduling a model of production. Although this 
objective is not uncommon, it goes beyond the scope of 
modeling production scheduling in the context of a high- 
level supply chain model. Our objective is to validly model 
the productive capacity of plant nodes in the supply chain. 
Validity is not an absolute. We must test alternative ap- 
proaches to modeling production schedules against actual 
experience to determine their suitability. The cost of a 
modeling approach can be measured in the time require to 
develop it; its impact on the execution time of the model; 
and the complexity of specification of its parameters. 
Four methods of modeling production schedules are 
described below as illustrative of the range of approaches 
that might be considered. Other approaches are possible, 
including combinations of planned and reactive methods. 
Standard Supply Chain Builder Ordering: 
production orders are generated by daily review of 
the inventory levels of finished products. Timing 
and size of orders are determined by user defined 
reordering policy parameters. Orders are filled in 
sequence, with queues for raw materials and pro- 
duction resources. 
On the Fly: when manufacturing systems become 
available for production, inventories are reviewed 
and the most urgent order that can be produced on 
the system is placed. 
Order Limiter: at weekly or other intervals, pro- 
duction orders are placed which match finished 
goods requirements with compatible production 
systems. Orders are processed sequentially rather 
than being cast in a firm schedule. 
Schedule Builder: finished goods requirements 
are periodically assessed and a production sched- 
ule is generated taking into account system pro- 
duction rates, changeover times, and compatibil- 
ities. 
In Table 1, these four methods are compared with re- 
spect to the following issues. 
1. 
2 .  
3. 
4. 
How is the initial generation of production orders 
controlled? 
How are orders modified to reflect availability of 
resources? 
How is the timing of the filling of orders con- 
trolled? 
How are raw material limitations taken into ac- 
count? 
Tat 
Issue 
Initial 
orders 
Resource 
Limiting 
Timing of 
order fill- 
ing 8 
delivery 
Raw 
material 
limits 
: 1: Corn 
Standard 
SCB 
Standard 
ordering 
options 
Capacity 
table 
materials 
will limit 
order fill- 
ing. Drop 
in plant 
models 
may limit 
comple- 
tion. 
Ship- 
ments will 
be limited 
to avail- 
able raw 
materials 
irison Of 
On the fly 
Message 
sent by 
controller 
to order 
block 
Inherent 
in control 
structure 
and initial 
order 
genera- 
tion 
Filled im- 
mediately 
after cre- 
ated. 
Drop in 
plant de- 
termines 
comple- 
tion. 
Initial or- 
der limited 
to avail- 
able raw 
materials. 
cheduling R 
Order Lim- 
iter 
Standard or- 
dering op- 
tions. Should 
send mes- 
sage from 
controller. 
Orders are 
reduced to fit 
capacity. If 
multiple re- 
sources, ad- 
ditional or- 
ders are 
generated. 
Only raw ma- 
terials will 
limit order 
filling. Drop 
in plant mod- 
els may limit 
completion. 
Shipments 
will be limited 
to available 
raw materi- 
als. 
:thods 
Schedule 
Builder 
Message 
sent by con- 
troller to or- 
der block 
Build sched- 
ule and re- 
size orders 
Filling & de- 
livery trig- 
gered by 
completion 01 
runs 
Require- 
ments list 
limited to 
available raw 
materials for 
each plan- 
ning period. 
562 
Parsons and Phelps 
6 ASSESSMENT OF COST AND VALIDITY 
The codbenefit curve, Figure 3, suggests that there might 
be a’ diminishing return from introducing greater complex- 
ity into the modeling of plant scheduling. 
increasing model complexity ~ - - -> 
Figure 3: Benefits From Modeling Complexity: ‘Diminish- 
ing Returns’ 
The goal is assessing alternatives for modeling schedul- 
ing is twofold. First, to determine what are the modeling op- 
tions that get the greatest advance in accuracy for the least 
increase in complexity. Second, to determine if the curve is 
truly shaped as shown in Figure 3. There may be an alterna- 
tive and less attractive shape as shown in Figure 4. This 
would imply that we have to develop a lot of complexity be- 
fore we yield significant benefits in accuracy. 
increasing model complexity - - - -> 
Figure 4: Benefits From Modeling Complexity: 
Complexity Required’ 
‘High 
Cost assessment must include not only model devel- 
opment cost, which may vary widely among modeling 
methods, but must include assessment of resulting model 
run time and the utility of scheduling parameters. The use- 
fulness of a model may stem from the ability conduct ex- 
periments quickly that require many runs. Supply chain 
models commonly capture the flow of many thousands of 
shipments of materials. Complex scheduling logic may 
slow down model execution not so much as a result of the 
time to calculate the schedule, but rather as a result of the 
detailed production model that might be required to carry 
out the schedule. 
Assessment of the validity of production schedule 
models is challenging. When the goal is not to make the 
model “look like” the real thing, how do we know how 
close we are? We need to employ common sense in re- 
viewing simulation results. The goal is to product a valid 
model of the production throughput of a plant over each 
time period. We can inspect the results of model test runs, 
looking at resource utilization, run lengths, overall produc- 
tion output, and out of stock performance. Experienced 
plant management can assess whether the model results 
reasonably reflect the productive capacity and responsive- 
ness of real world plants. 
We should not be drawn into the illusion that modeled 
production schedules can be compared to real world “pa- 
per” schedules or to actual production experience to deter- 
mine their validity. Most plants do not implement paper 
schedules without significant modifications in reaction to 
unpredicted demand and production realities. Usually these 
changes are not documented as schedule modifications, 
leaving the production historian with a fictitious record. 
Records of actual production experience can be just as de- 
ceiving. We may know just what was made on each system 
each hour of the day and week, but we do not know the 
underlying causes - shortages, breakdowns, judgment calls 
of all kinds - that led to that production experience. We 
can and do model random effects, but by definition, they 
will not map neatly onto the random events that occurred 
during historical periods. 
So, validation of production schedule modeling tech- 
niques must rely on the common sense assessment of ex- 
perienced people looking at model results. This entails a 
process of developing confidence over a period of time, 
rather than a single “validation” step in the model devel- 
opment process. 
7 CONCLUSION 
High-level supply chain models that incorporate produc- 
tion facilities within their scope should take into account 
impact of production scheduling on overall supply chain 
performance. A common sense approach should be taken 
to assessment of the costs and benefits of alternative mod- 
eling techniques. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
DAVID J. PARSONS is Vice-president of Simulation 
Dynamics. His experience with simulation began in 1965 
with experiments in the use of natural selection algorithms 
to evolve architectural designs. During the 1980’s he de- 
Parsons and Phelps 
signed, built and operated several dairy-processing plants 
using simulation of key systems as an integral tool for de- 
sign, value engineering, and troubleshooting. Mr. Parsons 
received a B. A. from Harvard College and a Master of Ar- 
chitecture degree from the Harvard School of Design. His 
email and web addresses are <Parsons@ 
SimulationDynamics.com> and <http://www. 
SimulationDynamics.com>. 
RICHARD A. PHELPS is the Projects Manager at Simu- 
lation Dynamics. Mr. Phelps’ industrial experience prior to 
joining SDI includes time in the cutting tool and aluminum 
industries. He received his B. S .  in Industrial and Systems 
Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology 
where he is a member of the Council of Outstanding 
Young Alumni. His email and web addresses are 
<Phelps@SimulationDynamics.com> and 
<http://www. SimulationDynamics.com>. 
564 
