Mining the Gold of Human Knowledge 
Lawrence B. Jobson 
PTC 
141 Kendrick Road 
Needham, MA 02494 
ljobson@int-mail.ptc.com 
781-398-5366 
Abstract - As this conference discusses advanced 
technologies required to delve into the unexplored or 
unresolved regions of geographic and temporal spaces, 
there is one region here on earth whose riches have only 
barely been tapped. That region is the human mind and its 
“knowledge mother-load” potential in support of 
collaborative problem solving. Human knowledge is the 
“currency of collaboration”. Human knowledge is a 
natural resource that gets richer the more it is tapped. This 
paper discusses the processing challenges for and a 
reference architecture for a Human Knowledge Mining 
(HKM) system. The paper illustrates how the HKh4 
system can be integrated with traditional information 
mining systems (often mistakenly equated to knowledge 
management systems) to create multi-disciplinary 
collaborations within context-specific problem-solving 
communities. The goal of the paper is to leave its readers 
with a starter-kit of “knowledge nuggets” that can be used 
as a down payment for getting started in the emerging 
field of human knowledge mining. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. TECHNICAL DISCUSSION 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
4. REFERENCES 
5. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The premise for this paper is that only humans persist and 
grow knowledge. Human knowledge is manifest (through 
various human interfaces) as context-specific beliefs. A 
system that can systematically harvest individual human 
beliefs and facilitate the convergence of a shared belief 
state within a solution-directed community of interest is a 
HKM system. Research and history have demonstrated the 
value of bringing diverse groups of people together in 
highly-facilitated focus groups when complex problems 
need to be solved. The key challenge for a HKM system is 
to capture and formalize the well-established “analogue 
processes” associated with face-to-face collaborations 
within the “digital processes” that comprise a HKM 
system. 
of human knowledge mining in contrast to the more 
prevalent discipline of information mining. Where as 
information mining is all about managing query sessions 
associated with relatively static content sources, 
knowledge mining is all about managing the stimulation of 
human beliefs within an evolutionary reasoning context. 
Over the last ten years, almost two orders of magnitude 
more money (hundreds of billions of dollars) has been 
spent on information mining systems than on knowledge 
mining systems (Reference [l]). The result of this 
disproportionate expenditure is that information mining 
system software is in its “late majority” stage and HKh4 
system s o h a r e  has yet to reach its “early adopter” stage. 
The recent maturation of both multi-threaded 
collaboration management frameworks and distributed 
object computing infrastructures has set the stage for 
early-adopter based rapid prototyping of HKM systems 
within the context of emerging Net-Centric eBushess 
frameworks. The goal for this early-adopter rapid 
prototyping of HKM systems must be to evolve an 
extensible HKM infrastructure that will support a “plug- 
and-play’’ interfaces for the primary HKM system 
processing components. The primary HKM system 
processing components are: (1) human belief harvesting, 
(2) information harvesting, and (3) Asynchronous Virtual 
Collaboration Facilitation (AVCF) (see Reference [ 11). 
As an aid to understanding the functional processing that 
the HKM system must support, Figure 1 offers an 
overview of the processing taxonomy for a HKM system. 
Figure 1 illustrates the fact that a HKM system operates 
on a specific “enterprise problem-solution domain, to 
evolve and maintain a set of solution communities within 
which specific belief workspaces are used to facilitate and 
persist shared human belief artifacts within a “Knowledge 
Ecology (shared human reasoning context). Introducing 
the HKM system concepts that affect the processing 
implied in Figure 1 is the point of this paper. 
This paper discusses the requirements for and distinctions 
7-3531 
Enterprise Problem-Solution 
Figure 1 - Functional elements of a Human 
Knowledge Mining System 
The remainder of this paper presents: (1) a reference 
architecture for an AVCF-based HKM system; (2) a set of 
HKM component processing diagrams; and (3) the 
relative benefits of AVCF over more conventional 
Groupware-based approaches for human collaboration. 
2. TECHNICAL DISCUSSION 
A HKM system offers the promise of seamless integration 
of human knowledge harvesting and enterprise resource 
information harvesting. This paper asserts that 
Asynchronous Virtual Collaboration Facilitation (AVCF) 
is the enabling component for this seamless integration. 
This is due to an AVCF’s capability to adaptively form 
and manage relationships between individual and shared 
human beliefs and the information content that is used to 
stimulate those beliefs. 
2.1 Technical challenges for implementing an A VCF- 
based Human Knowledge Mining System 
Reference [2] provides a wealth of information pertaining 
to the spectrum knowledge mining processes that must be 
supported by a HKM system. A core set of these 
processes is categorized in Table 1. 
Table 1 - Core processing Requirements for an HKM 
Figure 2 illustrates a AVCF-based conceptual model for a 
HKM system. The conceptual model for a human 
knowledge mining system defines the primary functional 
components and interactions that a HKM system must 
support. The use of the term “model” here implies a 
processing pattern that a HKM system must be designed 
to support. Table 2 summarizes the primary functional 
processing purpose for each of the HKM functional 
components displayed in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 - Functional processing components of a 
HKM System 
Table 2 - Processing purpose of Primary HKM 
System components 
The fundamental premise for HKM is that new and 
innovative ways can be employed to effectively capture 
the attention and the knowledge of savvy collaborators. 
These savvy collaborators have sharable information and 
knowledge associated with their evolving beliefs about the 
needs, values, capabilities,. . .etc. associated with select 
elements of a problem-solution domain model. Capturing 
the attention and knowledge of savvy participants suggests 
that a deployable HKM system must: (1) stimulate and 
resolve an extremely eEcient dialogue between members 
of the Solution Community, (2) provide an engaging 
medium for evoking human knowledge and prompting 
7 - 3 5 3 2  
human belief, and (3) evolve and disseminate Belief 
Resolution Workspaces in which each human can be 
immersed at his convenience and in accordance with what 
he knows within a specific Knowledge Ecology. 
Cbnteit Mailagenuit 
ante* Milagemzit 
Understding b g e m t  
BeliefMaoag-t 
On the surface, the Web appears to be a perfect 
prototyping medium for evolving the HKM system 
infrastructure and primary processing components, yet 
there are many hurdles that must be cleared before true 
HKM system prototyping within a Web-based 
environment can be productive. Table 3 presents a short 
list of some of the more prominent hurdles and issues that 
must be overcome. 
seunntics translation system. 
belopmm ofa dynairdc fiheriug andaggregation sytemthat 
enableslegacy m ~ R l t m b e r e u s e d m v ~ i ~ n ~ c o i i t e ~ s .  
Developimt ofa set ofproblemolitwn Outobgh thnt aptmathe 
relatiousllpls beh\eenstnidard "bisuim o b w n n d  b i n e s  
processer. 
b e l o p  a mppingpmcess to tnk wtnictmd dntn nrd resolve it 
into a ~ ~ t u ~ ~ c o n t ~ s .  
Devebpafmnewrkfor mnverghg"beliefs"nitoa shambleset of 
hiodedgeartifnas tlmt sislporta shnredbeliefstnte dh a problem 
solution domni. 
Table 3 - Primary Issues for Developing an HKM 
System 
2.2 Reference Architecture for the HKMSystenz 
The purpose of a reference architecture is to provide a 
functional template for a set of system implementations. 
Figure 3 illustrates a reference architecture for a AVCF- 
based HKM system. The schematic shown in Figure 3 
shows that the HKM system must be capable of the 
dynamically assembly of specific stakeholder-consumer 
clusters through a hybrid of Web-based and Application- 
based servers. These Web and Application servers "serve- 
up" both tailored presentations and interactive "belief 
resolution workspaces" as a function of the state of the 
evolving "knowledge ecology". 
Figure 3 - Primary HKM System Processing 
Components 
The essential processing components for the HKM system 
can be characterized by examining processing diagrams 
for the three primary HKM components: 
0 Human Belief Harvesting 
0 Enterprise Information Harvesting 
0 AVCF-based Knowledge Management 
Human Belief Harvesting is associated with the 
stimulation of humans, the collection of human actions in 
response to the stimulation, and the resolution of human 
belief through belief formulation and resolution through 
multi-belief inference testing. Enterprise Resource 
Information Harvesting is associated with the complex 
tasking of heterogeneous information production 
resources. AVCF is associated with the continuous fusion 
of information and knowledge artifacts within Knowledge 
Ecologies. 
Figures 4,5, and 6 illustrate the components and 
interactions associated with the three use cases. Figure 4 
focuses on the systematic stimulation of human 
knowledge and the evolution of human beliefs associated 
with the stimulation. 
The good news about the schematic shown in Figure 3 is 
that it represents a system whose infrastructure software 
and processing component interfaces exist today. The 
other good news is that many candidate HKM processing 
components (e.g., groupware systems, information 
portals,. . .etc. are available as foundational components to 
be used to jumpstart the HKM system rapid prototyping 
cycle. The bad news is that the commercial HKh4 system 
marketplace is evolving in many directions very quickly 
with some rather myopic solutions being offered as de- 
facto standards. Companies that can put in place a 
baseline HKM system infrastructure right now, while 
incrementally evolving the right plug-and-play HKM 
components will have the best basis for continuously 
thwarting their HKM competitors during what appears to 
be the start of a highly-evolving HKM system 
marketplace. 
Figure 4 - Human Belief Harvesting in the HKM 
System 
7-3533 
The stimulation may be from specific enterprise resources 
or from other human participants. Human Belief 
Harvesting is a natural by-product of the fact that human 
knowledge is always retained by humans but is manifest to 
the HKM through the recording and resolution of human 
beliefs associated with the stimulation. Figure 5 focuses 
on the systematic harvesting of enterprise resources for 
specific information content that has been determined to 
be valuable in the process of stimulating human beliefs. 
I InterachOnE I 
Figure 5 - Enterprise Information Harvesting in the 
HKM System 
This systematic information harvesting is based on highly- 
structured resource tasking (e.g., repository query, tool 
execution tasking, equipment monitoring,. . .etc.). The 
resource tasking is completely correlated to the process of 
resolving shared human knowledge through the evolution 
of human beliefs within specific Knowledge Ecologies. 
Figure 6 focuses on the processes that are required to 
evolve Knowledge Ecologies and Knowledge Artifact 
Models through the continuous fusion of information and 
belief artifacts within the context of evolutionary 
Knowledge Ecologies. 
I Interactions I 
I I 
, 
Figure 6 - AVCF-based Knowledge Management 
within the HKM System 
resolved knowledge products within the context of well- 
defined and well-managed Knowledge Ecologies. The 
process of continuous transform of human beliefs, 
information artifacts, and Knowledge Ecologies must be 
facilitated by a combination of human facilitation and 
agent-based inference. 
2.3 Bene3ts of Virtual Collaboration Facilitation within 
the HKM System 
As tomorrow’s enterprise become more virtual and more 
agile, the value of HKM systems embedded in the 
enterprise infrastructure will manifest itself in enterprise 
efficiency and product innovation. References [2] and [3] 
highlight clear advantages that accrue to enterprises that 
are adopting AVCF independent of its integration within 
HKM. Currently, most human belief harvesting is done 
using Group-ware-centric session information content 
logging with limited capability to formulate shared human 
belief contexts. Through the integration of Human Belief 
Harvesting, Enterprise Information Harvesting, and 
AVCF-based Belief-Information MappingKnowledge 
Management, HKM-centric firms have the potential to 
achieve higher levels of product innovation at faster cycle 
times (see Figure 7). 
Implicit in the enterprise benefits just discussed are the 
fundamental relative benefits of AVCF over currently 
deployed Group-ware systems. These benefits include: 
more efficient collaborator participation, more focused 
human belief harvesting process, more directed 
information harvesting process, and more specific 
development of solution communities around an evolved 
shared belief context. 
U G r o w t h  in N e w  K n o w l e d g e  v s  T i m e  
s ’C 
Knowledge 
Continuous Growth of Organizational 
Competency and Capacity 
I 
Without AVCF-Based I G- Knowledge Management 
Enterprise  Li fecyc le  T i m e  
T i m e  to A c h i e v e  Solut ion Innovat ion 
Enterprise  Li fecyc le  T i m e  
Within all the interactions illustrated in Figures 4 thru 6, 
AVCF must be used to continuously transform a-priori 
human beliefs, information and knowledge artifacts into 
Figure 7 - Human knowledge mining potential for 
HKM System Users 
Separately, the HKM system as characterized in Figure 3 
7-3534 
will enable a degree of enterprise lifecycle collaboration 
across a broader set of enterprise business disciplines, 
thereby creating a true learning organization. Within a 
truly functioning learning organization, the opportunity 
for innovation, employee retention and growth will 
accelerate. Without a fully-implemented HKM system, the 
each human is forced to simultaneously be a information 
harvester, a belief propagator, and a collaboration 
manager. Faced with this triple burden, the average 
knowledge worker will view virtual collaboration as 
another class of meetings that must be attended at 
marginal rate of return for the participants. Complex 
enterprises that chose to integrate an HJSM system into 
their business frameworks and align their IT department 
with some of the leading suppliers of HKM-based 
s o h a r e  components and infrastructure will quickly 
distinguish themselves in both productivity and innovation 
(see Reference [5 ] ) .  
3.0 CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has provided the concepts and a reference 
architecture for an readily-achievable AVCF-based HKM 
system. The set of process interactions presented in 
Figures 4, 5, and 6 illustrated the distinction between 
human belief harvesting, information harvesting and 
knowledge artifact production management. Figure 7 
highlighted the potential for AVCF-based HJSM to exceed 
the capability of current approaches to collaboration 
management (i.e., using structured synchronous 
Groupware). Many of the principles discussed within this 
paper are now being formulated within the enterprise 
integration software systems being marketed under the 
emerging field of “Collaborative Product Commerce” 
(CPC). CPC firms (see Reference [5]) that can rapidly 
implement the concepts of AVCF-based HKM presented 
in this paper will more effectively capture the attention 
and knowledge (equated to e-Commerce site “stickness”) 
of sawy knowledge workers through all phases of 
complex enterprise problem solving. These HKM f m s  
will reap the benefits of being able to deliver more 
effective, deeper, and more reusable knowledge worker 
knowledge mining at lower costs, all while keeping the 
competition guessing. 
4.0 REFERENCES 
[l] KnowledgeKonnect Market Space, Phase 1 Briefing to Ball 
Aerospace, October 2000 
[2] Robert Hargrove, Masterful Coaching Fieldbook, Jossey- 
Bass, October 1999. 
[3] Robert Hargrove, Mastering the Art of Creative 
Collaboration, Business Week Book, January 1998. 
Collaboration Facilitation Agents (CFAs)”, 4‘h Annual 
Intelligence Community Desktop Collaboration Conference, 
May 1999. 
[ 5 ]  Aberdeen Group, “Collaborative Product Commerce: 
Delivering Product Innovations at Internet Speed”, Market 
View Point, Volume 12/Number 9, October 1999. 
5 .  BIOGRAPHY 
Lawrence B. Jobson is a Business Development Manager 
at PTC in Needham MA. He has over 30 years of 
aerospace domain experience. He is the author of 
numerous papers and sofbvare systems architectures that 
address the role of e-Collaboration (virtual 
collaboration) in accelerating the rate of innovation 
within heterogeneous and highly-distributed product 
development enterprises. He has a BS Math from 
Fairleigh Dickinson University and a MS Operations 
Research from George Washington University. 
[4] L. B. Jobson and C. Kaestner, “Leveraging Distributed 
Intelligence Products Through the Use of Embedded 
7 - 3 5 3 5  
