Developing an Efficient Space System Rapid Design 
Center’ 
Dr. Charles M. Reynerson 
Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation 
PO Box 1062 
Boulder, CO 80306-1062 
creyners@alum.mit.edu 
Abstract-A Space System Rapid Design Center (RDC) can 
be used in quickly sizing and estimating the cost of space 
systems. Given candidate mission requirements for a 
satellite or constellation, clean-sheet of paper designs can be 
formulated resulting in the definition of key system 
parameters, such as size, power, weight, and payload 
performance. Rough cost models (Unmanned Spacecraft 
Cost Model - USCM, Small Satellite Cost Model - SSCM) 
can be linked to this to assist in determining Life Cycle Cost 
estimates. Existing spacecraft buses can be compared to the 
clean-sheet of paper design to determine their suitability for 
a particular mission. Higher fidelity tools can be used to 
link the spacecraft design to the mission data to assess 
impacts on mission effectiveness. Comparing the 
capabilities of a RDC to that of traditional aerospace 
concept design team processes, vehicle designs and 
performance information can be produced with a Saction of 
the resources and in much less time. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Space System Rapid Design Center was designed in the 
same spirit as other design centers developed in the 
government, but with an eye towards commercial efficiency. 
Through the use of tailored procedures, adaptive tasking of 
resources, and COTS products, great efficiencies can be 
achieved. The use of internet capable products also assists 
greatly in the rapid design of space systems. 
BACKGROUND OF CONCEPT DESIGN CENTERS 
Design Centers in the Government 
Numerous design centers have been created for space 
system design in the last few years. The Aerospace 
Corporation’s Concept Design Center (CDC) was among 
the first. In the CDC the concept of creating a linked 
spreadsheet systems engineering tool, known as the 
Concurrent Engineering Model, was formulated and tested. 
This same model was used as the heart of NASA Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory’s Project Design Center (PDC). 
Since then, similar centers have been created at other NASA 
field centers, such as the Goddard Spaceflight Center’s 
Integrated Modeling Design Center (JMDC). 
Resulting increases in efficiency from JPL’s PDC are shown 
in Figures 1 through 3. 
Design Centers in Industry 
Similar centers have been formed within some sectors of 
aerospace industry also. The RDC was created to emulate 
the multi-million dollar capability created in the 
government, but at a fraction of the cost. As the application 
of information technology to the space industry progresses, 
the capability of creating designs rapidly is becoming 
instrumental. Such centers also exist at Lockheed Martin 
and TRW. 
Number of New Mission proposals 
Figure 1 JPL PDC Results for New 
Mission Proposals 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 C 2001 IEEE 
7-3517 
Design Centers in Academia 
There are currently several academic institutions that 
have created aerospace related design centers to further 
educational excellence. Among them includes those created 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Georgia 
Institute of Technology, and the Naval Postgraduate School. 
~- ~ _ _ _ - ~ _ _  
Typical Proposal Cost 
250 
t K  
50 
< 1895 1953 
Figure 2 JPL PDC Results for Typical r ProDosal Cost 
BALL RAPID DESIGN CENTER PH~LOSOPHY 
accommodate unique payloads, missions, and environments. 
A general flow of resources and products is shown in Figure 
4. A flow of the data through the modeling process is 
shown in figure 5 .  
Resource Tools - One way to link resources is to use 
collaborative engineering tools. Livelink is a tool 
commonly used in industry to help manage resources. 
Using a format similar to an internet browser, Livelink 
allows users to store and control access to data files. It also 
has the capability of controlling workflow in managing a 
design project. This is important when certain design 
functions need to be performed in either a serial or parallel 
fashion. By using the features of Livelink, it is possible to 
Typical Concept Design Time 
Week6 
< 1995 1996 
A New Philosophy for Design Centers 
The philosophy taken in creating a RDC was to achieve 
similar goals attained in government design centers, but in a 
much more efficient manner. To attain those efficiencies 
means using less resources while obtaining results to within 
what is normally expected for concept designs. The reality 
in the commercial world is that you may not always have 
the right specialty when you need them. Government 
design centers seem to have this luxury and therefore have 
plenty of subsystems engineers involved at the outset of the 
concept design. The philosophy for this RDC is to use 
several seasoned systems engineers during conceptual 
formuations and consult with specialists on an as-needed 
basis. 
Procedures and Methodology 
To create a design center that can meet desired timelines of 
1 to 2 weeks, it is important that the center have a common 
procedure. The procedures guides the center personnel 
through the design process. The methods used for particular 
designs are likely to vary with the mission. So it is 
important that the models be flexible enough to 
Figure 3 JPL PDC Results for Typical 
Concept Design Time 
have a virtual design team, that is, not have all the people in 
the same room. 
Adaptivity - The ability to adapt is important in design, 
especially when dealing with new missions and 
technologies. Also it is important to accommodate 
additional design tools when necessary. So a closed loop 
design system can have limitations. RDC’s can take 
advantage of the ability to access anyone in the company as 
well as using specialized design tools that are resident in 
any computer on the company intranet. This is important in 
achieving cost efficiency, not only in hardware and software 
but also in training personnel. The key in creating such a 
system is to use the assets already resident in the company 
rather than investing in a whole new facility. For example, 
facilities for computation may exist long before a RDC is 
created, but they can be used together to complement each 
other in the formulation of a system design. Figure 6 
illustrates the use of several tool sets without incurring 
excessive cost. 
7-3518 
Hardware 
The hardware used for a RDC is nothing unusual. IBM PCs 
that can run the required software work fine. Currently a 
prototype system is running on a single 300MHz machine. 
Server space is required for some of the software, currently 
no more than 4 Gbytes. 
Internet Tools - A limited number of software internet tools 
were used to develop a website on the company intranet. 
The software used was Microsoft Frontpage and Netobjects 
Fusion. Websites can be easily updated to link to 
manufacturer data in lieu of updating a costly database. One 
commercially available and free spacecraft hardware 
database exists on the web right now: AstroExpo.com. 
collaboration between team members. This tool allows 
team members to exchange data effectively, control access, 
and manage work flow. 
Specialized Tools - Some specialized tools can be used to 
help create models. Tools like Mathcad and Matlab allow 
users to create models that can range from the simplistic to 
the complex. Mathcad 2000 includes a tool called Math 
Connex to connect various software products during a 
design sequence. 
Requirements Tools - To handle requirements, DOORs was 
used in conjunction with Interactive Excel spreadsheets. 
There is always a question of what is a requirement - and 
where did it come from. The interactive modelling tools 
help to determine appropriate requirements, while the 
Customers a Resources 
Figure 4 Generalized Process for a Rapid Design Center 
Sofiware 
DOORs program helps to record them. Flowchart tools are 
then used to help generate Conops. 
The majority of the development for a RDC requires Visualization Tools - To visualize the designs, AutoCad is 
software packages. Some recommended software tools are used driven by a Visual Basic Engine. Parameters from the 
described in this section. design model are manipulated through Visual Basic to 
create a rough CAD visualization model. This model can 
Collaboration Tools - Livelink was used to allow then be used in other programs for presentation, 
7-3519 
configuration analysis, and more detailed design. Figure 7 
shows a space station visualized using a very inexpensive 
COTS product. 
Modeling & Simulation Tools - The central model is built 
within Excel to deliver a systems model. Other tools are 
used as needed to deliver particular information on an as- 
needed basis. For example, MathCad is used in created a 
more detailed, analytical model, while providing an 
environment that can assist in validation. Simulink can be 
used and linked to the common systems model when 
dynamic controls systems models are required. Satellite 
Tool Kit is useful in the design of satellite constellations, 
verifying coverage patterns, and visualizing orbits. 
Customer Interaction 
Interaction with the customer can be performed in several 
different ways. Starting with phone conversations and 
emails, general mission requirements can be delivered. 
Then rough models can be created and specific software 
tools identified to help in the design. Collaborative tools, 
such as NetMeeting can be used to convey ideas over long 
distances in real-time. Then of course face-to-face 
interactive design sessions can be conducted. 
THE CULTURAL ISSUE 
Every organization wishing to implement a design center 
eventually is faced with cultural issues. These include those 
related to processes, tools, and training. Everytime a new 
process is introduced, it involves a certain amount of 
dedication to make it happen. All members of the design 
team need to be trained in particular tools and using a 
particular process. The process is key in achieving rapid 
design efficiencies. The tools are not so important. Properly 
designed, a process can use tools that most people are 
familiar with already. Key design parameters can be 
identified and as long as those data values are used in a 
consistent fashion, nearly any relevant tool can be used in a 
productive manner. 
Figure 5 Data flow through a system model 
7 - 3 5 2 0  
created a design to within 6 percent of the mass and 8 
percent of the power budgeted for the RS-300 design. 
VALDATION & EVALUATION 
In order to gain acceptance in any new process, it is 
important to run it through some example cases and 
compare to the traditional process to validate it. The 
following examples were run through a RDC during its 
validation phase. Some lessons learned are expressed in this 
section. 
IDLC NanoSat 
The Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) sponsored a 
study entitled the Innovative Design Low-Cost 
NanoSatellite. The goal of the study was to produce a 
nanosatellite design that could be reproduced in a cost- 
effective manner. The mission goals of this satellite were to 
dock with another satellite to deliver a small payload 
package and perform close-in inspection of the host satellite. 
TechSat 21 
The AFRL TechSat 21 program involves a cluster of radar 
satellites used to perform remote Earth sensing. Given the 
payload requirements of the system, the spacecraft bus was 
designed using the RDC. In this spirit, the customers 
projected design of the bus was used in checking the 
validity of the RDC system model. The results of the RDC 
design came within 17% and 10% of the mass and power 
budgets respectively. This is within expected variance for 
concept designs (usually ranging Erom 25% to 35% error). 
Orbital Express 
DARPA’s Orbital Express program involves the concept of 
autonomous spacecraft servicing. The concept involves the 
use of a servicing vehicle (Astro) to dock and deliver 
components and consumables to a satellite designed to be 
serviced (NextSat). In performing the task, a Commodities 
Depot is used to store components and consumables on- 
I I Figure 6 Philosophy of using existing tools and adaptivity. I I 
The RDC was used to create a parallel design alternative for orbit. The RDC will be used in creating architecture 
this study. Figure 8 shows the design visualized to show alternatives as well as creating concept designs for the 
rough sizing and configuration. proof-of-concept demonstration. By having the capability 
to rapidly create trade space alternative designs, resources 
ISIS and time can be saved. 
The ISIS satellite was designed to perform an Earth-based For this program, several versions of the Commodities 
remote sensing mission sponsored by NASA. The study Depot was created during the architecture phase. 
was performed at Ball using traditional methods, then the Depending on the commodities needed for the particular 
RDC was used in parallel to create a design. The RS-300 NextSat servicing neeeds, the depot had different design 
satellite bus was the resulting design using traditional design requirements. So at the conceptual architecture stage of this 
processes. Using the same requirements list the RDC program, these tools were used to assist in the development 
7 - 3 5 2 1  
Figure 7 Example of an Inexpensive 
Visualization Tool - A Space Station 
of spacecraft requirements. In later phases the same tools 
can be used to help refine the spacecraft design. 
Lessons Learned 
So far through the cases run using this system one lesson 
stands out clearly: When used for new and unusual 
systems, there inevitably will be modifications needed with 
the models. This is because they are models. The word 
model implies that it is close to reality to some extent. The 
models need to be adapted when running cases that stretch 
the assumptions for which they were originally designed. 
Therefore, it is important to also have tools that can be 
readily and inexpensively changed. 
There also needs to be a efficient way to record the 
assumptions made in creating the design model. When 
Figure 8 Example of an Inexpensive 
Visualization Tool - IDLC NanoSatellite 
using them on certain designs one should be able to quickly 
understand the assumptions used to assess validity. And if 
the assumptions are not valid, then it is important to have a 
quick and efficient way to change the model. 
Through this development, the Rapid Design Center has 
also been an effective way to capture the design of a 
spacecraft at a particular point in time. Inherently the tools 
capture critical information that can be used to specify 
system and subsystem requirements. Effectively, an output 
product of the entire process is a spacecraft design database. 
SUMMARY 
A Space Systems RDC has been used successfully to 
significantly reduce the amount of resources required to 
generate space system concept designs. This proves to be 
useful for business in several phases of product 
development including: New Business, Customer 
Requirements, Concept Design, and Preliminary Design. 
Examples have been cited for the validation phase of the 
project. This center is now being used on a limited basis for 
particular programs at Ball Aerospace and can be contracted 
out for use by other companies or even government 
customers. Internal training classes are being created to 
allow more employees to make use of the center, its 
resources, and its products. 
Biography for Dr. Charles Martin Reynerson 
Senior Systems Engineer, Ball Aerospace and Technologies 
Corp., Boulder Colorado. Dr. Reynerson received his 
Doctorate of Science in Astronautics from the George 
Washington University, Engineers (EAA) degree (between 
MS and D.Sc.) in Aeronautics and Astronautics from MIT, 
Engineers (NE) degree in Naval Engineering from MIT, and 
BS from U.C. Berkley. He has extensive experience in the 
development of space systems with NASA where he was the 
Assistant Deputy for Space Shuttle Integration and National 
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) Liaison for Space 
Technology Programs and was a Project Manager and 
Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative at the 
National Reconnaissance Office. He is an ex-Naval 
Engineering Duty Officer 
also qualified in 
submarines. Dr. 
Reynerson is member of 
the American Institute of 
Aeronautics and 
Astronautics (AIAA), 
American Astronautical 
Society (AAS), the Mars 
Society, the 
Experimental Aviation 
Association ( E M )  and 
Tau Beta Pi (National 
Engineering Honor 
Society). 
7 - 3 5 2 2  
