Advanced Design Concepts for a SeaWinds Scatterometer 
Follow-On Mission’ 
Michael W. Spencer, James N. Huddleston, and Bryan W. Stiles 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
818.354.1 175 
Michael. W.Spencer@jpl.nasa.gov 
MIS 300-319 
Abstruct- The SeaWinds wind scatterometer was first 
launched in June of 1999, and has contributed significantly 
to the study of global climate phenomena and to the fidelity 
of operational weather forecasting. A second SeaWinds 
instrument is planned to be launched aboard the Japanese 
ADEOS-I1 platform in late 2001, and operate until mid- 
decade. To extend the important Ku-Band scatterometer 
data base to the end of the decade and beyond, a follow-on 
system to the SeaWinds series of scatterometers is being 
developed. The goals for this system are to continue the 
core Ku-Band backscatter measurement, to further improve 
spacecraft accommodation constraints so as to be easily 
operated on a variety of platforms, and -- where possible 
under existing cost constraints -- improve wind retrieval 
performance. It is shown that a system, which meets these 
objectives, can be achieved by the addition of polarimetric 
measurement capability to the existing SeaWinds approach. 
Polarimetric scatterometry is demonstrated to improve wind 
measurement performance without impacting instrument 
complexity or cost, and has the long term potential to further 
ease spacecraft accommodation requirements. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4 .  
5.  
6. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
IN~~ODUCTION 
ADVANCED SCATIEROMETER ISSUES 
RIE POLARIMETRIC SCAITEROMETER TECHNIQUE 
BASELINE POLARIMETRIC SYSTEM DESIGN AND 
PERFORMANCE 
POLARIMETRIC SYSTEM WITH 180 FIELD-OF-VIEW 
Conclusions 
1. INTRODUCTION , 
The SeaWinds wind scatterometer is a Ku-Band radar 
developed to measure surface wind speed and direction over 
the global oceans [4]. The first launch of the SeaWinds 
instrument occurred aboard the QuikSCAT spacecraft in 
June, 1999. Although other wind scatterometers have flown 
in the last two decades - including the C-Band ERS-1,2 
series of instruments and the Ku-Band NASA Scatterometer 
(NSCAT) - these systems employed multiple long “fan- 
beam” antennas [l], [3]. SeaWinds is the first scatterometer 
system to use the scanning “pencil-beam’’ antenna approach. 
Unlike fan-beam systems which often require complex 
deployments and large fields-of-view, pencil-beam systems 
employ a single conically scanning antenna. The single dish 
antenna design is generally easier to accommodate on 
spacecraft. This feature was demonstrated when the 
QuikSCAT mission was developed to quickly replace the 
loss of the NSCAT data [2]. Within a period of one year, a 
commercial spacecraft bus was procured and an existing 
SeaWinds instrument was easily integrated with few 
modifications to the bus architecture and no instrument 
deployments. Another key advantage of the pencil-beam 
scatterometer approach is that measurements from each 
beam are made at a constant incidence angle. This 
simplifies model function estimation, and also greatly 
simplifies the use of backscatter values for land and 
cryosphere applications. 
Having operated flawlessly in orbit for over a year, the 
QuikSCAT mission has validated the conically-scanned 
pencil-beam scatterometer concept. SeaWinds/QuikSCAT 
derived ocean winds have contributed significantly to the 
scientific study of aidsea interactions, and are also being 
increasingly used to improve the fidelity of numerical 
weather forecasts. The launch of the SeaWinds instrument 
on the ADEOS-I1 spacecraft in late 2001 will extend the 
Ku-Band scatterometer data base into the middle of the 
decade. 
Due to the.successfu1 use of SeaWinds data in a variety of 
Earth science disciplines, plans are underway to develop a 
follow-on scatterometer system to begin operation around 
2005 [6] .  In this paper, the advanced design concepts 
proposed for the SeaWinds follow-on mission are presented. 
Here design features which can improve the scatterometer 
measurement performance, as well as the required 
programmatic constraints of spacecraft accommodation are 
discussed. An innovative scatterometer technique, which 
employs polarimetric backscatter measurements, is 
identified as a low-cost enhancement, which will 
significantly improve wind retrieval performance. It is also 
discussed how the polarimetric technique may be employed 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
to further reduce the field-of-view requirements for pencil- 
beam scatterometers, and consequently further ease 
spacecraft. accommodation issues. 
2. ADVANCED SCATTEROMETER ISSUES 
The overriding consideration for a follow-on scatterometer 
mission is the continuity of the Ku-Band backscatter and 
wind data base. Preferably, the follow-on measurements are 
to be obtained at the same incidence angles as Seawinds. 
The continuation of measurements collected under the same 
conditions will facilitate the detection of subtle, multi- 
decade climate change signatures such as those induced by 
El Nino or long-term global warming. 
A second major consideration is that the follow-on 
instrument must be low cost and be easily accommodated 
aboard a variety of different spacecraft platforms. This will 
enhance the ability of the instrument to be flown on 
“spacecraft of opportunity” (as was the case with 
QuikSCAT for example) as well as future operational 
systems. Consistent with this, the instrument mass and 
power should be the same as Seawinds, or, preferably, 
smaller. Current technology trends should make this latter 
requirement a relatively straightforward one to satisfy. Also 
critical is the accommodation and associated field-of-view 
of the rotating antenna. The current SeaWinds system is 
mounted on the nadir-facing side of the spacecraft and 
requires a 360 field-of-view as it rotates. If possible, it is 
desirable to reduce this so that the scatterometer may be 
mounted on the top-side of the spacecraft allowing abundant 
room for other nadir facing sensors. 
Clearly, a desire for any follow-on mission is that of 
improvedl sensor measurement performance. For weather 
forecasting applications, it is critical that measurement 
revisit time be as short as possible. With the current 
SeaWinds instrument, the 1800 km measurement swath 
provides near-global coverage every 24 hours. Because the 
quality of the scatterometer data varies over the swath, some 
performance degradation occurs near the spacecraft sub- 
track region and at the extreme outer edges of the swath. 
Some researchers have found it necessary to only include 
the data from the “sweet spot” of the swath which excludes 
these regions. It is therefore highly desirable to improve 
wind performance in the sub-track and outer-swath regions 
so that the full benefit of the wide pencil-beam swath may 
be realized. 
3. THE POLAR~METRTC SCATTEROMETER 
TECHNIQUE 
An innovative technique that meets the requirements of the 
previous section is to add polarimetric measurement 
capability to the current SeaWinds instrument architecture. 
Polarimetric scatterometry can be added to the SeaWinds 
design with minimal cost impact while continuing to 
produce measurements identical to the current SeaWinds 
instrument. Additionally, polarimetric scatterometry can be 
used to either ease accommodation on spacecraft or to 
improve wind performance. Before we develop and describe 
this appPDaCh, however, we will first briefly review the 
standard SeaWinds wind retrieval approach. 
Spacecraft 
groundtrack \ 
Figure 1: SeaWinds measurement geometry. 
Conventional Wind Scatterometry 
In convmtional wind scatterometry, the normalized radar 
backscatter cross-section, q,, of-given point on the ocean 
surface is viewed from multiple azimuth angles [3]. This is 
accomplished with the SeaWinds systems as shown in Fig. 
A - 1  R 2 L l  
1. As the satellite passes, the surface is viewed four times: 
twice by the inner beam looking first forward then aft, and 
twice by the outer beam in the same fashion. The four 
measurements are inverted using the geophysical model 
function (GMF) to solve for the wind speed and direction. 
To aid in the wind retrieval, the SeaWinds inner beam is H- 
polarized and the SeaWinds outer beam is V-polarized. 
(4 
W ,  54 deg. incidence angle 
100 , 
I 
0’0 900 1800 2700%bO 
Azimuth Angle (dag) 
H V W .  54 deg incidence angle 
35 0 
(4 
0004, I 
(b) 
HH. 46 deg. incidence angle 
10.0 , 
350 I 
00 900 1800 2700 3600 
Azimuth Angle (deg) 
(d) 
VHHH, 46 deg incidence angle 
0004 I 
OM)3 i 0.003 
0.002 
0.001 
0.003 
4.001 
4.002 
i 
4.M)4 ’ 
0.0 90.0 180.0 270.0 360.0 
Azimuth Angle (dag) 
1 4.003 i \d -0.004 
0.0 90.0 180.0 270.0 360.0 
Azimuth Angle (deg) 
Figure 2: Geophysical model functions for the conventional 
co-polarized return -- (a) and (b) -- and the polarimetric 
correlation term -- (c) and (d). 
With scatterometer systems to date, only the co-polarized 
component of the backscatter is measured. For example, in 
the case of the SeaWinds outer beam, a V-polarized signal is 
transmitted and only the power in the V-polarized return is 
detected in order to calculate q,. The co-polarized GMF is 
an even function of illumination azimuth angle as shown in 
Fig. 2 a and b. When inverted in the presence of noise, the 
wind estimation procedure does not yield a unique wind 
estimate but a set of wind ambiguities, as shown in Fig. 3 a 
and b. Often invoking the aid of global circulation models, 
the ambiguous wind can be resolved yielding the correct 
wind vector. This process, however, is error prone in the 
regions of the SeaWinds swath immediately adjacent to the 
satellite nadir track and in the outer edges of the swath 
where only the outer beam measurements are available. 
Figure 3: Wind vector solution curves for two co-polarized 
measurements (a), four co-polarized measurements (b), and 
with four polarimetric measurements (c). 
Polarimetric Measurements 
Theoretical and experimental studies have indicated that 
additional information may be provided to the wind retrieval 
by collecting polarimetric measurements of the sea surface 
backscatter [7]. With polarimetric measurements, one 
polarization -- V, for example -- is transmitted and both the 
co-polarized V backscatter and the cross-polarized H 
backscatter are measured simultaneously. The correlation 
between these backscattered energies is measured to 
calculate the polarimetric backscatter correlation coefficient 
ohvvv given by q,,,, = <EVE,> where Ev is the V-polarized 
backscatter signal and EH is the H-polarized backscatter 
signal when a V-polarized transmit signal is used., and the 
brackets represent the time average. In general this 
polarimetric correlation term is a complex quantity. In a 
similar manner, an H-polarized transmit signal can be used 
to measure ovh,,,,. It is important to note that the polarimetric 
defined above is not the same as the cross-polarized return 
power which is given by = <E,EH>, when a V- 
polarized transmit signal is used and by o u h v h  = <EVE,> 
when an H-polarized transmit signal is used. 
Utilizing directional rough surface scattering theory, it can 
be shown that the terms q,vvv and o,,, are odd functions of 
the illumination azimuth, which is an orthogonal symmetry 
compared to the standard co-polarized measurements. 
When added to the wind retrieval process, this additional 
polarimetric information has the potential to reduce the 
number of ambiguities, as shown in Fig. 3c. It is this 
feature that makes the polarimetric capability desirable for 
implementation on follow-on missions. 
' 
4. BASELINE POLARIMETRIC SYSTEM DESIGN AND 
PERFORMANCE 
I 
A polarimetric scatterometer can be easily constructed by 
adding cross-polarization measurement capability to an 
existing pencil-beam scatterometer design such as 
SeaWinds [7]. A brief description of the current SeaWinds 
instrument is provided here for ease of reference. 
As discussed in previous papers, the SeaWinds architecture 
employs a one meter diameter dish antenna with center 
feeds slightly scanned to generate two pencil-beams [4], [5]. 
The transmitter alternatively pulses the inner beam then the 
outer beam yielding an effective PRF for each beam of 92 
Hz. This sampling rate, coupled with the antenna rotation 
rate of 18 rpm, produces measurements on the surface at 15 
to 20 km spacing. 
* 
nadir 
U 
-b OMT I I sf 
OMT 
I 
Figure 4: Baseline SeaWinds design (a) and polarimetric 
modification (b). 
Figure 4 (a) depicts the basic design of the SeaWinds radar 
electronics. Upon command from the timing controller, the 
transmitl.er, which consists of a modulated signal generator 
driving a traveling wave tube amplifier (TWTA), issues a 
1.5 ms duration, 110 Watt Ku-band pulse. The pulse is 
routed to either the inner or the outer beam and through a 
coaxial rotary joint to the spinning section of the antenna 
assembly. The echo return is likewise directed to the 
receiver where it is amplified, downconverted, and detected. 
Due to the motion of the satellite relative to the Earth, a 
Doppler shift of between +/- 500 kHz is imparted to the 
~ 
4-1836 
echo retam signal as the antenna scans. To compensate for 
this effect and insure that the echo return is centered in the 
receiver bandwidth, a carrier offset frequency is computed 
as a function of the antenna azimuth and imparted to the 
transmit pulse. An important feature of any scatterometer 
system is the accurate calibration of the transmit power and 
receiver gain. In the SeaWinds instrument design, these 
parameters are measured simultaneously by periodically 
injecting the transmit pulse, attenuated by a known amount, 
into the receiver. A summary list of the key radar 
parameters is given in [4]. 
Polarime.tric Modifications 
Because SeaWinds has proven to be easily accommodated 
on spacecraft, we constrain our polarirnetric design to be a 
simple modification to this existing system. 
The necessary modifications to the SeaWinds design to add 
polarimeitric capability are summarized in Fig. 4(b). In the 
antenna assembly, the feed system must be modified in 
order to allow the simultaneous reception of the two 
polarizations. This is done by employing dual-polarized 
feeds and orthomode transducers to separate the V and H 
components. The antenna design must also be modified to 
produce a very low cross-polarized component in order to 
minimize cross talk between the channels. Preliminary 
design studies have demonstrated th.at cross-polarization 
isolation levels of better than 35 dB can be achieved with 
an offset-fed antenndfeed configuration. 
To handle the more complicated switching required for the 
polarimetric measurements, additional circulators and/or 
ferrite switches are necessary on both sides of the antenna 
rotary joint. The switching configuration shown in Fig. 
4(b) is one (but by no means the only) strategy for routing 
the signals to insure that the co-polarized and cross- 
polarized returns are received simultaneously on each beam 
in turn. (One advantage of the approach shown is that the RF 
connection across the rotary joint only requires two 
channels, just as in the current Seawindis design. 
The finall modification is the addition of another receiver 
chain in order to obtain the polarimetric correlation 
measureiments. As shown in Fig. 4(b)., the conventional co- 
polarized measurements (the V and H polarized o,,'~ 
respectively) are obtained by detecting the total signal 
power out of one of the receivers by forming <R,R,*> or 
<R2R;> where Ri is the downconverted return signal in the 
ith channel. The polarimetric correlation components are 
derived from a measurement of <R,R,*>. It is important to 
note that all the required modifications to implement 
polarimetric capability involve the use of fully mature 
technologies, and thus do not significantly increase the cost 
of the system. 
Simulation Results 
To evaluate the performance improvements associated with 
the polairimetric modifications, the JPL scatterometer end- 
to-end simulator was used. The results of the simulation are 
discussed in detail in [6] ,  but the key results are shown in 
Fig. 5. In Fig. 5a, the wind direction errors for the nominal 
SeaWinds case (dotted line) and the polarimetric case (solid 
line) are shown as a function of cross-track distance for four 
different wind speed ranges. Similarly, in Fig. 5b., the wind 
speed retrieval errors are shown. Note that the addition of 
the polarimetric capability significantly improves wind 
retrieval performance, particularly in the swath regions near 
nadir and at the extreme edges of the swath. It is also 
important to point out that whereas the nominal SeaWinds 
simulation case was performed with the aid of numerical 
model “nudging,” the polarimetric case was not (see [SI). 
This means that the polarimetric system has the added 
benefit of providing wind measurements that are completely 
independent of any other data sources. 
- Polarimetric. no nudge - - - Seawinds. nudge 
35.5 m/s 5.57.5 m/s 
I 
1 5  I 
e 
v E 1 1  
I 
I 
7.510.5 m/s 10.530 mls 5 0 ’  c 
,- ’ I  
$ 0  
1000 500 0 500 1000 IOW 500 0 500 1000 
Cross Track Distance (km) 
(a) Wind Direction Performance 
coverage for the SeaWinds sweet spot region is shown in 
Fig. 6.  
If we conclude from Fig. 5 that the polarimetric capability 
effectively extends the sweet spot to be the entire swath, 
then the resulting 24-hour Earth coverage is given by Fig. 7. 
Note that the addition of polarimetric capability to the 
SeaWinds scatterometer system effectively extends the 
Earth coverage over which the best wind performance can 
be obtained. 
Figure 6: 24 hour coverage for sweet spot only. (White is 
the area not covered.) 
Figure 5: Simulated conventional vs. polarimetric 
performance results for wind direction error (a), and wind 
speed error (b). 
It is traditional to refer to the swath region over which the 
scatterometer achieves the best performance as the “sweet 
spot.” From Fig. 6, we define the sweet spot for the 
nominal SeaWinds case as being from about a cross-track 
distance of 150 km to 750 km on either side of the sub- 
satellite point, thus effectively excluding the regions near 
nadir and at the outer edge of the swath. The 24-hour Earth 
Figure 7: 24 hour coverage for full SeaWinds swath. 
4-1837 
5. PC~LARIMETRIC SYSTEM WITH 180 DEGREE 
FIELD-OF-VIEW 
In the previous section, an example was given of how the 
SeaWinds system can be easily improved by the addition of 
polarimetric capability. In this case, the fundamental 
SeaWinds antenna architecture and accommodation 
constraints are the same. Although the SeaWinds system 
has proven easy to accommodate on a variety of spacecraft, 
the system would be even easier to accommodate if the 
requirement for a wide 360 degree field-of-view for the 
scanning antenna was somehow reduced. Unfortunately, 
with a conventional co-polarized scatterometer system this 
is unachievable because a minimum of three azimuth looks 
at the surface are rewired for acceptable for wind vector 
retrieval. 
Figure 8; Polarimetric system with 180 degree scan. 
Because the polarimetric model function has orthogonal 
symmetry to that the conventional model function, however, 
the addition of polarimetric measurements effectively adds 
an additional azimuth look to every co-polarized 
measurement obtained. Thus a polarimetric system which 
only scans 180 degrees, as shown in Fig. 8, has the potential 
to yield performance similar to the conventional system 
scanning 360 degrees. The performance of this system, 
however, is still not as good as the polarimetric systems 
which scans the full 360 degrees. Thus this system 
approach is not recommended by the immediate SeaWinds 
follow-on, but, following the successful demonstration of a 
polarimetric scatterometer, could be considered for future 
systems where instrument accommodation is extremely 
limited. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The SeaPJinds instrument has proven tlo be a valuable tool 
in weather prediction and in the study of the Earth’s climate. 
There is i t  strong desire to continue the Ku-Band wind data 
base throughout the decade by developing follow-on 
missions. A key innovation, which improves the 
scatterometer measurements while maintaining core features 
-- such as the same measurement geometry and ease of 
spacecraft accommodation - is polarimetric scatterometry. 
The addition of the polarimetric function to the basic 
SeaWinds design is shown to be straighltfonvard and results 
in a signi€icant improvement to instrument performance. In 
addition, polarimetric scatterometry has the potential to 
further ease the spacecraft accommodation issues associated 
with fume pencil-beam scatterometers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work reported here was performed at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under 
contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Adminisbration. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 E.P.W. Attema, “The Active Microwave Instrument 
On-Board the ERS-1 Satellite,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 
Vol. 79, No. 6, pp. 791-799, June 1991. 
[2] J.E. Graf, W-Y Tsai, and W.L. Jones, “Overview of the 
QuikSCAT Mission - A Quick Deployment of a High 
Resolution, Wide Swath Scanning Scatterometer for Ocean 
Wind Measurement,” Southeastcon’98, April 1998, Orlando, 
FL. 
[3] F. Naderi, M.H. Freilich, and D.G. Long, “Spacebome 
Radar Measurement of Wind Velocity Over the Ocean--An 
0vervie.w of the NSCAT Scatttxometer System,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 850-866, Vol. 79, No. 6, June 
1991. 
[4] J. N. Huddleston and M.W. Spenoer, “ SeaWinds: The 
QuikSCAT Wind Scatterometer,” IEEE Aerospace Conf., 
Big Sky Montana, March 2001. 
[5] M.\N. Spencer, C. Wu, and D.G. Long, “Improved 
Resolution Backscatter Measurements with the SeaWinds 
Pencil-Beam Scatterometer,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. and 
Remote Sensing, Vol. 38, No. 1, January 2000, pp. 89-104. 
[6] W-Y Tsai, J.N. Huddleston, M.W. Spencer, and R.D. 
West, “Modeling and Simulation for SeaWinds I-B System 
Design and Performance Evaluation,” Proceedings of SPIE: 
4-1838 
Sensors, Systems, and Next-Generation Satellites, London, 
UK, September 1997. 
[7] W.Y. Tsai, S.V. Nghiem, J.N. Huddleston, M.W. 
Spencer, B.W. Stiles, and R.D. West, “Polarimetric 
Scatterometry: A Promising Technique for Improving 
Ocean Surface Wind Measurements from Space,” IEEE 
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing, Vol. 38, No. 4, July 2000, 
pp. 1903-1921. 
Michael W. Spencer received the B.S. degree in Physics 
from the College of William and Mary in 1985, and the 
M.S. degree in Planetary Science from The California 
Institute of Technology. Through an employer sponsored 
program, he received the M.S. degree in electrical 
engineering from the University of Southern California in 
1995, and is currently working towards a Ph.D. in electrical 
engineering at Brigham Young University. He is currently 
employed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the Radar 
Science and Engineering Section. 
James N. Huddleston received the B.S and M.S. degrees in 
electrical engineering from the Illinois Institute of 
Technology in 1990 and 1991 respectively. In 1991 he 
joined the Radar Science and Engineering Group at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena. There, he currently serves as the 
Sensor Verification Team Leader for the postlaunch 
calibration of the SeaWinds on QuikSCAT scatterometer. 
Bryan Stiles received his B.S. in Electrical Engineering 
from the University of Tennessee at Knoxville in 1992 and 
his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin in 1997. 
His doctoral dissertation work proved the universal 
approximation capability of certain dynamic artificial neural 
networks. In June 1997, he became a member of the 
technical staff at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where he 
has simulated the behavior of. spaceborne scatterometers 
(NSCAT and SeaWinds) as well as analyzed the data 
returned from these instruments. He is interested in 
statistical techniques for determining and visualizing 
relationships between remote sensor data and geophysical 
phenomena. 
4-1839 
