Techniques to Screen for Moving and Large Stationary 
Discretes in Space-Time Adaptive Estimation Data 
Thomas E. Morton 
United States Air Force Research Laboratory 
2241 Avionics Circle 
Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7333 
thomas.morton@sn.wpafb.af.mil 
93 7-25 5-6427 
Abstract-When the data samples used to estimate the 
interference covariance matrix in Space-Time Adaptive 
Processing (STAP) are assumed to be independent and 
identically distributed, an estimation loss indirectly 
proportional to the number of samples will occur. Measured 
data has shown that data samples are often nonhomogeneous 
and that these nonhomogeneities can cause losses beyond 
that from the estimation alone. Nonhomogeneities are of 
various types; here we have focused on moving and large 
stationary discretes. Numerical examples are presented that 
give a rationale for a screening technique. Then we present 
related screening techniques and performance simulations 
for the detection of moving and large stationary discretes in 
the estimation data. The screening techniques consist of 
pre-processing the samples by transforming them fi-om the 
space-time domain to the angle-Doppler domain and 
exploiting the resulting interference characteristics. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
INTRODUCTION 
RATIONALE FOR A SCREENING TECHNIQUE 
SCREENING TECHNIQUES 
NUMERICAL EXAMPLES 
CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Space-Time Adaptive Processing (STAP) is a candidate 
technology for airborne radar to improve the detection and 
tracking of slow moving targets in difficult clutter and 
jamming environments. STAP performance is determined in 
part by how closely its estimate of the interference 
covariance matrix, typically calculated from range samples 
surrounding a test range bin, matches the interference 
statistics of the test range bin. In this paper interference will 
mean ground clutter and receiver noise although in general it 
may also include other interference such as jamming and 
mutipath returns. 
when the estimation samples are independent and 
identically distributed (i.i.d.) and the statistics match those 
of the test range bin, an estimation loss directly related to the 
number of samples, also called secondary data or sample 
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright 
support, will occur. Measured data, however, has shown 
that interference is often nonhomogeneous [1,2], and is 
characterized by varying amplitude and spectral statistics 
that depart from the i.i.d. assumption. These 
nonhomogeneities in the sample support will introduce 
losses in addition to the estimation loss, and will limit the 
range extent and number of samples that may be considered 
i.i.d. Many approaches have been proposed to meet sample 
support requirements in nonhomogeneous environments. 
These include screening the data to excise nonhomogeneities 
[3], selecting samples based on data dependent rules [4], 
using multiple transmit frequencies [5] and exploiting the 
structure of the interference covariance matrix [6,7]. Since 
the required sample support, as well as computational 
complexity, is directly related to the dimension of the 
covariance matrix, many partially adaptive and reduced rank 
methods have been introduced. With partially adaptive 
methods, the idea is to reduce a prohibitively large problem 
into a number of smaller problems via data transformation, 
while maintaining performance close to that of the optimum 
fully adaptive processor. A comprehensive discussion and 
taxonomy of partially adaptive techniques is given in [SI. 
For the reduced rank techniques a subspace of the 
covariance matrix is used to calculate the adaptive weights; 
the required sample support is related to the dimension of 
the interference subspace (often much less than the 
dimension of the estimated covariance matrix). An analysis 
of reduced rank techniques can be found in [9]. A 
systematic description, modeling and analysis of 
nonhomogeneities has only recently been addressed [10,11]. 
In [lo] nonhomogeneities are classified by type, causes, and 
impact on adaptive radar performance. An overview of 
existing algorithmic solutions is also given. In [ 1 11 a variety 
of nonhomogoneities are analytically modeled and the 
resulting STAP performance analyzed. 
Nonhomogeneities have been categorized into those having 
a gradual change over range and those with an abrupt 
change [l]. The former type are caused by range variations 
in the interference characteristics introduced for example by 
mismatched elevation patterns and the range-Doppler 
dependencies characteristic in non-sidelooking arrays. The 
abrupt nonhomogeneities are caused by clutter edges, 
moving discretes, coherent repeater jammers, and large 
stationary discretes. In this paper, we focus on moving and 
2-853 
large stationary discretes; that is, except for discrete 
nonhomogeneities the estimation data is assumed to be 
homogeneous and the secondary data statistics match those 
of the test bin. Previous results, both simulated and with 
measured data, have shown that when present in the 
estimation data these discretes can lead to significant 
performance losses [3,10,11]. For example, in [ll] it is 
shown that for a given airbome radar scenario, moving 
discrete scatterers corrupting the estimation data set result in 
performance losses from 2 to 20 dB, depending on the size 
of the moving discretes and how close their directions of 
arrival are to the peak of the mainbeam. We will 
substantiate these results with numerical examples and 
present related techniques to screen range samples for the 
presence of undesired discretes so that those samples can be 
removed before interference covariance matrix estimation. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the 
rationale for a screening technique by first defining STAP 
signals and metrics and then illustrating with numerical 
examples the potentially significant losses caused by 
discretes in the secondary data. Fully adaptive STAP and a 
reduced rank method are considered. Section 3 describes 
the screening techniques and is followed with numerical 
examples in Section 4. Section 5 is a conclusion and 
SUmmary. 
2. RATIONALE FOR A SCREENING TECHNIQUE 
In this section we discuss and illustrate the rationale for a 
proposed technique that screens for the presence of moving 
and large stationary discretes in the estimation data. First, 
we introduce signals that are relevant to STAP and discuss 
the need to estimate a covariance matrix from data samples 
prior to weight computation. Then we briefly discuss the 
STAP metric of Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio and 
the expected losses introduced by the covariance matrix 
estimation. Discrete nonhomogeneities are then discussed 
and an expression for including them in the covariance 
matrix estimation is shown. Finally, we present numerical 
examples for both fully adaptive STAP and a reduced rank 
technique; it is seen that moving discretes introduce 
significant losses beyond that introduced by estimation 
losses alone. 
STAP Signals 
Consider a linear array of N isotropic elements with each 
element followed by M time taps each delayed by the Pulse 
Repetition Interval (PIU) of the radar (Fig. 1). 
The resulting signal at a given range, p, can be represented 
in matrix form as 
- ] E c""" (1) - % = ['lJ,p9 ' l p 9  * * 'M-1,p 
4 
where x, , ,~ E cNxl is the spatial response vector across the 
array for the mth pulse. When vectorized as 
g,, =vec(X,) E cmxl, the resulting vector is called the 
space-time snapshot and is the superposition of all received 
signals from that range including clutter, zc,p, noise, gn,,,, 
and target signal if present: 
ip =at %t 9 f d t  >+ %c,p + ?n,p =at '($t 9 fdt >+ Zu,p 
(2) 
. . I*-----b I 
I 
I 
[ N spatial channels 
I 
 
c 
U 
Fig. 1. Linear Array with PRI Delays 
where at is the target amplitude and q($t,fdt)  is the 
array response to the target arriving from an angle $t and 
having Doppler frequency fdt . More specifically, 
?($t, fdt ) can be represented as 
'($t 9 f d t  't = ' ( f d t  > @ '($t > (3 ) 
with s($t) and 6( fd t )  the spatial and temporal responses 
of the array given by 
and 
(4) ~ ( 4 ~  >=[I e j2nfs  ... ej2nfs 0 - 1 )  ] 
] ( 5 )  i;(fdt >= [I ej2nfdt ' f r  . . . eJ2nfdt ' f r  (U-1) 
where is the normalized spatial 
frequency, f, is the Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF), and 
the quantity f dt /f, is the normalized Doppler frequency. 
f, = (d / h)sin $, 
As indicated in figure 1 a scalar output for a given range is 
formed by the inner product of a complex weight vector with 
the space-time snapshot. The processor decides whether a 
target is present or absent according to the hypotheses: 
: Ho target absent 
: H1 target present. 
gp =%U 
g,, = a t G t  + x u  4 
The optimum weight vector to a scale factor is given by 
[12]: 
Go =E[gug;}-'Gt =R,'?, (6 )  
2-854 
where R, is the covariance matrix of the clutter and noise 
signals, E is the expectation operator, and H denotes 
Hermitian transpose. 
In practice, the covariance matrix is unknown and must be 
estimated. Various techniques for covariance matrix 
estimation are possible [see for example, 41 but nominally it 
is estimated by averaging snapshots located close to but not 
including the range bin currently under test for a target: 
l K  
p p=l 
Ru =-Cx,x," (7) 
where P snapshots are used to estimate the covariance 
matrix. These estimation snapshots make up the sample 
support. 
SINR Metrics 
An important metric often used in STAP analysis is Signal 
to Interference plus Noise Ratio, SINR, at the processor 
output: 
Using equation (6) in equation (8) gives the optimum SINR, 
When the weights are calculated with the estimated 
covariance matrix we have the following expression: 
SINR, =aT?PR,'Ct. (9) 
The SINR loss resulting fiom the covariance matrix estimate 
relative to S m  is denoted by 
(11) 
Under the assumption that i.i.d. data samples are used for 
the covariance matrix estimation and that the weight vector 
has MN components it has been shown that the expected 
value of the estimation loss, E{p), is -3 dB when the 
number of samples, P 2 2MN [12]. 
Discrete Nonhomogeneities 
We have previously mentioned that because of 
nonhomogeneities in the estimation data the i.i.d. 
assumption is often not met in practice. Here we will be 
mainly concerned with moving discrete and large stationary 
discrete nonhomogeneities. By moving discretes we mean 
ground vehicles such as jeeps, tanks and trucks which have 
shown measured median RCS values (averaged over angle) 
of 20, 50 and 100 m2 respectively [13]; large stationary 
scatterers refers to man-made structures such as buildings. 
For the numerical examples in this section and in Section 4 
we have given the moving discretes an RCS of 10m2 in all 
cases. 
We may modi@ the covariance matrix estimation equation 
to include discrete nonhomogeneities as follows [3]: 
A 1 P  
where the double hat denotes discrete nonhomogeneities in 
the data. The data snapshot sample at range bin p is 
yp = + 6yp where 6yp represents the discrete 
nonhomogeneity and may be expressed as 
where ad,p, i($d,p), and 6(f&,) are the amplitude of 
the discrete and the spatial and temporal responses of the 
array to the discrete. The covariance matrix estimation in 
the nonhomogeneous environment is then 
R = R + A R .  (14) 
In the remainder of this section we will show by numerical 
example the potentially significant SINR loss caused by 
discrete moving scatterers in the estimation data, and that 
this significance diminishes as the moving discrete moves 
outside the 3 dB mainbeam pattern of the array and away 
from the Doppler frequency of a desired target. SINR loss 
curves for fully adaptive and a reduced rank technique are 
shown and it is seen that the reduced rank technique is more 
sensitive to moving discretes than the fully adaptive STAP. 
We show no performance examples fiom large stationary 
discretes in the estimation data but note that they can 
increase the number of false alarms by crossing thresholds 
set too low for them. Having thus established a rationale for 
screening the secondary data for moving and large discretes 
we present such a screening method in Section 3. 
Numerical Examples 
To illustrate the potentially significant SINR loss caused by 
discrete moving scatterers in the estimation data we simulate 
an airborne radar. The parameters stated here will hold 
throughout the paper unless otherwise noted. The airbome 
radar is a sidelooking, planar array of 18x4 elements where 
the columns are spaced at half wavelength, d =h/2, and 
beamformed to give N=18 spatial channels. The transmit 
array has a Chebyshev weighting with 30 dB sidelobes and a 
peak gain of 22 dB; the receive gain for the columns is 10 
dB. The radar processes M=16 pulses in a coherent 
processing interval, transmits at a frequency of 450 MHz, 
has a platform velocity of v, = 50 m/s, and has a PIU? off, = 
2-855 
300 E. The clutter to noise ratio is taken to be CNR = 50 
dB. The signal to noise ratio of an unwanted discrete is 
taken to be SNR=14 dB, and the signal to noise ratio of the 
desired target signal is taken to be SNR=lO dB. 
Y z 
-20 
-25 
0 
- 
r 
-5 
-10 
P n.
-5 -1 
7 
N 
-30 I II I 
-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
Normalized Doppler 
Fig. 2. Varying Angle of Arrival for Single Discrete in the 
Estimation Data. 
Figures 2-4 show SINR loss performance relative to the 
noise limited environment: 
where unit variance noise is assumed. The upper 
performance limit will be zero dB since noise sets an upper 
limit on performance. A desired target is assumed to arrive 
from broadside; its Doppler is varied and the adaptive 
weights are calculated for each Doppler. Figure 2 shows the 
results of several experiments in which the angle of arrival 
of a single moving discrete is varied from 1 to 4 degrees 
relative to broadside. The 3 dB half beamwidth of the 
transmsit pattern is about 5 degrees. In figure 2 the solid 
line shows SINRLoss when the covariance matrix is known. 
The remaining lines show SLNRh,, when the weights are 
calculated with a covariance matrix estimated with P = 2h4N 
= 576 range snapshots; note the estimation loss relative to 
the known covariance matrix. Also note the additional loss 
introduced by a single moving discrete in the secondary 
data. In all cases the moving discrete has a normalized 
Doppler of f , / f , .  =0.1108 (24.8 mph). Depending on 
the angle of arrival these additional losses can be signifcant 
and we certainly would like to remove the moving discrete 
from the estimation data. 
Figure 3 illustrates what may happen when multiple moving 
discretes are present in the estimation data. Here 3 moving 
discretes are included in the estimation data; each has an 
angle of arrival of 1 degree and their respective normalized 
Doppler shifts are 0.1108 (24.8 mph), 0.0997 (22.3 mph), 
and -0.0997 (-22.3 mph). It does not take many moving 
discretes in the estimation data to significantly degrade the 
detection of a desired target. 
0 
- g 1:lH dag.,fdf=O.llOB 
2: %=I dag., fJ,=0.0897 
$15 1 3 :&I deg., f,,n,=-0.0997 
I t  -20 1 
-251 
-30 I w 
-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 
Normalized Doppler 
Fig. 3. Multiple Moving Discretes in the Estimation Data. 
-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 
Normalized Doppler 
Fig. 4. Comparison of MNE to Fully Adaptive STAP. 
5 
Reduced Rank Technique-In the preceding discussions and 
in calculating the SINRhs, curves in figures 2 and 3 we have 
been using fully adaptive STAP. That is, the dimension of 
the weight vector is MN. In practice fully adaptive STAP 
requires tremendous computational complexity and a large 
secondary data set subject to many nonhomogeneities; 
consequently, a number of partially adaptive and reduced 
rank techniques have been proposed to lessen the 
computational burden and the required sample support. The 
Minimum Norm Eigencanceller (MNE) is a reduced rank 
technique [14]. In its single constraint form the W is 
formulated as the following constrained optimization 
problem: 
minGHG subject to Q:i% = 0 and ??i%=l. (16) 
Here, Qr is an MNxr matrix representation of the 
interference subspace and r is the dimension of the 
2-856 
interference subspace. The resulting optimum weight vector 
is given by 
. ,= ( I -Q ,Q,H~t [~ r ( I -Q ,Q~~ , ] - l .  (17) 
The rank of the subspace is often much less than MN and 
under certain limiting assumptions r rz [N + (M - l)] (this 
is our assumption; also see [SI). Moreover, it has been 
shown that for the single constraint MNE the secondary data 
support requirement is 2r [ 151. 
Figure 4 compares the SINRLoss performance of MNE to 
fully adaptive STAP when the number of secondary samples 
is 2r and 2MN respectively; a single moving discrete with 
angle of arrival of 1 degree and normalized Doppler of 
0.1108 (24.8 mph) is put in the estimation data for both 
cases. Because of its smaller sample size the MNE 
performance is much more sensitive to the moving discrete; 
however, when the samples are homogeneous MNE and 
fully adaptive STAP have similar performance. Note that 
for reduced rank and partially adaptive methods a screening 
technique may be particularly beneficial by allowing the 
relatively small secondary data set to be chosen from a much 
larger set of available data. In the next section we present 
related techniques to screen for the presence of moving and 
stationary discretes in the secondary data. 
3. SCREENING TECHNIQUES 
This section presents related techniques to screen range 
samples for the presence of undesired discretes both moving 
and stationary; those samples containing discretes can then 
be removed prior to covariance matrix estimation. First, we 
describe a two stage method for detecting moving discretes. 
The first stage is a frequency domain Adaptive Matched 
Filter and the second stage is a detector based on the Cell- 
Averaging Constant False Alann Rate (CA-CFAR) detector. 
The detector is not optimized here but used only to 
demonstrate the concept. Then we consider a related 
screening method for large stationary discretes and note that 
it is computationally much simpler than that for moving 
discretes since it requires no adaptation. 
Moving Discretes 
Stage I-Let us refer back to an individual space-time data 
sample in its matrix form: 
Now transform X,, from the space-time domain to the angle- 
Doppler domain via a 2-dimensional Fast Fourier 
Transform: 
x p  = h,. x1.p.  ... ' M - l , p  - ] E CNfi . - 
z, =F,,X, (18) 
where FzD is the 2-dimensional FFT transform, and the tilde 
denotes a frequency domain quantity. The rows of x, 
correspond to spatial frequencies and the columns to 
Doppler frequencies. A notional power spectral density plot 
N 
N 
of X, for a sidelooking array is shown in figure 5. The 
diagonal line represents the clutter return or clutter ridge; 
when the parameter p =2v, /f, d is equal to one, as in 
LLl Doppler Frequency 
Fig. 5. Notional Power Spectral Density for 
Sidelooking Array 
our numerical examples, the Doppler is unambiguous and 
the clutter ridge will just completely fill the Doppler space. 
(A detailed description of p and its effect on the angle- 
Doppler return is given in [SI). The shaded area of the 
figure, labelled a,, shows the spatial frequency extent of 
the mainlobe clutter return where return from the boresight 
has zero spatial frequency. When a moving discrete is 
present in the data sample its motion gives it a Doppler 
offset relative to the stationary clutter ridge and potentially 
places it in an area relatively clear of interference and 
accessible for screening. The dots labelled 1 and 2 represent 
moving discretes of different Dopplers but at spatial 
frequencies close to the boresight. The moving discrete 
labelled 3 is well off boresight and will have little effect on 
SINR as figure 2 illustrated. Dots 4 and 5 represent 
stationary discretes and will be described in the next section. 
Thus, since we wish for the screening technique only to 
detect moving discretes in the secondary data it will suffice 
to use only that portion of X, containing spatial 
frequencies near the boresight. It is reasonable for our 
simulation to assume that these frequencies are codmed to 
the single spatial fi-equency bin represented by a, . If we 
extract and transpose bin a, from Xp then we have the 
data vector, E CM"', of Doppler frequencies. The 
frequency domain optimum weight vector at frequency f; to 
within a scale factor is given by 
- 
N 
N 
N 
(19) 
N 
Wa, , f ,  = R p f ,  
where zao E CMxM is the covariance matrix from the 
transformed data at spatial frequency a, and vf, E CM"' 
is the transformed steering vector at frequencyf; defined as 
(20) - VJ =F,,KA ) 
where FID is 1-dimensiona FFT transform and b(A) is the 
temporal response vector defined in equation (5). The 
covariance matrix can be estimated from the transformed 
secondary data by 
r P  
p # test 
where the notation p #test indicates that the estimate does 
not include data from the range bin under test. The resulting 
estimated weights at frequencyf; are 
If a moving discrete is present in the test bin then its 
Doppler frequency will be unknown so it is necessary to 
vary the steering vector over a number of frequencies, K, 
such that all Doppler frequencies of interest are covered. 
Thus, an MxK matrix of weight vectors, 
calculated by 
N - ]Ec- is a where vf =p/, * - -  vf, ' f K  
matrix of steering vectors. 
An output vector, ztest, is caIculated by operating on the 
test bin vector with the weight matrix: 
(24) 
N "H 
'test = wa, x a, ,test E CK"' 
Thus, processing a block of L range bins will yield L output 
vectors, zl , l=l:L each of length K. 
Before describing the second stage we emphasize that the 
hequency domain Adaptive Matched Filter just described is 
used only to screen secondary data for moving discretes and 
need not resemble the STAP architecture that will be used to 
adaptively determine the presence or absence of targets. 
Moreover, a far greater number of false alarms can be 
tolerated at this screening stage because false alarms will 
only result in the loss of secondary data as opposed to false 
target declarations. 
Stage 2-After processing a block of potential secondary 
data samples with the frequency domain Adaptive Matched 
Filter those samples are processed by a detector to test for 
the presence of a moving discrete. One possible detector, 
shown in figure 6, is based on the Cell Averaging CFAR 
detector. Refering to figure 6 the output vectors, 'z; , form 
the columns of the data block; the column labelled T 
represents the test bin currently under test. The f is t  step of 
the detector is to average each frequency,J;, of the output 
vectors across all L range bins in the block except the test 
bin at each frequency, j. Mathematically, we have: 
ii-t-t 
The second step is to average the outputs, D, , across all 
F b - & t  c 
+ 
if A > 0 Detect 
Fig. 6. A Detector for the Adaptive Matched Filter 
Screening Technique 
frequencies: 
and to average the test bin across all fiequencies: 
- 
where D and T are scalars. A difference , 
A = T  -cD , is calculated where c is a threshold 
adjustment used to control false alarms. If A exceeds zero 
a moving discrete is declared. In this way each of the L 
range bins is tested for the presence of moving discretes. In 
section 4 we will show numerical examples for the two stage 
screening method just described. 
Large Stationary Discretes 
In contrast to moving discretes, large stationary discretes lie 
along the clutter ridge. In the notional PSD plot of figure 5, 
the dots labelled 4 and 5 represent large stationary discretes 
in the mainlobe and sidelobe clutter respectively. Figure 7 
shows a rangehgle representation of the large stationary 
discretes. For our example sidelooking array, the velocity 
vector lies along the x-axis and the mainlobe lies along the 
y-axis. Angle from boresight is measured relative to the y- 
axis and range is represented by the concentric rings. The 
2-858 
dot labelled 4 represents a large stationary discrete at 
boresight and the dot labelled 5 is a large stationary discrete 
at the angle of the first peak sidelobe gain. Assuming that a 
block of range returns from a given angle, and thus having a 
given spatial frequency, is subject to approximately the same 
Y 
t 
Fig. 7. Illustration Showing Blocks of Range 
Returns at Two Specific Angles. 
antenna gain then we can screen for the large discretes by 
comparing the return from each range at that angle to a 
threshold determined by an average of all the range returns 
at that angle. More specifically, by noticing that large 
discretes lie on the clutter ridge and that the clutter ridge 
consists of the diagonal elements of X, E Czd ,where the 
dimension Z includes zero padding in the 2D FFT of 
N 
equation ( 181, we may form a matrix:- 
fi=[diag(fi,) -.. diag(g,) ... diag(g,)]E Cw 
(28) 
by extracting the diagonal elements from a block of L range 
samples. Each column of X corresponds to the clutter 
ridge return from a single range bin and the rows of X 
correspond to distinct spatial frequencies. Denote an angle 
of interest, 4 ,  for all range bins in x by the vector 
N 
N 
N 
4. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES 
In this section we demonstrate the data screening concept 
with numerical examples. Cases of interest for moving 
discretes and large stationary discretes in the secondary data 
are described and representative results discussed. 
Moving Discretes 
The radar parameters used for these numerical examples are 
those given in Section 2 with the following change. Recall 
the covariance matrix estimated from the transformed 
secondary data: 
r D  
= p=l 
p f test 
N 
The dimension of Rao and thus the number of samples 
required to estimate it is determined only by the number of 
pulses, M; this is in contrast to fully adaptive STAP where 
the dimension of the covariance matrix is the product of 
spatial channels and pulses, MN. We may increase the 
number of pulses processed for the screening technique 
without affecting the actual STAP processing; it is 
advantageous to do so because the increased Doppler 
resolution will reduce the amount of interference that the 
moving discretes compete with. Thus, for the screening 
technique numerical example we increase M from 16 to 32 
N 
and estimate Ra0 with 2M=64 range samples located 
symetrically about the range bin under test. 
For the first example, we arbitrarily choose to screen a block 
of 20 range bins where each range bin in the block 
undergoes the two stage screening process described in 
Section 3. Recall that all moving discretes are given a 
SNR=14 dB. We place a single moving discrete in the 16h 
range bin of the block and experiment by varying its angle 
of arrival and normalized Doppler frequency. These 
experiments, or cases, are summarized in Table 1. 
E($) E CIXL, and average all the range bins at angle 4 to 
form a scalar average. Now, the scalar average is turned 
into a row vector of length L by simply copying the scalar 
average into L components, Z,($)E clXL, and a 
difference vector A is formed: 
- 
ii = fi(0)- cfiavg (4) , (29) 
where c is a threshold adjustment used to reduce false 
alarms. When any component in A exceeds zero the 
corresponding range bin is determined to have a large 
discrete. A numerical example is shown in the next section. 
- 
2-859 
The angle of arrival is denoted by 4 and the normalized 
Doppler by f, /f, . Each case was run 100 times and the 
results are presented in the last column of Table 1 and in 
figures 8 and 9. Table 1 shows the number of times the 
moving discrete is detected in range bin 16 out of 100 trials 
for each of the nine cases. The numbers show that as the 
relative velocity of the moving discrete increases and it 
breaks free of the mainlobe clutter it becomes easier to 
detect; it is also apparent that for a given normalized 
Doppler frequency, the moving discrete is easier to detect as 
4 -  
m 
b 
j3 
x lo6 Test Range Bin 16 
- 
I ) 
L 
j3- 
2- 
1 L  
0 
-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
Normalized Dappisr 
Fig. 8. Output of the Detector for the Range Bin with 
Moving Discrete, @= 2' , fd = 0.0997. 
Test Range Bin 17 6r-----7 
the sidelobe clutter interference that the moving discrete 
must compete with. 
Figures 8 and 9 are meant to illustrate the screening 
technique; they show the respective outputs of the detector 
for test range bins 16 and 17 plotted versus frequency. That 
is, the quantities, D, , and /TA ,test I * are plotted after the 
adaptive matched filtering but before being averaged across 
frequency with equations (25)  and (26). The single moving 
discrete is in range bin 16 and has a normalized Doppler 
frequency of 0.0997 and an angle of arrival of 2' (Case 5, 
Table 1). In figures 8 and 9 the solid line is a plot of the test 
range bin and the dased line the average of the remaining 
range bins at each frequency in the block of 20. Figure 8 
clearly indicates the peak caused by the matched filter when 
it is tuned to the moving discrete frequency of 0.0997. After 
averaging across frequency and setting a reasonable 
threshold adjustment the moving discrete is detected 95% of 
the time as shown in Table 1. Figure 9 shows the result of a 
test bin which has no moving discrete; false alarms occurred 
3% of the time using the chosen threshold adjustment. Note 
that the threshold settings are not optimized and that false 
alarms occurred up to 10% of the time for all cases. False 
alarms that happen during the screening technique will result 
in the loss of possibly good secondary data. 
A good question to ask is what happens if moving discretes 
are in more than one range bin. If a moving discrete is 
present in the bin under test then moving discretes in other 
range bins serving as estimation data for Rao are expected 
to cause cancellation of the test bin target and thus degrade 
detection performance as implied by the numerical examples 
in Section 2. The degree of degradation will depend on 
many factors including the number of moving discretes as 
well as their sizes and relative velocities. The interaction 
between these factors may be complex. Here we only 
briefly consider the question of multiple moving discretes 
with the single example summarized in Table 2. 
LI N 
Table 2. Multiple Moving Discretes in the Range Block 
Bin 
Detections per 100 
trials 
Single Mover / 
Range +,degrees fd/ f, 
0.0886 56 120 
0.0997 83 120 
100 f 92 0.1108 16 1 
20 2 0.1108 100 I 72  
Fig. 9. Output of the Detector for a Range Bin without the 
Moving Discrete 
its angle of arrival moves closer to broadside. More to the 
point we may say that it is easier to detect as its Radar Cross 
Section increases, although we have not explicity varied the 
RCS for these cases. The array transmit taper will also 
significantly influence detection performance by reducing 
A moving discrete is placed in each of the range bins 
indicated by Table 2 and given the corresponding angle of 
arrival and normalized Doppler. The experiment was run 
100 times and the results are presented in Table 2. The last 
column in Table 2 compares the results of the multiple 
moving discrete experiment with the corresponding single 
moving discrete case. For example, 20 out of the possible 
2-860 
100 detections occurs in range bin 6; the moving discrete in 
range bin 6 has the parameters corresponding to case 4 
which yielded 56 detections when it was the only moving 
discrete in the range block. In other words, the interference 
caused by the multiple moving discretes has caused a loss of 
36 detections. The performance in range bins 16 and 20 
fares somewhat better, but it is clear that for these numerical 
examples the screening performance is degraded and some 
strategy for dealing with multiple moving discretes must be 
considered. 
0.5 
Large Stationary Discretes 
- Threshold 
oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooco3ooooooooco~oooooo~ 
We now consider a numerical example for the large 
stationary discrete screening technique described in Section 
3. This time let us choose an arbitrary block of 50 range 
bins and run the experiment summarized in Table 3. 
~~~-0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000~~  
2 -  
Table 3. Large Stationary Discretes 
W g e B i n  I $,degrees I RCS, m2 
31 
36 
41 
46 
0 
16 
0 
16 
3x 1 O6 
3x106 
3x105 
3x105 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
-0.5' 
Range Bin 
Fig. 1 1. Shows Output A for $ = oo ; Large Discretes in 
RangeBins31 and41. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
-1" 
Range Bin 
-1.51' 
I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Range Bin 
-2 I 
Fig. 10. Baseline: Output Across Range Bins with no 
Discretes in the Data for 0 = 0 (Mainlobe Look Direction). 
Thresholds: ~ 1 . 5  ('0'); ~ 1 . 0  ('- -'). 
Fig. 12. Shows Output A for $=16' (First Sidelobe); 
Large Discretes in Range Bins 36 and 46. 
A large stationary discrete is placed in each of the range bins 
indicated in Table 3 and given the corresponding angle of 
arrival and RCS. The peak of the mainlobe is of course at 
0'; 16' degrees is also chosen because that is the location of 
the first sidelobe peak. The results for a single run are 
presented in figures 10-12. Figure 10 is a baseline plot used 
to determine a reasonable threshold adjustment, c. No 
discretes are present in the data. The solid line is a plot of 
the difference vector, A = ?($)-cgavg($), defined in 
Section 3. The angle of arrival being checked is $=o" . 
The lower and higher horizontal lines represent threshold 
settings with c=l and ~ 1 . 5  respectively. Next, the large 
stationary discretes are added to the data and the screening 
technique described in Section 3 is carried out. It should be 
noted that in order to eliminate the interference caused by 
the 2-D FFT spatial frequency sidelobes a sidelobe taper 
2-861 
was applied to the space-time snapshot before the frequency 
processing. Figure 11 is a plot of 5 for 0 = 0’ . The large 
discretes in range bins 3 1 and 4 1 cross the threshold and are 
easily detected. Figure 12 is a plot of for $=16’ ; that 
is, the angle cut corresponding to the peak gain of the first 
sidelobe. Not surprisingly, since the first sidelobe is 30 dB 
down from the mainbeam the output magnitudes are much 
smaller. The relatively smaller discrete in range bin 46 is 
just barely detectable with the given threshold setting. 
5.  CONCLUSIONS 
STAP processing requires an estimation of the interference 
covariance matrix. The estimation is typically calculated 
with range samples surrounding a range bin under test for 
the presence of a target. When these range samples are i.i.d. 
and the statistics match those of the test range bin, an 
estimation loss indirectly proportional to the number of 
samples will occur. When they are not i.i.d. additional 
losses may occur. The departure from i.i.d. is caused by a 
variety of possible nonhomogeneities in the estimation data. 
In this paper we have focused on discrete nonhomogeneities 
and have shown with numerical examples that the losses 
caused by moving discretes can be quite significant and have 
stated that large stationary discretes can result in an 
increased false alarm rate. 
Having provided the rationale to identify and remove 
discretes from the estimation data the paper presents related 
screening techniques to do so. The techniques are based on 
pre-processing the range samples; specifically, this means 
transforming space-time range samples to the angle-Doppler 
domain via a 2D FFT. For moving discretes, an adaptive 
matched filter is used that exploits the characteristic Doppler 
offset from mainlobe clutter; large stationary discretes are 
detected by simply comparing the return from one range at a 
given angle to the average from a number of other ranges at 
that same angle assuming that the antenna gain is 
approximately the same for all ranges. 
The numerical results shown in this paper indicate that the 
proposed screening techniques are effective under certain 
limiting assumptions and warrant further study. The 
screening techniques are conceptually simple since they are 
based on Fourier Transforms and known adaptive 
processing and detection schemes; they also allow a far 
greater number of false alarms than the fmal STAP 
processing because this only results in the loss of estimation 
data as opposed to a false target detection. There are 
possible limitations. The ability to detect a moving discrete 
will depend on its velocity and size as well as the parameters 
of the radar. The additional processing loads and possible 
delays caused by the screening techniques need careful 
consideration. Multiple moving discretes in the estimation 
data can significantly interfere with the range bin under test 
and pose a limitation that merits further investigation. The 
limitations are not necessarily prohibitive and these 
screening techniques could find useful application for 
example in Slow Ground Moving Target Indication modes 
where the ground environment has moving discretes and 
large man-made structures present at many ranges. 
Future work should include a performance analysis for a 
variety of radar parameters and for both forward and 
sidelooking array configurations. A careful analysis of 
multiple moving discretes in the estimation data and 
methods to overcome their adverse effects should be 
considered. Processing loads and delays to the STAP 
processing need further consideration. Most importantly, 
these techniques should be implemented on measured data 
to determine if the feasibility holds. 
REFERENCES 
[l] H. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Q. Zhang, “Lessons Learned 
from Recent STAP Experiments,” , pp. 761-765. 
[2] W.L. Melvin and M.C. Wicks, “Improving Practical 
Space-Time Adaptive Radar,” Proc. 1997 IEEE National 
Radar Conference, 1997, pp. 48-53. 
[3] H.H. Chang, ‘Tmproving Space-Time Adaptive 
Processing (STAJ?) Radar Performance in Nonhomogeneous 
Clutter,” PhD Thesis, Syracuse University, August, 1997. 
[4] D.J. Rabideau, A.O. Steinhardt, “Improving the 
Performance of Adaptive Arrays in Nonstationary 
Environments Through Data Adaptive Training,” Proc. 3@ 
Asilomar Con$, Pacific move, CA., pp. 75-79, 3-6 Nov., 
1996. 
[ 5 ]  L. Cai, “On Adaptive Multiband Detection of Targets in 
Nonstationary/Nonhomogeneous Interference,” Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Syracuse University, 1990. 
[6] R. Nitzberg, “Application of Maximum Liklihood 
Estimation of Persymmetric Covariance Matrices to 
Adaptive Processing,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, vol. 16, no. 1, January 1980. 
[7] S.U. Pillai, J.R Guerci and Y.L. Kim, “Generalized 
Forwardhlackward Subaperture Smoothing Technique for 
Sample Starved STAP,” ICASSP, 1998. 
[SI 3. Ward, “Space-time Adaptive Processing for Airborne 
Radar,” lMlT Lincoln Laboratov, Tech. Rep. No. TR-I 01 5, 
Dec., 1994. 
[9] C.D. Peckham, A.M. Haimovich, T.F. Ayoub, J.S. 
Goldstein, I.S. Reed, “Reduced Rank STAP Performance 
Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 664-676, April 2000. 
[lo] W.L. Melvin, J.R. Guerci, M.J. Callahan, M.C. Wicks, 
“Design of Adaptive Detection Algorithms for Surveillance 
2-862 
Radar,” 2000 IEEE lntemational Radar Conference, 
Arlington, VA., 7-12 May 00. 
[l 11 W.L. Melvin, “Space-Time Adaptive Radar 
Performance in Heterogeneous Clutter,” IEEE Transactions 
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 
621-632, April 2000. 
[12] LS. Reed, J.D. Mallett, and L.E. Brennan, “Rapid 
Convergence Rate in Adaptive Arrays”, IEEE Transactions 
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES-10, no. 6, 
November, 1974. 
[13] H.S. Nussbaum,et.al, (Hughes Aircraft Company), 
“Slow Ground Moving Target IndicatiodLocation 
Techniques,” Final Technical Report AFWAL-TR-83-1086, 
May, 1983. Portions of the report are classified at a 
Confidential level. 
[ 141 A.M. Haimovich, “The Eigencanceler: Adaptive Radar 
by Eigenanalysis Methods,” IEEE Transactions on 
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 32, no. 2, April 
1996. 
[15] I.P. Kirsteins, D.W. Tufts, “Adaptive Detection Using 
Low Rank Approximation to a Data Matrix,” IEEE 
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 30, 
(Jan. 1994), 55-67. 
Thomas Morton was born in Rumford, 
Maine. He received a B.A. degree from 
the Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
in 1985. He received a B.S.E.E. from 
Wright State University, Dayton, OH in 
1989 and an A4S.E.E. from the University 
of Dayton, Dayton, OH, in 1996. He has 
been working at Wright-Patterson Air- 
Force Base since 1989 in various areas of radar acquisition 
and research and development. He currently works at the 
Air Force Research Laboratory where his research interests 
include Space-Time Adaptive Processing. 
