The Passive Sensor Subsystem for DITP - Current Status 
and Projected Performance 
Paul LeVan & James Lyke 
Space Vehicles Directorate; Air Force Research Laboratory 
Kirtland AFB, NM 871 17-5776 
505-846-9959 
Paul. levan@kirtland. af.mil 
James R. Waterman 
Naval Research Laboratory 
Washington, DC 20375 
waterman@ccsalpha4.nrl.navy.mil 
James R. Duf€ey 
Maxwell Technologies, Inc 
Albuquerque, NM 87106 
ji3m@maxwell.com 
and 
Brandon Paulsen 
Utah State University Space Dynamics Laboratory 
North Logan, UT 84341 
paulsen@sdl.usu.edu 
202-404-7945 
505-764-3 143 
435-797-4490 
Abstract-The passive sensor subsystem (PSS) is under 
development by the Air Force Research Laboratory as 
part of the DITP, which is a BMDO and tri-service flight 
demonstration of advanced interceptor technologies. We 
describe the PSS in terms of its three basic constituents - 
the LWIR focal plane array (FPA), the flight cryostat 
assembly (FCA), and the malleable signal processor 
(MSP). We first review each of these basic constituents. 
We then describe how these constituents relate in the 
overall system, including the FPA in the operating 
environment provided by the fight cryostat assembly; the 
operation of, and data acquisition from, the FPA by the 
malleable signal processor; and the optical configuration 
used to achieve the desired pixel and FPA fields of view 
in both flight and ground-test embodiments. 
TABLE OF C 0 " T S  
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. FOCAL PLANE ARRAY (FPA) 
4. FLIGHT CRYOSTAT ASSEMBLY (FCA) 
3. MAL" SIGNAL PROCESSOR (MSP) 
5.   MISCELLANEOUS CONSIDERATIONS 
6. CONCLUSION - PERFORMANCE SUMMARY 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Future exo-atmospheric interceptors will employ infrared 
sensors that achieve unprecedented levels of performance 
in the acquisition and tracking of distant, cold-body 
targets. Large sensor fields of view (FOV) will enable 
efficient target acquisition, and small instantaneous (pixel) 
FOVs will provide precise target location at long ranges, 
thereby reducing interceptor divert maneuvers. Both of 
these objectives will be simultaneously met with infrared 
focal plane arrays (FPA) of sufficiently large pixel format 
and with near background-limited performance (BLIP) 
against the lower-than-tactical background levels of an 
exo-atmospheric interceptor. A discrimination capability 
for targets from decoys and structured background 
radiation made possible with dual- and multi-waveband 
FPAs will improve further the probability of a successful 
intercept [ 11. 
Efforts under the passive sensor sub-system of the BMDO 
discriminating interceptor technology program (DI") 
have addressed the issues mentioned above. We report 
here only on the DITP passive sensor for which we are 
responsible, and apart from the DITP ladar and digital 
signal processor efforts. In reality, all three subsystems 
are closely related, with the ladar and passive sensor 
sharing a common telescope, and the digital signal 
processor servicing the data processing needs of both 
sensors. The flight telescope configuration is an all- 
reflective (except for ladarm beamsplitter), off-axis 
design that provides a collimated beam to the ladar sub- 
system. A pupil is provided in collimated space 
"upstream" of the ladarm beamsplitter and at the location 
5-2113 
of a beam steering mirror (BSM). Such a BSM would 
allow for pointing of the approximate 10 milliradian 
square passive FOV within an approximate 0.61 by 1 
degree telescopic field of regard. The re-imaging of the 
beam for the idtared focus is accomplished with an all- 
reflective, three-mirror anastigmat telescope. A ground- 
test optical configuration involving a (refractive) infrared 
camera lens supports hardware-in-the-loop testing, and is 
described in Section 2, below. In Section 4 we describe 
the custom cryostat assembly designed for use with the 
(all-reflective) flight telescope. 
2. FOCAL PLANE ARRAY (FPA) 
The focal plane array (FPA) consists of an amay of 
photovoltaic HgCdTe pixels hybridized (via indium 
interconnects) with a cryogenic multiplexer (of silicon). 
The FPA is optimized for the LWIR, with a cut-off 
wavelength near ten microns. The FPA consists of 
256x256 pixels on 30 micron centers, and operates in a 
"snapshot" mode, with all pixels integrating 
simultaneously. The FPA is typically operated near 77 
Kelvin, but for the background levels described below, 
improved sensitivity results from the reduction of dark 
current from 77 and 65 Kelvin. 
In both the flight (with 25 cm diameter optics) and 
ground-test (with 5 cm diameter optics) configurations, 
the F/# of the scene imaged onto the FPA is Fl3. (The 
resulting pixels and sensor fields of view are 40 
microradians and 10 milliradians, respectively, for the 
flight configuration.) The ground-test optics consist of a 
150 mm focal length, F/3 camera lens assembly, 
optimized for the LWIR. Elements in the ground-test 
optics train in addition to the camera lens include a 
vacuum window (of germanium), a cooled spectral filter 
transmitting from 7 to 10 microns, and a cold pulpil stop 
sized to the diameter and location of the exit pupil of the 
camera lens. The ground-test system provides the 
requisite cryogenic cooling with a pour fill, liquid 
nitrogen Dewar, with the capability for a vacuum over the 
liquid nitrogen flask that achieves temperatures inear 65 
Kelvin. Levels of background radiation on the FPA 
follow from optical configuration described above., and an 
estimated value of about 23% emissivity. In the case of 
the night configuration, this relatively large value of 
emissivity results from multiple optical elements in the re- 
imaging, off-axis telescope design, meeting the 
requirements of aperture sharing with a ladar sub-system. 
The resulting background levels on the FPA are on low- 
l O I 5  photons per second per square cm. The FPA can 
integrate on the time scale of one millisecond under these 
background levels, resulting in an approximate 10% 
integration duty cycle at the maxi" frame rate: of 100 
Hertz. 
The level of FPA performance needed to support long 
range, cold body target acquisition with this optical 
system have been derived. The required sensitivity, in 
noise equivalent flux (NEQ) at the focal plane, is 
approximately 2x10" photonslsec-cm'. While this level 
of performance is somewhat less stressing than that 
required for truly low background systems, it is an 
approximate order of magnitude lower than a typical 
tactical focal plane array requirements, and is therefore 
challenging even for currently-available, single waveband 
IRFPA technology. The government (NRL) evaluation of 
the selected FPA shows excellent performance with 
respect to system requirements. The responsivity 
uniformity is outstanding, as shown in Figure 1. A two- 
dimensional map of the noise equivalent flux for a 
candidate array is shown in Figure 2. Focal plane 
operability against the desired NEQ exceeds 99%. 
Although the limited charge integration capacitance of this 
device leads to somewhat inefficient value of integration 
duty cycle against the projected background levels and 
frame rates, we nevertheless find that high signal to noise 
target acquisition is possible, as described in Section 6. 
Our ultimate objective is to ready the simultaneous, 
dualband FPA under development for DITP for upgrading 
from the single waveband FPA. 
ResponsMty LEAP 256x256 LW 
:L 0 1 2  
Mean ResponsiviIy=2.69lle-O15 
Sigma/mean=0.032626 
# IOW resp (~75% mean) plxels=52 
3 4 5 6 7  
Volts/( phkec-cm') 10.'~ 
Figure 1. FPA responsivity histogram 
NEQ(ph/sec-cm') 
*IO" 
" A  
TinW.5 msec f fk=61 K Fr rate=60 Hz 
Figure 2. FPA noise equivalent flux map 
5-2114 
3. MALLEABLE SIGNAL PROCESSOR (MSP) 
The MSP for DITP implements a modular reconfigurable 
processor containing a core (where sensor-specific 
algorithms are implemented), a gigabitlsec Myrinet-based 
communication interface, and a configuration 
management processor for confguring and operating the 
core under the control of a simple serial command 
interface. The MSP in a flight system is implemented as 
two small multichip modules (MCMs), and a number of 
MSPs can be networked through their command interfaces 
to support complex sensor fusion applications. To cope 
with custom analog sensor interfaces, MSP employs 
sensor adaptation segments (SAS). Segments refer to 
assemblies that can be migrated to MCMs, in this case 
user specific MCMs in the PSS to meet FPA drive and 
data acquisition requirements to acquire FPA images for 
processing in the MSP core. Two-axis mirror control has 
also been demonstrated, and the interface is implemented 
with a second SAS, in this case customized for servo 
drive, which operates concurrently with the FTA SAS. 
Cryostat control in a flight system is handled by a third 
SAS. Hence, MSPs can be customized for specific 
applications by simply replacing one or more SAS 
modules as new components are added and reconfiguring 
the MSP core hardware, under software control, providing 
the potential to dramatically reduce the time needed to 
upgrade systems in production or in the field, while 
provide a significantly miniature form factor for real-time 
embedded application. 
\ 
As part of a more ambitious overall electronics 
miniaturization activity, the MSP and associated SAS 
modules for the passive sensor are to be housed in the 
Sensor and Fusion Engine (SAFE) package (Figure 3), a 
high-performance, micro-miniature 3-D packaging system 
developed for DITP. SAFE modularly combines up to 16 
segments in an electrically efficient micro-backplane and 
advanced structural mounting system. The 
microbackplane accommodates segment signal counts of 
up to 1,225 and power delivery levels of up to 75A peak, 
while providing an efficient thermal management system 
that employs advanced composite and phase change 
options. Other segments in SAFE include a second MSP, 
which operates on an advanced ladar subsystem, and a 
DITP fusion processor subsystem, which bridges the large 
volumes of sensor data through the Myrinet interface of 
each MSP. SAFE achieves over 90% size and mass 
reduction when compared with conventional approaches, 
while providing vastly greater electrical performance. 
these functions require bulky subsystems involving 
several electronics boards on a common backplane, with 
dedicated boards for bias and clock generation, as well as 
Figure 3. Conceptual SAFE Layout 
signal conditioning/digitization. Usually, significant levels 
of power are required. In DITP, it is necessary to provide 
all of the functions mentioned above in a single, 
miniaturized assembly, which became the FPA SAS. The 
current SAS is approximately 3.5 x 3.5 x 3 inches and 
weighs less than 215 grams (without an enclosure). 
Imagery (see Figure 4) is noteworthy in the level of detail 
in the infrared while viewing a human subject (with, for 
example, temperature differences of facial features and 
emissivity differences of metallic jewelry clearly evident). 
The noise floor of the current SAS is lower than that of 
the FPA operated with near-optimal integration times 
against the DITP background levels, and work is ongoing 
to further lower the noise floor. 
reduction in noise floor between the initial and current 
versions of the SAS corresponds to an increase in target 
acquisition range approaching 20%. 
The factor of 
Sensor adaptation segment (SAS) 
Modem infrared FPAs require supporting electronics that 
generate precise bias voltages and clocking waveforms for 
FPA operation. As pixel signals appear serially on each 
of several output lines, these signals must be conditioned 
in the analog domain prior to digitization. Commercially, 
Figure 4. Image obtained with MSP sensor adaptation 
segment and 256x256 pixel LWIR FPA. 
I 
5-2115 
4. FLIGHT CRYOSTAT ASSEMBLY (FCA) 
The FCA is designed to be a low-cost flight test vehicle 
for a variety of advanced technologies that may be used in 
future advanced interceptor programs. The FCA is also a 
versatile cryostat designed to accommodate a variety of 
FPAs and different fore-optics. Its initial design was for 
compatibility with future dualband FPA technologies, 
including Mercury Cadmium Telluride (HgCdTe) and 
Quantum Well Infrared Photodetectors (QWIPs) based on 
GaAsIAlGaAs. A wide variety of FPA cutoff wavelengths 
could be used, depending on the interceptor envircinment 
and target selection. All of these considerations pointed 
to a design capability for a wide range of 0pi:rating 
temperatures. The FCA electrical interface is sufficient for 
any envisioned number of FPA inputs, and the simplicity 
of the FPA printed wiring board allows new ones to be 
quickly and inexpensively obtained for a variety of FPAs. 
In addition, the FCA can be adapted to a wide variety of 
optics by merely changing the end plate and cold shield. 
This can also be done inexpensively and with rapid 
turnaround. Utah State University Space Dynamics 
Laboratory (SDL) is developing the DITP flight cryostat 
assembly (FCA). 
Mechanical 
A proprietary SDL design is employed for rigidly 
supporting cryogenic assemblies (in the case of DITP, 
both the cryogen flask and the FPA mounting surfac:e) in a 
way that survives launch shock and vibration and 
preserves high levels of thermal isolation. The mounting 
utilizes tensioned Kevlarm threads to support the neon 
reservoir and FPA mount assembly to the outer FCA case. 
This mounting technique is very rigid resulting in high 
natural resonance frequencies. This rigidity provides some 
immunity to vibration problems in interceptors, since most 
of the energy in the vibration is located at energies lower 
than the resonant frequency of the internal FCA. A proof 
of this concept was attained with a test-bed, liquid neon 
dewar fabricated as part of the DITP effort, with the test- 
bed FCA charged with liquid neon and subjected to 
pathfinder levels of launch shock and vibration, thereby 
validating hold-time and vibrational levels of survival. A 
similar mounting technique has been flight proven. 
Thermal 
The major defense acquisition program (IDAP) 
interceptors are typically launched warm, and the FPA is 
cryo-cooled in flight. This approach is hard to defend for 
a low cost flight demonstration, where most individuals 
would insist on having the FPA cold and passing a pre- 
launch, functional test before proceeding with the 
countdown. This requirement also impacted our choice of 
cryostat over mechanical cryocooler, after disimissing 
available cryocoolers of this type and operating in the 
required temperature regime as too costly. Our approach 
provides flexible cooling over a range of temperatures 
(from 28 Kelvin up to 80K) thereby accommodating 
disparate FPA technologies (including the 60 Kelvin 
operation of the FPA described in Section 2). A liquid 
neon Dewar with temperature-controlled thermal stage 
was the economical choice for us; this approach also 
accommodated the DITP space restrictions. 
The FPA base temperature is maintained with a thermal 
link that has a known temperature drop from one end to 
another. This thermal link is designed so that the base 
temperature is several degrees below the operating 
temperature of the FPA. The temperature is controlled 
from this elevated base temperature rather than from the 
liquid neon base temperature. This reduces heater power 
consumption and increases stored cryogen life. Thermal 
links with differing temperature drops can be fabricated 
simply and inexpensively to accommodate a wide variety 
of FPAs with differing base temperabes, while 
maintaining similar cryogen storage lifetimes. 
Flexibility 
5-2116 
The FCA is larger than tactical cryocooler assemblies 
because it provides flexible cooling over a range of 
temperatures from 28 Kelvin up to 80K. There is no 
flight-qualified, blow-down (Joule-Thompson) cryocooler 
providing the 40 to 60 Kelvin cooling requirement that we 
have, so the liquid neon Dewar was the economical choice 
for us to accommodate the DITP space restrictions. The 
FCA is well partitioned, so that a different cooler, either 
blowdown or mechanical, should be substituted without 
re-designing the FPA mounting section. cold shielding, 
endplate, and optics interface. The thermal link would 
then connect to the alternate cooler rather than the liquid 
neon reservoir. The rear of the FCA would need to be 
redesigned to accommodate the alternate cooling 
technique, but much of the design, such as the light- 
weighting would remain the same. 
Optical & conclusions 
The FCA accommodates the inI?ared focus of the DITP 
flight telescope by providing an appropriately-sized cold 
stop for a relayed telescope pupil. A “ground-test” 
version of the FCA has been fabricated to include a 
different cold stop size and location that is compatible 
with the 150 mm, F/3 camera lens used for ground-testing. 
This version of the FCA was delivered in the early 2001 
timefhne. In summary, significant attributes of the DITP 
FCA include (l), relatively low mass and volume cryostat 
that provides cooling of high levels of power dissipation 
over a broad range of temperatures, (2) ,  showcasing of the 
technology of Kevlar supports of cryogenic assemblies, 
(3), capability for €PA cooling and functionality checking 
prior to launch. 
16 June 1999 \-- 
Figure 5. Flight Cryostat Assembly (FCA) 
4. M MISCELLANEOUS CONSIDERATIONS 
Integration-Duty-Cycle-Limited (IDCL)FPA Pedormance 
Many currently available idfared FPAs can not take 
advantage of the 111 fiame time, or inverse fiame rate, for 
continuous signal integration (also called ‘Yid1 stare 
efficiency”), because typical optical background levels 
and values of F/# can lead to filling of the FPA charge 
storage capacity at a fiaction of a frame time, even at their 
fastest @me rates. (This limitation has been successfblly 
overcome with FPAs employing very deep intrinsic 
charge wells, those attaining deep “effective” well depths 
through on-chip processing, and those with sub-frame 
averaging capability for which many well fills are 
transferred to a larger “frame” integration capacitor during 
a fiame time.) For example, the baseline FPA for DITP 
attains a 75% well fill in about one millisecond of 
integration time (with 3 micron spectral bandpass, F/3 
optics, and a 30 micron pixel pitch), corresponding to 
about 10% duty cycle at its fastest (nearly 100 Hz) fiame 
rate. The implications of poor stare efficiency include, 
(l), loss of “per frame” signal to noise ratio and 
concomitant limitations in target acquisitioqrange and (2), 
increased latency of tracking error signals since the 
integration time normally occurs at the beginning of the 
frame time. Low stare efficiency also impacts in selection 
of optical F/# for optimal point source signal to noise 
ratio. The latter point is discussed in detail, below. 
Optimal Pixel IFOVs For IDCL Performance 
The pixel IFOV for optimal point source sensitivity for a 
given aperture diameter (D) and under background-limited 
conditions is more or less widely understood. This IFOV 
is about 20% larger than h/D (where h is the effective 
wavelength for the waveband and target combination), 
and results in about 64% of the point source energy falling 
on a square pixel for a diffraction-limited optical 
assembly. Larger IFOVs increase the percentage of 
“ensquared energy”, but do so at a rate slower than the 
increase in background noise (which increases, in this 
case, linearly with the pixel IFOV). However, we reach a 
different conclusion for the case of “integration-duty- 
cycle-limited FPA performance”. This difference arises 
because smaller pixel IFOVs in this case increase 
available integration time (or stare efficiency), since the 
background photocurrent is reduced; this also results in an 
increase in the ratio of integrated signal to background 
photocarriers. For example, for the 25 cm DITP aperture, 
the optimal IFOV value for high, single pixel SNR is 
approximately 40 microradians (at 8.7 microns effective 
wavelength) for the case of full stare efficiency, but less 
than 20 microradians for the integration-duty-cycle 
limited case. Given this potential to realize SNR 
improvements with smaller pixel IFOVs (larger F/#’s), an 
attractive trade-off is available to the system designer 
whose FPA pixel format allows more than adequate FOV 
coverage. 
5-2117 
require reduced divert capability. For the ladar-equipped 
Trade-08s Between Pixel And Overall Sensor FOF7s DITP demonstration, an accurate passive handover 
Modern infrared sensors for exo-atmospheric target 
intercept have two disparate objectives: the efficient 
acquisition of targets as facilitated with large overall 
FOVs and precise target location made possible: (after 
acquisition) with small instantaneous (pixel) IFOVs. 
permits a better centering of the outgoing laser beam 
profile on the target, resulting in an increase in reflected 
laser power and higher signal to noise ladar acquisition. 
Simulations by Grossman & Emmons [2] have shown that 
tracking to a small fraction of a pixel IFOV is possible 
with simple centroiding algorithms, but we stress that this 
Figure 6. On the Left, 20 Microradian Pixel Sampling of the DITP PSF. On the Right, 40 Microradian Pixel Sampling of the 
Same PSF. (The Baseline DITP Aperture is 25 cm.) 
These objectives are often constrained by available FPA 
pixel formats, since FPA dimensions of N x M (in pixels) 
correspond to an overall FOV of N x M pixel IFOVs. For 
example, the DITF’ baseline has an FPA with 256x256 
pixels and 40 micro-radian pixel IFOV; this results in an 
approximate 10 milli-radian square sensor FOV. 
The surface plots in Figure 6 show the same (pixel- 
centered) point spread function (PSF) sampled with 
IFOVs that differ by x2. As can be seen from the plots, 
the PSF is sampled by many pixels (about 5 with 
fractional signal levels of 50% peak or greater) with the 
smaller IFOV. For the larger IFOV, there is only one 
pixel sample with appreciable (i.e., 50% of peak or 
greater) signal. It can be seen that the repercussion of 
dead pixels is much less severe for the smaller IFOV; 
alternately stated, lower values of FPA operability can be 
tolerated in this case. (Although these plots are simplified 
in that the PSF is pixel-centered, and also that there is no 
integration of the Airy function under the spatial extent of 
the pixel, they nevertheless point to the correct general 
conclusion.) 
requires very high target signal to noise, a very uniform 
(corrected) pixel response, and a very clean subtraction of 
background radiation. 
Successful approaches for accomplishing efficient 
subtraction of telescopic background include novel “bus 
dithering” methods made possible with FPAs having 
extremely high M e  rates coupled with algorithmic 
approaches for extracting target position, using the target 
motion on the FPA, ffom the background. The 
attractiveness of this approach is that there is no 
modulation in telescopic background and no post- 
subtraction background residuals that obscure fainter 
targets. By contrast, infrared sensors employing beam 
steering mirrors (BSM) to dither the target image on the 
FPA require, for efficient performance, significant 
constraints on the overall optical system. These include 
relaying of the pupil to the BSM (to circumvent 
modulation of telescopic background) and also to a cold 
pupil stop in the seeker that limits telescopic background 
to the low emissivity mirror surfaces in view over the 
range of BSMmotion. 
Small pixel IFOVs result in high angular precisian target FPA response non-uniformity (and its residual after non- 
location. This is significant for the purely passive uniformity correction) is .more problematic for higher 
interceptor for which lower target positional uncertainties background levels with ambient-temperature telescope 
5-2118 
optics, when the background is not subtracted on a pixel- 
by-pixel basis. In this case, the “cleanliness” of 
background subtraction is limited by the amount of 
residual (post-correction) non-uniformity on the FPA. 
Values of residual response non-uniformity in the range of 
0.3% (sigma over mean) combine with the high (pre- 
subtraction) levels of background, resulting in 
“background residuals” that impact target centroiding 
performance (when target to background contrast 
approaches 5% and lower.) 
Interceptor Demonstration Considerations 
The cost-effective integration and demonstration of 
advanced, .“one-of-a-kind” FPA technologies may be 
better served by non-conventional approaches. Candidate 
flight FPAs are typically mounted on a temporary chip 
carrier prior to characterization. Selected FPAs are then 
de-mounted fiom the test carrier and re-mounted onto a 
custom flight substrate. (The custom flight substrate has 
precise mechanical tolerances, precise alignment fiducials, 
and other mechanical alignment aids such as pins and 
sockets.) A number of FPAs must be available since some 
yield loss is expected in the de-mountinghemounting 
process. A processing data package follows the FPA 
through its various stages of fabrication and test. 
Although this process does ensure a high degree of 
reliability, it is expensive, labor intensive, inflexible with 
regard to in-stream changes, and poses additional risk of 
FPA damage resulting from additional handling. An 
alternative approach consisting of mounting the FPA in a 
custom flight substrate from the onset entails additional 
costs in the development of the mounts and in the 
mounting of all (good and bad) FPAs. Since the yield of 
high-performance flight grade FPAs is low, the costs 
associated with the labor intensive, precise mounting of 
FPAs of unknown performance into expensive flight 
quality substrates would be prohibitive. 
The “one-of-a-kind” nature of these developmental FPAs 
mandates a minimization of risk such as that entailed in 
the de-mountinghe-mounting of FPAs from test to flight 
substrates. The approach adopted here, and also being 
investigated independently within a NASA Goddard space 
flight program, is to fly the FPA within its test leadless 
chip carrier (LCC). The FPA/LCC might be clamped into 
a socket that is part of the flight substrate, or mounted 
directly to the substrate with electrical connections made 
from the LCC to a ceramic circuit board with soldered 
wires or wire bonds. The FPA within its LCC is expected 
to survive reliably launch shock and vibration due to the 
very low mass of its constituent piece parts relative to the 
bonding strength of the bonding medium joining them; 
this can be verified in ground testing. This approach also 
maximizes traceability between the LCC-based FPA 
characterization and subsequent FPA flight performance. 
Imprecise thickness of the FPA/LCC/socket assembly and 
alignment of the FPA within the LCC can be compensated 
with sensor alignment relative to the optics. In addition, 
the planned flight design for DITP includes a fast steering 
mirror (FSM) to select dynamically the FPA FOV within 
the larger telescope field of regard: FPA misalignment 
within the LCC can be easily compensated by adjustment 
of the FSM center point. A flight-qualifiable LCC 
approach such as this is highly desirable as a cost- 
effective, limited-risk integration approach for 
demonstration of single or very low-availability FPA 
assets. 
6. CONCLUSION - PERFORMANCE SUMMARY 
We model our demonstration FPA with performance 
parameters de-convolved fiom FPA characterization data 
(from which quantum efficiency, dark current and readout 
noise can be determined) acquired under system operating 
condition (e.g. background levels, operating temperatures, 
and frame rates). Our model first calculates the 
integration time corresponding to the filling of the FPA’s 
charge integration sites (“’wells”) by background 
photocurrent. This integration time is then used to 
calculate background and dark current noise contributions, 
which are then combined statistically with the multiplexer 
readout noise. 
The signal to noise calculations presented in Figure 7 
correspond to the fight system observing a cold body 
target (290 Kelvin) with an emissivity-area product of 0.5 
square meters. Target acquisition (at SNR of 10) occurs 
at ranges approaching 350 km, s6ciently distant to 
permit timely ladar acquisition and tracking at several 
kilometer per second target approach speeds. These 
calculations are for the 40 pradian pixel IFOV, 25 cm 
collecting optics diameter, and ambient-temperature, F/3 
optical assembly with 23% emissivity, discussed in 
Section 2. 
Figure 7. SNR vs. Range For 7 to 10 pm waveband 
5-2119 
We acknowledge the support of our DITP sponsors at 
BMDO, including Dr Walt Dyer, and also Mr. Pat 
McGuirk and his colleagues at Mission Research 
Corporation for their careful attention to the development 
of the MSP sensor adaptation segment. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Paul D. LeVan, Ken W. Brown, Anjali Singh, “Multi- 
waveband Mared Focal Plane Arrays - Recent Trends 
for Lower-background Operations”, Proceedings qf 194th 
Meeting of the Electro-chemical Society, (Boston, MA) 
1998. 
[2] S.B. Grossman & RB. Emmons, “Perfoimance 
Analysis and Size Optimization of Focal Plane Arrays for 
Point-source Tracking Algorithm Applications”, Optical 
Engineering, 23 (2), 167, 1984. 
Paul LeVan is a 
senior astrophysicist 
and lea& the Space 
Focal Plane Array 
Group of the Space 
Vehicles Directorate 
at the Air Force 
Research 
Laboratory. In his 
previous posi,tion as 
astrophysicist with the passive sensors branch of the 
former Phillips Laboratory, his achievements included 
overseeing the export of infrared detectors to the 
European Space Agency’s space astronomical telescope, 
participating in the definition and procurement of 
infrared sensors for the Air Force Advanced .Electro 
Optical System (AMOS upgrade), and sponsoring the 
deveIopment of new-technology infrared focal plane 
arrays that image simultaneously in two wavebanch. He 
is the author of two US. patent applications, has 
published over 20 refereed journal article::, and 
frequently presents invited talks and acts as coqference 
chairperson at national technical conferences. 
James Lyke is a senior engineer and leads the 
Microsystems Group of the Space Vehicles Directorate at 
the Air Force Research Laboratory. He specializes in the 
development of advanced miniature electronics and 
adaptive architectures for aerospace applications, 
involving over 60 diyerent multi-chip module designs. He 
is the author of two US. patent applications, has 
published over 40 technical articles, including a book 
chapter and several best paper awards. 
James Duffey is a 
Principal Scientist . 
and head of the 
Electronics Group 
in the Albuquerque 
Division of Maxwell 
Technologies 
Incorporated. He is 
responsible for 
infrared electro- 
optical systems 
engineering, 
infrared detector and Focal Plane Array (FPA) 
characterization; radiation eyects in cryogenic 
electronics, detectors, and FPAs; as well as signal 
processing harabare for electro optical systems. He has 
extensive experience in FPA technology based on 
extrinsic silicon, Indium Antimonide, Mercury Cadmium 
Telluride, platinum silicide, Q WIPs, and silicon 
bolometer detectors. In addition he has characterized a 
variety of these FPAs, detector materials, and electronic 
readout materials in a radiation environment He has 
worked on FPA technology associated with a variety of 
sensor programs, including SSTS, SMXS, BSTS, FEWS, 
SBIRS, DCWS, NDEW; and GSTS. Prior to joining 
Maxwell he worked for Hughes Aircrap Company. He has 
a BSc in Engineering Physics from South Dakota State 
University, as well as a MSc and Ph.D. in Solid State 
Physics from The University of Nebraska. 
Brandon Paulsen is 
a senior mechanical 
engineer and 
manager of the Flight 
Cryostat Assembly 
Program at the Space 
Dynamics 
Laboratory, Utah 
State University, 
Logan Utah. He is 
responsible with the 
design, fabrication 
and’assembly of the 
FCA subsystem. He specializes in cryogenic heat transfer 
systems and fluid dynamics. Currently he is the lead 
mechanical engineer on the SBIRS Low Long Wave Scene 
and Target Generator test demonstration. Brandon 
received both MS. and B.S. of Mechanical Engineering 
from Utah State University prior to working at the Space 
Dynamics Laboratory. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate 
at Utah State University in Mechanical Engineering. 
Brandon has an active patent application in process for 
Cryogenic Thermal Switches and has published several 
papers on his work with developing these devices. 
5-2120 
