Extreme Temperature (-170C to +125C) Electronics for 
Nanorover Operation' 
Michael A. Newel1 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 1 109 
Michael.A.Newellid,ipl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-195 1 
Gary Bolotin 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 1 109 
Garv.S.Bolotin:@ipl.nasa.gov 
818-354-4126 
Christen Buchanan 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 1 109 
Christine. J.Bwhananii3ipl.nasa.aov 
8 18-354-0656 
Ryan Stern 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 1 109 
Ry~i.A.Stern(~ipl.nasa.no\i 
8 18-354-3072 
Tim Gregoire 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 91 109 
Timothy. W.Gregoire:@ipl.nasa.gov 
8 18-354-95 12 
Abstract-The design of the electronics control and data 
system for the extreme environment seen by a 1.3Kg, 1666 
cubic cm nanorover is presented. The Muses-CN electronics 
is a low mass, low volume, low power electronics platform 
that must operate over the -170C to +125C temperature 
range and a 1 Astronomical Unit (AU) fiee space radiation 
environment. The nanorover electronics is a 2.5 watt system 
that allows for 0.05 to 1 MIPS processing power and will 
control 10 motors for mobility and science instruments. 
Science measurements include Infkared (R) and Alpha Xray 
backscatter (AXS) spectrometers along with an Active Pixel 
Sensor (APS) camera and robotic telemetry signals. 
Theoretical basis for a low power electronics system with 
space and commercial grade electronics parts operating in 
this temperature range is presented. System and component 
temperature results along with the unique packaging 
constraints of the Chip on Board (COB) assembly are also 
discussed. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. THEORETICAL JUSTIFICATION 
4. MUSES-CN MISSION DESIGN D m s  
2. MISSION DRIVERS PAST, PRESENT & FUlWTG 
David Hykes 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 11 09 
Da\lid.IIy~es!~~ipl.nasa:gov 
818-354-061 1 
Thomas McCarthy 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 9 1 109 
Thomas.M.McCarthv~,ipl.nasa.gov 
818-354-4729 
Scott cozy 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena Ca. 91109 
Raymond. S. Com@,ipl.nasa. gov 
California Institute of Technology ' 
8 18-354- 1629 
5. DESIGN AND PHYSICAL IMPLEMENTATION 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
7. ACKNOWJADGEMENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Planned micro/nano sciencecraft imply low volume, mass 
and power resources. Smaller sciencecraft enable missions 
previously unfeasible and can translate into lower launch 
cost and the ability to fly more spacecraft per mission. 
Space electronic components are specified to work over a 
-55C to +125C temperature range. This temperature range is 
even narrower (-40C to +85C) for most industrial parts. A 
large number of planned nano sciencecraft (small baseball to 
basketball size landed and non landed spacecraft) will not 
have the mass, volume or power resources needed to keep 
the avionics and instrument electronics wann in a space 
environment. To add mass, volume or power to keep flight 
electronics within the standard operating temperature range 
of flight and commercial components erodes the ability to 
produce nano-sciencecraft. Being able to operate the 
electronics for these systems below standard electronics 
temperature ranges enables this new generation of micro and 
nano-sciencecraft. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
5-2443 
This paper will present the design environments of past 
spacecraft electronics and the needs of present and future 
nano-sciencecraft [ 13 electronics. We will then present the 
theoretical and empirical basis for the design of cold 
temperature operation of digital and analog electronic 
circuitry. We will next review the requirements of the 
Muses-CN nanorover and its design [2],[3],[4]. Finally, the 
Muses-CN nanorover electronics implementatiaa which 
allows for nanorover operations while addressing the mass, 
volume and power constraints of the Muses-CN mission will 
be presented. 
2. MISSION DRIVERS -PAST, PRESENT & F'UTURE 
When coming from, the paradigm of conventional size 
spacecraft it is easy'to assume that a standard electronics 
temperature environment will exist for micro and nano- 
sciencecraft. A comparison of standard size spacecraft with 
micro and nano size craft yields some insight into the 
temperature environments of much smaller spacecraft. 
A look at traditional interplanetary spacecraft 
The mass of traditional spacecraft from Mariner 2 tlo Cassini 
varied from 1S7Kg to 2668 Kg, excluding fuel. The more 
recent of these spacecraft had power sources from 400 to 
700 watts. Total spacecraft volumes varied from 5.4 to 27.2 
cubic meters. [5] All of these spacecraft used space rated 
electronics parts that could handle the radiation environment 
of an interplanetary flight. If additional mitigation of 
radiation was needed for parts or systems, mass existed for 
shielding the components behind structural metal OK specific 
dense materials. 
Traditional interplanetary spacecraft have relied on heat 
surplus from electronics or Radioisotope Thermonic 
Generators (RTGs) to keep the spacecraft electronics warm. 
Thermal louvers help control the temperature of the space 
rated parts in the electronics systems not only within the 
military temperature range but in some cases at a fairly 
constant temperature that had a few degree variance after the 
spacecraft cruise stabilized. 
Given the mass of standard spacecraft, additional tens to 
hundreds of kilograms in mass to allow for additional 
radiation or thermal shielding or larger power sources was a 
small fraction of the overall mass. 
The resource shgt 
The magnitude of the margins on micro and nano- 
sciencecraft are much smaller. For example 10% margin of 
the Muses-CN mass, volume and power resources yields just 
190 grams, 160 cubic centimeters and a quarter of a watt! 
[21 
implementations that allow for interfaces from an isolated 
electronics area to sensors and actuators are often 
unrealizable for even the simplest of systems. Often the heat 
is conducted away by the very wires that are interfacing to 
the system electronics [6], [7]. Such heat paths can also limit 
the time available to science craft to use sensors that want to 
stay cold for a long duration after a cooling period. An 
example: of this is operating an IR sensor at first light, after 
having a long night time period to cool a heat reservoir that 
keeps the IR detector at a needed low temperature operating 
range. 
Opportunities for electronics systems that operate very cold 
Given these requirements, an approach was taken to 
investigate how feasible it was to operate actual flight 
electronics at temperatures well beneath the standard 
temperature range of military, industrial and commercial 
electronics. We chose a practical limit of the temperature 
range easily reachable with liquid nitrogen in a temperature 
control chamber and arrived at -170C as a limit for the 
operation of electronics. Future investigations into operation 
with liquid helium sources are planned, but there are 
economic drivers to testing with liquid nitrogen over liquid 
helium. 
With the lower temperature bound set, we investigated 
expanding the operating range of military rated electronics 
components and systems made from these components over 
the -1701 to +125C range. 
JPL's Nanorover technology task worked toward two goals 
to develop an operational rover 1/10 (to eventually 1/100) 
the size of the Mars Pathfinder Soujoumer Mcrorover [SI 
and to investigate if standard integrated circuits would work 
over our new temperature range or if fully custom integrated 
circuits would be needed. The goal being to be able to 
operate our new nanorover in an asteroid environment.. 
Accomplishhg this will allow future sciencecraft operation 
in such temperature environments. 
3. THEORETICAL JUSTIFICATION AND APPROACH 
Part of the key to successful operation of electronics at 
extreme temperatures depends on the type of electronic 
compontmts used. Bipolar transistor parts rely on thermal 
excitation to allow for conduction and are subject to carrier 
freeze oiut as temperatures are lowered[9]. Gain decreases 
and reaches zero as the temperature is reduced beneath 
manufacturers ranges, usually beneath -5%. Therefore 
bipolar transistors or parts that use bipolar transistors have a 
built in degradation beneath their specified temperature 
range. MOSFETs on the other hand offer an attractive 
altemative as they are able to operate in this extended 
temperature range. 
While arguments can be made for the thermal insulation of 
such small systems as a way of the retaining heat, practical 
5-2444 
MOSFET operation 
General operation of MOSFET devices at extremely cold 
temperatures does not represent a degradation in functional 
performance as do bipolar devices. The gain of MOSFETs 
and MOSFET based devices actually improves as they are 
operated at colder temperatures. This is primarily due to the 
fact that the transconductance (gm) increases as a function of 
temperature since mobility (h) increases as temperature 
decreases.[lO][l 11 The Threshold voltage (VTH) shifts "up" 
(more positive for n-channel MOSFETs, more negative for 
p-channel MOSFETs) as a function of temperature, but does 
not diminish the overall MOSFET gain[ll]. Equation 1 
shows the MOSFET channel current in the active region of 
the transistor[l2]. 
Looking at equation 1, we note that Cox, W, L are constants 
of the device that is being tested. VGS is dependent on the 
operating voltages of the MOSFET. This leaves p,, and VTH 
as variables. p,, increases as the operating temperature drops 
dependent on the doping of the MOSFET channel material. 
This is on the order of 3.7 (cm'N-sec) I "C for moderate 
doped substrates to 2.2 (cm*N-sec) I "C for heavily doped 
Substrates'. VTH changes on the order of 2.7mV per degree 
C. While the raising Vm term can reduce the gain of 
equation (1) by l6%, the varying of the temperature f?om - 
55C to -170C increases gain (depending on doping 
concentrations) from 43% to 72% [lo]. Thus the MOSFET 
gain is of order 20% to 45% greater at -170C then at room 
temperature. 
Of importance here is that the transconductance increases as 
the temperature decreases even when the change in threshold 
voltage is factored in. Calculations and empirical 
measurements of various p and n channel MOSFEiTs were 
performed which support this model. 
Figure 1 shows the calculated results on the MOSFET 
family of curves as a function of temperature. Figure 2a and 
2b shows measured shifts in threshold voltage as a function 
of temperature for power MOSFETs. 
Effects of colder then -55C operation on digital electronics 
Expanding the effect of MOSFET gain to CMOS digital 
circuits we start by looking at the effect of temperature on 
1 1 -VGS=3V. T=+2SC - VGS-V, T=+25C VGS=3V, Tz175C VGS-V, T=175C I 
Figure 1: Calculated results of changes to a family of curves 
of a n-channel MOSFET as a function of temperature. 
the operation of an inverter. Temperature effects on an 
inverters can be generalized to all digital logic. 
Effects of temperature on an inverter-A Complementary 
MOSFET (CMOS) implementation of an inverter is shown 
in Figure 3. The effect of decreasing the temperature of the 
inverter, leads to decreased propagation delays due to the 
2.9 
2.0 I , ' ,  I I ,  I , ,  , I I I ,  I ,  I I 
~ 5 ~ 4 3 ~ ~ 8 ~ s c a a - a - s r - - ~  I I I ,  I ,  I 
I , I , , / ,  
Temperalure (Degrees C) 
Figure 2a: Threshold shifts as a function of temperature in a 
n-channel power MOSFET 
" , " , " , " 7 " , " - , " , " , " , - " " -  - " z " , " s ' D  
- - ~ z 2 ~ = = T c o 7 - w " 7 ~ m w  
Temperalure (Degrees C) 
I , I / I I , I I  
7 - m  
I I I , , , , ,  
Figure 2b: Threshold shifts as a function of temperature in a 
p-channel power MOSFET 
' Calculated using empirically fit mobility equations from [lo] 
5-2445 
increased gain, and decreased channel resistance of the 
internal MOSFETs at colder temperatures. 
Figure 4 shows the equivalent circuit of an inverter and - +125deg C 
helps to give some insight into the speed up of the digital 
signals through an inverter. As a practical matter the channel 
"on" resistance decreases as the temperature decreases. This 
coupled by the increased current supplied by the increased 
gain of the MOSFETs allows for the subsequent load 
capacitance (of the gates of driven CMOS logic) to charge 
or discharge quicker at colder temperatures. 
SPICE simulations were run using the MOSFET models of 
the gate array used in our actual implementation. These 
1 
I ' " ' I " ' ' I  ~ ~ " I " " I " " I  ~ " ~ I " " I " " I ' " ' I  MOSFETs were used to implement inverters and other logic <I a * * 3" U" 3% I* M 
functions for simulation. The graph of the decrease in xFmr . r ,  
propagation delay as a function of temperature can be seen 
in Figure 5. The drive of the MOSFETs and load propagation delay as a function of temperature 
capacitance are those internal to the gate may. The 
propagation delay decreases to 66% of the room temperature 
value at -175C. Measurements were also taken to see the 
affect of decreasing temperature on a standard SEX CMOS 
(74C04) inverter. These results are taken at room 
temperature and at -170C. Figures 6a and 6b show the 
propagation delay decreased to 59% of room temperature 
value at -170C. 
Figure 5: CMOS Inverter SPICE simulation showing 
I J+ 
Figure 3: CMOS Inverter 
Figure 6a: 74C04 Inverter transitions at 5 volts, 23C. 
vcc 
CLOAD 
Figure 4: Simplifled Inverter and load capacitance model. The effects on the inverter as a function of temperature 
generalize to combinational CMOS logic gates. This is 
5-2446 
useful from a system design point of view, whether the 
combinational logic is intemal to a single chip or with use of 
CMOS components at a board level. 
(which was still a negative hold time) and with a worst case 
OnS hold time. 
Effects of an inverter driving a D jl@ jlop-Initial 
excitement of increase speed in CMOS devices is mitigated 
by the fact that faster response time of an gate driving a D 
flip flop may present hold time violations on the D flip flop. 
If the D flip flop remained at room temperature and a 
combinational gate driving it decreased it’s operating 
temperature to -170C the possibility for a hold time 
violation occurring does increase. In practice, there are a 
number of mitigating circumstances, primarily the fact that 
all aspects of CMOS devices are speeding up as the devices 
are cooling down. 
D jlip jlop hold time analysis for Gate a r r q  jlip jlops- 
When the digital circuitry (combinational logic and flip 
flops) is incorporated into an integrated circuit (gate array or 
ASIC) there are two ways to analyze for hold time 
propagation. 
The first approach we used was to simulate equivalent 
combinational logic and flip flops using the MOSFET 
models from the manufacturers line. Even though the models 
for the flip flops are not given, the models that we made (see 
figure 7) with appropriate load and routing capacitance had 
the same order of magnitude negative hold time (and other 
parameters) as the flip flop parameters given by our gate 
array manufacturers. Our circuit models tracked the gate 
array manufacturers estimate equations over the standard 
temperature range. These models were then tested over the 
extended cold temperature range and showed that the 
negative hold times actually got more negative as 
temperature approached -170C. 
In reality the hold time requirements of the flip flop will 
track (to some fidelity) the decrease in the propagation delay 
applied to the D input. Using models for the D flip flop, D 
gate delay and clock tree one could simulate all inputs 
arriving at the flip flop over temperature. This was the 
second approach to analyzing hold time at the extreme cold 
temperatures. Timing analysis was then done using the new 
simulation derived parameters at cold temperature. A second 
set of extrapolated timing parameters were obtained by 
comparing the decrease of the propagation time of an 
inverter constructed out of the MOSFET parameters for the 
line at -170 and -55 and using 
this as a scaling factor for the D flip flop parameters. 
Equation 2 allows for calculation of the hold time presented 
to the D flip-flop input being analyzed in figure 8. This 
calculated available hold time can then be compared with 
the hold time requirement of the D flip flop. 
Using this approach, the hold time fiom simulation and 
extrapolated driving values compared favorably with the 
extrapolated hold time requirements of the D flip flop 
PRESET I 
CLOCK -ltExm-Q 
1 1 - 1  
D 45 
Figure 7. D Flip Flop circuit model. 
An even more conservative approach utilized the 
extrapolated parameters used in equation 2 with positive flip 
flop hold time, and zero delay in the combinational logic 
and associated routing. Even with these extreme bounds 
there was still hold time margin available to the flip flop. 
Djlipjlop hold time analysis for board level jl@jlops- 
At a board level, all flip flops are can be analyzed with an 
approach similar to those used at the integrated circuit level. 
At the board level we are adding wait states as needed to 
make sure that worst case timing is satisfied. 
Clock 
I Source FF 
I Logic I 
I 
Figure S. D Flip Flop simulation test circuit. 
t(min) = t(rise/fall) + t(clk-q) + t(1ine) - t(skew) (2) 
A unique approach can also be used at the system level to 
correct for propagation delay for parts that one does not 
control the intemal design. It is possible to make up for lack 
of margin on synchronous designs by lowering the operating 
voltage of the entire digital system. This will slow down the 
propagation delay to the levels seen at room temperature. 
Figure 9 shows the measurement of the same inverter 
operating at -170C in figure 6b with the operating voltage 
lowered to 3.9 volts. One can see that the propagation delay 
is back to 20.5ns, comparable with the 19.711s seen in figure 
6a. We also successfully showed that this approach can be 
5-2447 
used with complex commercial processor which failed to 
operate at cold temperatures due to the decrease of intemal 
propagation delay of the component. 
Z V  
sns 
8 V  
Figure 9. Recovery of inverter timing margin by 
lowering operating voltage. 
All told, these techniques allow the use of standard digital 
combination and synchronous logic components already 
employed in spacecraft electronics design and if the 
technologies pass simple criteria, allow one to extend design 
operation well beneath the partshystem cold temperature 
range. 
EHects of colder then -55C operation on analog electronics 
Again, MOSFETs and CMOS circuits are preferred for 
analog use at extreme cold temperatures. As was the case of 
obtaining exact flip flop models fkom digital integrated 
circuit manufacturers, getting exact intemal circuit 
representations for analog components is very involved, and 
even perhaps not possible. The approach taken by our team 
was to, as thoroughly as possible, verify that the analog 
component device was as much as possible all PtQOSFET 
based, and then to measure parameters over the extreme cold 
temperature range. 
Below is a compilation of components tested and accepted 
for use in extreme cold, 50Krad radiation environmt:nts. 
POWER MOSFETs-Commercial power MOSFETs were 
first looked at for their small size consideration. The 
threshold voltage was characterized over the extreime cold 
temperatures (Figure 2a & 2b). General operation1 at cold 
temperature over time and cycling was verified. After cold 
temperature operation, radiation testing of the MOSFETs to 
a total ionizing dose of 50Krad was performed. The 
MOSFETs actually operated up to 75Krad total dose. While 
this was surprising initially, the low threshold voltage used 
by these parts implies a thin gate oxide between the gate and 
channel which reduces the volume for trapped chiuge[13], 
and gaves a relatively high total dose numbers for a 
commercial process. With power MOSFETs characterized 
over temperature and radiation, a component that allowed 
for both power control and general purpose amplifier existed 
for use i%t cold temperatures. 
Analog Multiplexer-A rad hard MOSFET based 16 to 1 
analog imultiplexer was tested over temperature. Figure 10 
shows a block diagram of the analog multiplexer. Given that 
the multiplexer utilized MOSFETs for the actual analog 
signal switching and had CMOS logic buffering the 
switching MOSFETs, the previous MOSFETKMOS cold 
temperature work supported testing of this part over 
temperature. Even though the part appeared to pass all the 
gates, one can never get the exact circuit to analyze, and 
extreme cold temperature testing has been an efficient way 
to find if there are any temperature sensitive components 
and or design practices in place. 
In the case of the Multiplexers that we selected, all worked 
fine down to -170C. Gain, linearity, and even “break before 
make” switching were tested. The gain and linearity were 
well within standard specification ranges at cold 
temperatures. The “break before make” test showed, that 
while the period of time between breaking of one connection 
and the making of another did decrease slightly, that the 
“break before make” operation was not violated at extreme 
cold temperatures. 
Analog 8witch- A rad hard MOSFET based analog switch 
was tested over temperature. Figure 11 shows a block 
diagram of the analog switch. Given that the analog switch 
utilized MOSFETs for the actual analog signal switching 
and had CMOS logic buffering the switching 
IN0 
P I 0  
A1 
A2 
A3 
ENABLE 
OUT 
IN15 
DIGITAL SELECTS ANALOG 
SWTCHES 
Figure 10. Block diagram of a 16 to 1 multiplexor. 
MOSFETs, testing of this part over temperature seemed 
appropriate. Again gain, linearity, and “break before make” 
switching were tested. Again, gain and linearity were well 
within standard specification ranges at extreme cold 
temperatures. Also again, “break before make” was not 
violated ;at extreme cold temperatures. 
5-2448  
- "'OUT 
OUTllN 
CONTROL 
Figure 11. Analog Switch block diagram 
Operation AmpliJiers-In the case of the CMOS 
Operational Amplifiers, a number of interesting challenges 
arose. The first was that there was no radhard CMOS 
operational amplifiers to be found. This prompted radiation 
testing of the two candidate CMOS operational amplifiers in 
parallel with cold temperature testing of these amplifiers. 
While one op-amp had good radiation numbers 
(>lOOKrad)[ 141, it exhibited non-linear amplification, and 
eventually severe distortion at extreme temperatures. This 
was due to the final stage class AB amplifier MOSFETs not 
tracking over temperature. The second operational amplifier 
worked great down to -170C and below. Gain product 
bandwidth actually increased down to -170C. At issue was 
the radiation susceptibility at 10Krad total dose. Other 
candidate commercial CMOS operational amplifers were 
tested cold, and those with final push pull stage 
amplification showed distortion at cold temperatures. Given 
this situation and without schedule, budget, or resource 
reserves to fabricate a custom CMOS operation amplifier, 
we chose to shield the op-amps with tantalum to allow for 
operation over the 50Krad radiation range. 
Analog Component: Voltage Reference-A 2.5 volt 
bandgap reference had been tested for previous work over 
the -125 to +25 temperature range[l5]. These previous test 
results (shown in figure 12) show that the reference does 
decrease slightly from 2.487V at room temperature to 2.448 
volts at -125C. We expanded the cold temperature testing 
range to -170C'and saw the same monotonic decrease down 
to about 2.432 volts. As seen in figure 13 the voltage 
decrease was monotonic over the extreme temperature 
range. Testing began after a cold soak of 45 minutes, and the 
temperature was then increased. While the parts are 
monotonic and repeatable, calibration is recommended for 
each part. 
Analog Component: A/D Converters-Cold temperature 
testing on a number of CMOS A/D converters was 
performed. All performed well over the extreme temperature 
environment. In the end, design interface considerations 
were made for a serial interface 14 bit CMOS A D  
converter. Again, radiation shielding was selected to 
overcome the total dose limitations, 17Krad for the selected 
part. Integral and differential non-linearity tests while 
successful to 14 bits at room temperature, were only 
accurate to 12 bits in the extreme cold temperature range. 
All N D s  tested were successive approximation type 
converters which had internal resistor or capacitor, they also 
had the capability for external voltage reference. 
Temperature (Degrees C) 
Figure 12. LM285 voltage reference as a function of 
temperature. 
Effects of colder then -55C operation on passive 
components-Testing on resistors, capacitors, inductors and 
nano-D connectors were also performed in an effort to come 
up with an understanding of component variations at 
extreme temperatures that would allow component selection. 
Considerable attention was paid to effects of cycling on 
these components as the fabrication process are very 
different then those for Silicon. 
Resistors showed very little change as a function of 
temperature, and adhered specified PPM change in 
resistance per degree C over the extreme temperature range. 
Cycling of 40 cycles did not show significant changes for 
carbon and thin film resistors. 
Capacitors in general showed a decrease over the extreme 
temperature regime, but the decrease could be controlled via 
which capacitor type was selected. Tantalum, glass and 
ceramic capacitors were tested for over 80 temperature 
cycles from -175C to +125. No permanent change in 
capacitance was observed or detected in statistical testing of 
the capacitors measured over 80+ temperature cycles [ 151. 
Inductors also showed a decrease in inductance over 
temperature and care needed to be afforded the core material 
and core winding. 
In general the variation of the capacitors was not an issue for 
decoupling capacitors. For circuits where the capacitive and 
inductive reactances were important for circuit operation, 
values were usually chosen for worst case cold temperature 
operation. In these cases, either circuit demands did not 
mind the increased value of inductance or capacitance at 
room temperature, or close loop feedback inherent in circuit 
operation compensated for device changes. 
5-2449 
NanoD connectors, connectors that are a factor of 3 smaller 
them the popular micro-D connectors worked incredibly 
well when cycled 10 times over the -170 to +125C 
temperature range. The test was constantly monitoring 
contact resistance on a number of different size connectors 
available, from 9 pin to 65 pin. The contact resistance varied 
slightly over temperature but had no measurable variance in 
resistance measured at specific temperatures over the ten 
cycles observed. [ 171 No discontinuities were observed, 
which was the major concern we had with connwtors in 
general over our extreme temperature range. The nano-D 
connectors were chosen due to volume and mass Constraints, 
and the need for the interfacing the large number of interface 
signals (>600) in the small volume of a nanorover. 
Operational 
Timle 
Asteroid 
Rotation 
Available components and design philosophy for electronics 
design over -1 70 to +125C 
2 weeks 2 weeks 
19-38 hours 19-38 hours 
Given the theoretical and empirical justification far using 
digital and analog active devices, along with various passive 
devices we now have the components to design e1t:ctronics 
to operate over the -170C to +125C temperature range. In 
general the design philosophy utilized in this design effort 
was one of implementing functions digitally whenever 
possible. That is, operating MOSFETs in the active or 
saturation region and not in triode or h e a r  region. If analog 
circuits are need, use closed loop active feedback so you do 
not need to depending on well behaved (characterized 
measured results of) capacitance, inductance and resistance 
changes. Try to design the circuits so that the temperature 
variation of the passive components are bounded by a 
minimum or maximum needed value. For example, use 
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) of variable voltage 
supplies and motors instead of DACs. 
This toolkit of electronics components not only handles the 
cold temperature operation, but it also covers a radiation 
Total Ionizing Dose (TID) environment of 50Krad. 
Increases in radiation levels seen by the science craR above 
50Krad will entail further shielding. Shielding will i~nly get 
one so far, perhaps 150Krad given the sciencecraft volumes 
anticipated. In lieu of shielding, custom componeiits with 
better radiation characteristics then commercial components 
could be used.. It should be noted that the military parts 
have numbers in the 300Krad to lMrad ranges over their 
standard temperature ranges. At constant extreme cold 
temperatures there is greater chance of trapped charge 
induced by radiation, staying trapped. Without thermal 
agitation, the charge is less likely to anneal out. In our case 
we expect to have temperature cycles from the extreme cold 
to the +1OOC range which should mitigate this situation. 
the MOSFET, is usually associated with MOSFET 
geometries. In an environment where the temperature is 
extremely low, the increased mobility allows for some of the 
faster trajectory carriers to imbed into the gate oxide also. 
Our maldels conservatively imply a minimal 8 month 
lifetime. Our testing of the prototype computer board which 
has the largest number of dense small feature size 
components shows no errors over 3 days of continuous 
operation and monitoring. We are currently only slating 
these electronics for missions with time frames on the order 
of 2 to 41 weeks when the electronics will be operating and 
therefore subject to hot carrier injection We have tests in 
the future to characterize electronics operation at constant 
extreme temperature operation over months. 
4. MUSES-CN MISSION DRIVERS 
Application of theory to a flight rover: 
Spec@ environmental needs of the Muses-CN Nanorover 
After the demonstration of a prototype nanorover and cold 
temperature techniques, a flight opportunity arose on the 
Muses-C asteroid mission fiom ISAS[19]. The flight 
opportunity had the following mass, volume, power and 
radiation constraints on the Muses-CN rover, and are 
presented in Table 1. 
A general review of the requirements of the electronics for 
the Muses-CN rover are shown below in a bulleted list, and 
pictoriall:y in Figure 13. 
Table 1 : Resource constraints of Muses-CN 
Resource Electronics 
Power 2.5 Watts 2.5 Watts 
Radiation 50 KRad 
There is one last issue that should be brought up. That is 
lifetime issues due to hot carrier injection. [18], [19]. Hot 
carrier injection, a phenomenon that allows for imbedding of 
carriers from the MOSFET channel into the gate oxide 
causing build up of charge and eventually non funt:tion of 
5-2450 
Overview of rover electronics requirement 
Computer with low power and sufficient memory 
Analog signal chain & A/D 
10 brushless motor drivers 
A bi-directional9600 baud radio interface 
General digital interface to implement science 
External access (ground and spacecraft) interface 
Switching regulator power supplies 
Operation only from solar cells in nominal mode 
64 channels (science and telemetry) 
3-phase PWM drive with hall feedback 
control and mobility. 
This allows for interfacing and control of: 
10 brushless DC motors. 
8 for mobility (4 for wheels & 4 for struts) 
2 for optics 
A 256x256 CMOS Active Pixel Sensor 
A 256 channel IR spectrometer 
An Alpha Xray Backscatter spectrometer 
14 temperature channels 
6 solar sensors (one for each body side) 
A bi-directional9600 baud radio interface 
20 power switches for power management. 
Control of system clock to allow for power 
Operation from a 2.5 watt solar panel. 
management of digital electronics 
1 
A Digital and Analog 
Control 
Analog and 
Digital Data 
Analog and 
Control, Digital Data 
Serial Data, 
and Power 
A I  I 
L I A  
Analog and 
ROVER ELECTRONICS I Radio I I 
Digital Data Analog 
and Hall 
I 
Analog and 
Digital Data 
Engineering Motor and Other 
Telemetry I I PWM Actuators 
Solar Panel -?i 
Direct Access 
Data 
Digital 
Control 
Power Switches 
Figure 13. The Muses-CN Rover top level interface. 
5-2451 
Other Sensors 
and Encoders 
Figure 14. A bloclk diagram of the Muses-CN electronics. 
These constraints coupled with the mechanical and 
electronics volume and mass needs to allow for mobility 
of this nanorover clearly point to a sciencecrafi design 
with minimal mass, volume and power for thermal 
control. The Muses-C Asteroid mission will pt:rform 
sample return and deployment of the nanorover on 
Asteroid 1982SF39 in 2003. 
5. DESIGN AND PHYSICAL IMPLEMENTATION 
Electronics Design Implementation 
Figure 14 expands on the implementation of the rover 
electronics box shown in the block diagram in figure 13. 
The design implemented uses the approach and technique 
described earlier, CMOS and MOSFET devices, digital 
control whenever possible, and thorough modeling and 
testing of analog design. 
The choice for a 32 bit processor allows for more power 
efficient operation when using the metric of instructions 
per joule. The idea was to maximize the power 
consumption for computing and data movement on an 
instruction basis. Memory sue was determined for ability 
to control the rover and storage of the science for either 
delayed or immediate transmission. Operation on the 
asteroid will imply periods where the asteroid is not 
illumiriated and therefore the rover will not have power. 
Rad hard EEPROM was the storage medium of choice for 
nonvallatile data storage. 
Interface between the CPU and memory, A D ,  actuators, 
power control, science instruments (Active Pixel sensor 
(APS) and both spectrometers) along with any digital or 
analog inputs was controlled by the Gate Array. 
Subblocks of the Gate Array control all fine grain timing 
need for all instruments as well as the brushless D.C. 
motor control which included a sine generation table, 
period control and PWMs drivers for all 10 motors on the 
rover. The Gate Array also includes a section that 
implements a system clock divider that allows for control 
of power consumption of the digital electronics by 
controlling the clock rate to the digital electronics. 
Control of the power is then largely regulated by (3) and 
is linear with frequency (0. Voltage (V) and capacitance 
(C) can be considered constants. 
P = CVZf (3) 
5-2452 
All sections of the electronics shown in Figure 14 were 
prototyped and tested cold. The flight processor was 
implemented on the same gate array as the special 
functions implemented by our team here at JPL. This 
allowed for the Gate Array to leverage off of the cold 
temperature testing being performed on the Processor. 
The design of the CPU implemented in the Gate Array 
was a synchronous MIPS processor. Synchronous design 
was implemented in our special function Gate Array. This 
coupled with the cold temperature analysis described 
above, gives high confidence the design of the gate array 
will operate as specified. 
Electronics Physical Implementation 
The implementation of the rover electronics is via Chip 
On Board (COB) assemblies that fit inside the nanorover 
body. Partitioning of the functions worked out across six 
single sided board assemblies. The functions are 
partitioned as follows: a computer board, two (half size) 
memory boards, an analog measurement and A/D board, a 
motor driver board and the switching regulator board. 
Four of these board assemblies are full size (see figure 15) 
and are joined into two double side board assemblies. The 
remaining two boards are half size and are joined into a 
third double sided board assembly. Figure 16 shows a 
side view of the locations of the board assemblies relative 
to the rover optical bench. 
The reason for fabricating single sided board assemblies 
and joining them together after fabrication is due to 
component density needs and the tooling needs during 
manufacturing. 
Test COB boards have gone through 100 thermal cycles 
and show no crack propagation in the die attach or any 
electrical connections where solder was used instead of 
bond wires. At the inception of the project an initial stress 
analysis performed for large die (0.8 an’) on a polyamide 
board material when the die was subject to a large 
temperature delta and when the die was subject to a large 
normal board deflection force. In both cases the sheer 
needed to cause the die to detach fiom the board was not 
exceeded. Additional testing will be done on the 
engineering models. 
Below is another bulleted list that summarizes the board 
partitioning: 
1.5 Mbytes SRAM 
1 .O Mbytes EEPROM 
ASIC for glue and interface to motors & 
science instruments. 
Analog signal chain & A/D Board: 
64 analog channels 
10 bit A/D 
Brushless motor driver board: 
10 - 3 phase brushless D.C. motor drivers 
hall effect sensor interface 
Switching regulator Power Board: 
startup linear supply 
fixed 5volt switching regulator 
0.3 to 4.4 volt.variable voltage switching 
POR circuitry 
regulator 
12.6 cm 
b 
12 
cm 
b 0 
5.3 cm 
Figure 15. The Muses-CN top and bottom electronics 
board assembly footprint. 
Figures 17 gives a frame of reference of the rover 
electronics boards shown in Figures 15 and 16 with the 
engineering unit optical bench. Figure 18 gives a 
reference of the optical bench with a scale rover model. 
Computer Board: 
32 bit Synova Mongoose V 
a rad hard version of LSl’s 
moo0 
5-2453 
MEMORY <-=I POWER SUPPLY \ - 
MOTOR / -  
DRlVERS 
OPTICAL 
BENCH 
Figure 16. Side view of board stackup 
--- 
Figure 17. The top of the Muses-CN Optical test bench, to 
which some of electronics boards assemblies mount. 
rover for comparison. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
Expanded temperature range operation of regular devices 
This w'ork covers the implementation of a design approach 
for using standard and custom components over an 
extended temperature range and achieving reliable 
functional operation. 
A theoretical justifcation for using MOSFETs in an 
extended temperature range was presented. An approach 
to analysis of CMOS digital components was described at 
a board and integrated circuit level. 
A unique approach that allows for compensating of digital 
CMOS components which have hold time margin 
problem at cold temperature was described. While the 
lowering of the voltage will recover propagation delay, it 
does so at the cost of noise margin. 
The approach has been used to enable a flight nanorover 
design that will operate between -170C to +125C. Issues 
related to extreme temperature operation will have to be 
addressed in future nano-sciencecraft and we believe that 
this approach will help to enable future nano-sciencecraft. 
There are issues to be looked at regarding hot carrier 
injectio:n degradation effects in MOSFET based devices to 
enable longer duration nano-sciencecraft missions. 
5-2454 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research described in this paper was carried out by 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Reference herein to any commercial product, process, or 
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or 
otherwise, does not constitute or imply its endorsement by 
the United States Government or the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Brian Wilcox, Annette Nasif, Michael Newell, Jan A. 
Tarsala and Sarita Thakoor, “Miniature Instrumented Robotic 
Vehicles for Exploration” September 1997, NASA Tech Brief 
Vol21, No. 9 ItemNumber 101. 
[2] NASA website 
http://spacescience.nasa.gov/osstech/sec 105.htm 
[3]ISAS website 
http://www.muses-c.isas.ac.jp 
[4 ]NASA website 
http://sse.jpl.nasa.gov/missions/ast_mis 
[5] JPL public Webpage 
httu:llwww. ipl.nasa.~ov/cassini/englisblspacecraft/ 
s.html 
[6] Henry Stone, JPL, personal Communication. 
[7] Gary Bolotin, JPL, personal communication. 
[8] Brian Wilcox, JPL, personal communication. 
[9] G.W. Nuedeck, ‘‘The bipolar junction transistor”, Modular 
Series on Solid State Devices, Addision-Wesley, Reading 
Massachusetts, 1989 
[lo] Pierret RF., 1989, Advanced Semiconductor 
Fundamentals, Modular Series on Solid State Devices pp 
188- 196 
[ll] Baker RJ., Li H.W, and Boyce D.E., 1998, CMOS 
Circuit design, layout and simulation , IEEE Press, pp 175- 
178 
[12] Johns, D.A and K. Martin, “Analog Integrated Circuit 
Design” J. Wiley, New York, 1997, pg 29. 
on MOS devices and circuits’’ John Wiley New York, 
1989 
[14] C.J. Kee, A.H. Johnston, “Comparison of Total dose 
Effects on Micropower @-Amps: Bipolar and CMOS,” IEEE 
Radiation Effects Data Workshop. 
[15] Chris Stell, JPL, internal cm”mcation. 
[ 161 Elaine Gee, Caltech, personal communication 
[ 171 Allen Sirota, JPL, internal communication 
[18] D.K. Ferry in “Basic properties of semiconductors” 
T.S. Moss, P.T. Landsberg editors, North Holland, 
Amsterdam, pp 1039-1077. 
[19] Lugli P, and DK Ferry 1985 EEE Transaction 
Electronics Devices ED-32,243 1 
Michael Newell has J3een years of 
experience designing and analyzing 
digital and analog systems for space 
flight, and is currently a senior 
member of technical sta8 at JPL. For 
the last four years he has been 
investigating operation of CMOS 
devices at cryogenic temperatures for 
both the Nanorover Technology Task 
and as the Muses-CN Cognizant Engineer. He has a 
patent for his work on a 32 bit risk processor MCM with 
reconJgurable hardware. His flight work includes design 
of integrated circuits design for the Cassini Spacecra9, 
lead designer of the APEYfight experiment, design team 
lead of the Mars Environmental Compatibility 
Assessment, along with design analysis on the Sojoumer 
Rover. Research work includes embedded systems for 
research robots, special purpose microcontrollers and his 
current task, leading the Gilgamesh super computer 
hardware design team at JPL. He has a BSEE from the 
California State Polytechnic University, Pomona. 
Ryan Stern has been an associate 
member of the technical stajjf at JPL for 
nearly 5 years while simultaneously 
being a jidl-time student. He has 
worked on the MECA and MUSES-CN 
projects doing circuit design and cold- 
temperature electronics analysis. He 
received his BA in Physics from 
Pomona College in 1999, and is currently in the Master’s 
program at UCLA for Electrical Engineering. 
[13] P.V. Dressendorfer, T.P. Ma, “Ionizing radiation effects 
5-2455 
David Hykes has fourteen years in 
spacecraft circuit modeling, analysis 
and design. He has performed 
transistor level modeling, parts stress, 
worst case, and failure mode analysis 
for various defense systems. As a senior 
member of technical stagat JPL he has 
worked in reliability and mission 
assurance on the Cassini, MSR, and X33 AFE tasks. He 
has designed a number of analog systems for X33 AFE, 
Athena and Muses-CN, and is currently perjbrming 
analog design for the Mars Exploration Rover. He has a 
BS degree in engineering from Califomia State 
University, Fullerton. 
Gary Bolotin has 15 years of design 
and analysis experience in the area of 
digital integrated circuit and board 
design. Gary was the lead designer of 
the Electronics for the Mar Pathfinder 
Sojoumer Rover. He also designed many 
gate arrays for the Cassini Spacecraji 
which is currently on the way to Satum. 
He  ear^ on at JPL he received a patent for his work in 
the MAX fault tolerant computer architecture and 
implementation. He is currently the deputy manager of 
the Avionic Equipment section at JPL. He has a BSEE 
from Illinois Institute of Technology and a master's 
degreepom University of Illinios. 
Timothy Gregoire has been a Senior 
Electronic Technician at JPL since 
primarily as a designer and task leader 
on the development of automated 
thermal control systems designed to 
simulate solarflwc and orbital thermal 
transients in JPL 's space simulators. 
These systems were successfully employed in the MLS, 
TOPEX, NSCAT, PMRR, Mars Pathfinder, Cassini, and 
MSR Solar Thermal Vacuum Tests (STVT,). He has also 
designed and built optical benches and h e r  systems for 
several metrology tasks and provided key technical 
support to US. Army sponsored projects such as ASAS 
and A M T  Since May of '97, Timothy has been 
providing electronic support to the Nanorover 
development task and the MUSESCNproject. 
1989. In that time he has served 
Thomas McCarthy is a Member of 
Technical Stafl at JPL. He has co- 
designed a Gate Array on the 
MUSES-CN Rover. In addition to 
Gate Array design and test, he has 
designed and prototyped numerous 
electronic systems for the MUSES-CN 
Rover and OlMRE including the 
protapping of the 32-bit RISC processor and Ethernet 
boards. He has also been a member of the team which 
performed two successful interface tests with the Japanese 
Muses-CN spacecraft interface. Previous work included 
developing Hardware Tests for the Pathfinder Sojourner 
Rover. Tom eamed a BS in Electrical Engineering from 
the University of Notre Dame, in 1997. 
Christine Buchanan is a senior 
member of technical stag and is 
current group supervisor of the ASIC 
Design group for the Avionic 
Equipment section at JPL. She has 10 
years experience with space jlight 
hardware in the areas of Gate Array 
design and hardware test & 
integration. She is a verilog HDL designer and has spent 
the last three years co-designing the A4USES-CN Gate 
Array which includes the Nanorover motor controllers 
and other rover & spacecraft functions. She is an expert 
in ana' has consulted numerous flight projects both Iocalb 
and intemationally on their Mil-Std-1553 bus 
implementation and test strategies. At JPL she has 
worked on Cassini, Mars Volatiles and Climate Surveyor, 
Deep Space I ,  Low Power Serial Data Bus, Space 
Technology Research Vehicle, X2000, and Team-X She 
has a BS degree in Electrical Engineering from 
Califomia State University, Northridge. 
R. Scott C o q  is currently a Member of 
Techn,ical Stag at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory in Pasadena, California. 
Prior to his arrival at JPL in 1997, he 
worked for four years at the Robotics 
Research Laboratory at the University 
of Southem Califomia. During his three 
years at JPL, he has worked on the 
Nanorover Technology Task, as well as 
the M7JSES-CN team, where he is currently designing and 
testing flight electronics. He holds a bachelor's degree in 
Computer Engineering/Computer Science from the 
University of Southem California, and a degree in 
Electronic Engineering @om Los Angeles Trade 
Technical College. 
5-2456 
