Concurrent Storm Damage Data Collection by 
High Altitude Airborne IFSAR 
Harold A. Malliot 
High Altitude Mapping Missions, Inc. 
1 1745 Winding Way 
Los Altos, CA 94024 
I~halliot@aol.com 
Abstract - This paper discusses the use of high altitude 
airborne interferometric synthetic aperture radar (IFSAR) 
operations for concurrent severe storm damage data col- 
lection. The primary storm damage observable is changes 
in surface topography induced by storm effects. The sur- 
face topography in form of a digital surface matrix (DSM) 
derived from concurrent IFSAR operations is compared to 
an archived DSM collected prior to the storm. Informa- 
tion on storm damage is developed from analysis of DSM 
changes. Combined with a- priori photo and radar im- 
agery, the technique provides means for detection, loca- 
tion, quantification and characterization of storm damage. 
The paper discusses limitations to the concept due pri- 
marily to radar signal propagation effects. Results of 
simulations of IFSAR measured surface topography 
changes are presented. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
3. PROPAGATION LIMITATIONS 
4. SIMULATION EXAMPLES 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
2. SYSTEM CONCEPT 
1. INTRODUCTION 
National and state emergency management agencies need 
accurate and concurrent storm damage information for 
effective emergency response planning and implementa- 
tion. This data is needed so that the agencies can provide 
rapid emergency response to save lives, provide shelter, 
and restore critical it&astructure. Some examples of 
storm damage of concern to these emergency manage- 
ment agencies include damaged and destroyed infra- 
structure, flooded areas, landslides, debris, fallen trees, 
and damaged and destroyed dwellings. Examples of infta- 
structure of concern include power distribution (lines, 
facilities, and equipment); communication (cables, facili- 
ties, and equipment); transportation (roads, bridges, and 
highways); government (law enforcement, fire, and medi- 
cal facilities). 
Accessibility to the area where the storm is in progress is 
the primary problem that hinders conducting effective 
concurrent storm damage assessment. Personnel cannot 
be deployed during the storm for direct observations. 
Even if personnel could be deployed, the number required 
to cover the area of a large area, moving storm would be 
prohibitive. The only alternative is to use remote sensing 
to collect data that can be interpreted to detect, locate, 
classify, and measure the extent of storm damage. The 
technical problem is to implement a system that can 
safely collect useful data during the storm. 
This paper proposes the use of surface topography data 
for this purpose. The proposed concept would use air- 
borne interferometric synthetic aperture radar (IFSAR) to 
collect surface topography data during a storm. This to- 
pography data would be processed with topography data 
collected prior to the storm to detect areas where signifi- 
cant surface topography changes have occurred during the 
storm. Analysis of this topography change data in a GIs 
can provide the locations and extent of possible damage. 
Further analysis with photo images and maps of the dam- 
age areas can provide information on the likely type of 
damage and the urgency of emergency response needed. 
Of the various remote sensing technologies and platform 
options that one may consider, only an airborne micro- 
wave synthetic aperture radar (SAR) flying above the 
storm offers the endurance and large area, high-resolution 
surface imaging capability needed to safely continuously 
monitor storm damage. While photographic and video 
images provide very high resolution, they cannot be col- 
lected through cloud cover and during nighttime. 
SAR is the only high resolution imaging technique that 
will work under these conditions. Microwave illumination 
from the radar transmitter will propagate through storm 
clouds to the surface, and radiation backscattered from the 
surface will propagate back to the radar receiver. The ef- 
fects of the atmosphere and heavy rain on system per- 
formance are evaluated. The SAR image processing pro- 
duces high-resolution images and S A R  interferometry 
provides high- resolution topography information. 
The proposed concept solves the problem of accessibility 
to the storm area. The use of IFSAR provides the capabil- 
I 0-7803-6599-2/01$10 0 2001 IEEE I 
2-695 
ity to collect large area, high-resolution 
image and surface topography data 
through the storm clouds and heavy 
rain. The high altitude aircraft provides 
the capability to conduct long duration, 
safe IFSAR operations over areas 
where severe storm damage is in prog- 
ress. 
2. SYSTEM CONCEPT 
The proposed concept for IFSAR con- 
current storm damage data collection is 
illustrated in figure 1. An airborne IF- 
SAR flying above the storm collects 
IFSAR signals from the surface and 
transmits IFSAR signal data is to a 
processing site. The IFSAR data is 
processed to produce a S A R  images 
and a digital surface matrix (DSM) 
with approximately one-meter resolu- 
tions. Such high resolution will be re- 
quired for a DSM to describe the sur- 
face topography with sufficient fidelity 
for effective damage assessment. 
This DSM is co-processed with a DSM 
of the same area produced prior to the 
storm to extract differences that relate 
to surface changes caused by the storm. 
Analysis of the DSM change data in a 
GIs can provide the locations and ex- 
tent of possible damage. Further analy- 
sis with photo images and maps of the 
damage areas can provide information 
on the type of damage and the urgency 
of emergency response needed. 
Airborne IFSAR 
The atmosphere above the tropopause is 
clear and free of turbulence and high wnds. 
Tropopause - / I/---- 
IFSAR signal 
data transmission Storm Clouds 
Figure 1, Concurrent storm damage data collection concept. 
fly over the storm and the microwave SAR can image the 
surface through clouds and heavy rain. 
The IFSAR is carried above the storm by an aircraft capa- 
ble of long duration operation in the relatively calm 
stratosphere above the storm. IFSAR signal data is trans- 
mitted to a ground facility where the signal data is proc- 
essed to obtain surface topography data. 
Earth satellites cannot be used effectively to collect con- 
current storm damage data. The concept requires continu- 
ous coverage. Satisfaction of this requirement with satel- 
lites 
The topography data is then compared to the archived 
data and differences are detected. Analysts use this data 
with collateral sources such as photo images and maps in 
a GIs to locate, classify and measure the extent of storm 
damage. 
Implementation of this concept requires an aircraft capa- 
ble of long endurance operation above the tropopause 
(which is approximately 48,000 feet altitude). Such an 
aircraft can safely 
would require either a geo-stationary satellite or large 
numbers of low earth orbit (LEO) satellites. No geo- 
stationary radar satellites exist (and even if they did, they 
could not provide sufficient resolution). Existing low 
earth orbiting radars (e.g., RADARSAT & ERS-1/2) and 
those under development have insufficient resolution and 
cannot provide continuous concurrent storm observations. 
Could the Space Station or the STS be used? The answer 
is negative because the duration and frequency of passes 
over a storm would be inadequate. 
SAR Image Change Detection 
2-696 
With appropriate operation and processing techniques 
S A R  can achieve resolution as high or higher than obtain- 
able with standard airborne optical imaging cameras. Fig- 
ure 2 (from the Sandia National Laboratory') shows a 
high-resolution image of the Pentagon. This image has as 
much detail as a photographic image with the same reso- 
I I 
Figure 2, A high resolution SAFt image of the Pen- 
tagon shows as much detail as a photograph. 
(Source: Sandia National Laboratory.) 
lution. A SAR image like this can be made at night and 
through cloud cover. 
SAR images alone may not provide highly useful data for 
storm damage assessment. Unacceptable false damage 
detection rates may result fiom differences in SAR im- 
ages made with different imaging geometry and under 
different environmental conditions. The brightness of 
surfaces in SAR images depends on the surface complex 
permitivity, the incidence angle and the scale of surface 
roughness relative to the signal wavelength. 
Any of these parameters can change with illumination 
geometry, environmental conditions (e.g., surface wetness 
and vegetation growth), and cultural activities. Different 
illumination geometry (direction and elevation) will also 
produce differences in images. Consequently, images 
made at different times can have significant differences so 
a pair of S A R  images (with one made before the storm 
and the second made during the storm) may have many 
differences that are not caused by storm damage. The 
most notable exception would be observation of flooding. 
Both airborne and satellite SARs have shown to be very 
effective in showing flooded areas. (Numerous examples 
~ ~ ~~ 
Go to www.sandia.gov to see this and other SAR images. 
of S A R  images of floods can be found by searching the 
web for: SAR + images + flooding.) 
Surface Topography Change Detection 
Surface topography change detection has the potential of 
being a highly reliable method of storm damage detection. 
Transport of large masses of material requires highly en- 
ergetic forces. Storm induced topography changes will be 
distinguishable from natural topography changes topogra- 
phy changes due to soil creep, subsidence, or lifting. 
These slow geophysical processes will not be observable 
during the short time span of storm damage assessment. 
On the other hand, storm damage involves large material 
transport that happens over short time spans. Conse- 
quently, the rate of energy deposition is very large. (Natu- 
ral earth movements such as earthquakes and landslides 
are exceptions.) 
Surface topography can be represented in the form of a 
data file consisting of the geographic and elevation coor- 
dinates of the surface at periodic points. The surface to- 
pography data can be organized into any desired format 
but the simplest and most useful for computations is a 
two-dimensional matrix that this writer prefers to call a 
digital surface matrix or DSM.' (This writer defines a 
matrix representing bare earth as a digital terrain matrix 
or DTM but the term DTM has several definitions. Defi- 
nitions that appear in the literature include digital terrain 
map and digital terrain model.) 
As used here, a DSM consists of surface elevations com- 
puted at periodic positions with displacements of hx and 
Ay . These positions are called posts. Each element of the 
DSM represents a post, and the value corresponds to the 
surface elevation. With uniform separation of posts the 
post spacing, P = Ax = Ay, defines the surface sample 
density. The geographic coordinates corresponding to the 
matrix element in row i column j of the DSM are 
xi = P . i + x o ,  y ,  = P . j + y o  where xu and yo 
are the geographic coordinates when i = j = 0 . 
With surface topography represented as a DSM it is a 
simple matter of subtracting two matrices to observe to- 
pography changes. (The two matrices may not be cor- 
rectly aligned. If so, it is a simple process to align them by 
multiplying one of the DSMs by rotation and translation 
matrices.) 
A DSM may be processed to obtain different representations of the 
topography. The writer prefers to call a derivative product a digital ele- 
vation model or DEM 
2-697 
Surface topography differs from bare earth terrain topog- 
raphy in that it includes any material or object (e.g., wa- 
ter, tree, structure, vehicle, etc.) that stands above the bare 
terrain. Removal of a material or object exposes the bare 
earth elevation. The elevation where an object has been 
deposited will be the sum of the terrain elevation and the 
object height. A horizontal and/or vertical displacement of 
any material or object will cause changes in surface to- 
pography that may be observable as changes in a DSM. 
Examples of surface topography changes corresponding 
to various types of storm damage are shown in section 4. 
Surface topography change can be observed in a differ- 
ence DSM derived by point-by-point subtraction of two 
correctly registered DSMs. A difference DSM can show 
vector changes (direction and magnitude of movement) in 
surface topography. The difference DSM will promi- 
nently expose metric scale topography changes caused by 
such damage as buried roads, flooding, relocated struc- 
tures, scattered debris, destroyed dwellings, fallen trees, 
and landslides. 
The quantitative topography data in the difference DSM 
can be used to compute the volume of material that has 
been removed from some areas and the volume deposited 
at other areas. The results will provide powerful discrimi- 
nates for detecting and locating damage and be good 
measures of damage extent. 
Surface Topography Data Collection 
Remote collection of surface topography data requires a 
sensor technique that measures the three-dimensional 
location of spatially periodic points on the surface. For 
collection of topography data for concurrent storm dam- 
age assessment, the sensor must be capable of long dura- 
tion operation through the storm, provide large area cov- 
erage, and produce high-resolution data. A high altitude 
airborne IFSAR is the only practical means of satisfying 
these requirements. An IFSAR system capable of achiev- 
ing these requirements is described in considerable detail 
in [ 1,2]. 
Figure 3 illustrates the operational method used with IF- 
S A R  for surface topography data collection. The IFSAR 
includes two receivers (SAR#l & SAR#2) that are posi- 
tioned on the aircraft wings so that the baseline connect- 
ing them is orthogonal to the aircraft flight path. Antennas 
on the two receivers cover the same area on the surface 
and collect signals backscattered from the surface simul- 
taneously. The two SAR signals have nearly the same 
amplitudes but have phase differences that depend on the 
surface elevation. 
The DSM is produced by: 
DSM Data Production 
SAR #I Signal Processing 
Scaling and 
Calculations 
Data 
SAR #2 Signal Processing 
Figure 3, The operational method used with IFSAR fa 
iurface topography data collection. 
1. S A R  signal processing to generate two SAR im- 
ages, 
2. image processing the two SAR images to form a 
phase difference image, 
3. image phase processing to remove phase ambi- 
guities, and 
4. performing scaling and trigonometry calcula- 
tions to generate topography coordinates. 
Aircraft Considerations 
Many years of operation of U-2, ER-2, and WB-57 high 
altitude aircraft have shown that flight operations con- 
ducted above the tropopause over severe storms are safe 
and relatively fkee of turbulence and winds. Flight opera- 
tions above the tropopause have total freedom in flight 
direction and the aircraft can safely loiter for long periods. 
2-698 
In contrast, low altitude flights through severe storms are 
allowed only with a few specially equipped P-3 and C- 
130 aircraft with specially trained crews. Flight operations 
in these environments are dangerous and have relatively 
short duration on restricted flight paths. Consequently, 
safe long duration low altitude operations in a storm are 
not possible with any existing aircraft. 
The high altitude aircraft listed above are government 
owned and have assigned missions that make them un- 
available for dedicated use for concurrent storm damage 
data collection. There are high altitude unmanned aerial 
vehicles in development (e.g., Global Hawk, Predator-B, 
and Altus) but, in their present codigurations, these can- 
not be used for the application proposed here. 
It is shown below that the IFSAR must have a long base- 
line length. (i.e., distance between the receiver antennas 
should be large). This requires that the IFSAR antennas 
and receivers be placed in pods on the aircraft wings. Few 
aircraft are operationally capable of high altitude opera- 
tion. Of those that are, there are fewer that can tolerate 
installation of instruments in wing pods. 
Currently the only commercial aircraft with these capa- 
bilities are the two British Electric Canberras owned and 
operated by Air Platforms, Inc. for High Altitude Map- 
ping Missions, Inc. Two Air Platforms, Inc. Canberra 
aircraft are shown, parked at the NASA Ames Research 
Center, Moffet Field California, in figure 4. 
In addition to carrying the IFSAR for surface topography 
data collection, the aircraft should be capable of carrying 
instruments that can provide up-to-date data on the storm. 
The Canberras are the only high altitude aircraft currently 
capable of deploying parachute weather sounders (drop- 
sonds) ftom high altitude. (These aircraft were used in 
high altitude dropsond demonstrations for NOM.) These 
sounders measure wind speed, temperature, pressure and 
humidity as they descend. The Canberras can be equipped 
with other sensors such as a W-band radiometer and a Ka- 
band Doppler radar to monitor rain rate and wind speed. 
IFSAR 
Interferometric S A R  is a special case of the more general 
technique of S A R  interferometery. Rosen, et. al., provide 
an extensive review of SAR interferometry and IFSAR 
[3]. Madsen, Martin, and Zebker [4] describe the IFSAR 
technique used for terrain elevation measurement. 
The basis of the concept is the fact that the pixels of a 
SAR image data contain both signal amplitude phase. 
The magnitude of each pixel is displayed in the typical 
S A R  image such as seen in figure 2. However, a phase 
image can also be displayed. SAR interferometry exploits 
the phase information in the SAR image data to derive 
other forms of data. 
Figure 4, Air Platforms, Inc. Canberra aircraft shown 
parked at the NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field 
California. 
IFSAR is a special form of S A R  interferometry that uses 
the phase difference of two S A R  image data sets, col- 
lected from the same surface with different elevation an- 
gles, to compute surface elevation data. The two image 
data sets are made simultaneously with two receiver an- 
tennas that are displaced horizontally and/or vertically in 
the plane formed by the slant rage, ground range and S A R  
altitude vectors. 
Figure 5 illustrates the FSAR geometry. The terrain ele- 
vation, h ,  (measured relative to a suitable datum at a 
given resolved surface area) is computed with [4]: 
where H,, is the aircraft altitude above the datum, R is 
the slant range to the resolved surface area, a is the in- 
terferometer baseline tilt, and 8 is the elevation angle of 
R measured relative to nadir. If a is zero (i.e., the inter- 
ferometer is mounted on the aircraft wings) the equation 
reduces to 
h = H ,  - R c o s ( ~ ) ) .  (2) 
The cross track surface range to (XJ) is computed with 
the equation: 
x = Rsin(9) . (3 ) 
The geometry and signal phase difference, 4 ,  are related 
by: 
- ( R + $ / k ) 2  + R 2  + B2 
2RB sin(8) = (4) 
where k = 2z  1 A ,  A is the radar wavelength, and B 
is the geometric baseline distance between the receivers. 
2-699 
Figure 5, The IFSAR geometry. 
The signal phase corresponding to the location of the re- 
solved area is related to the range difference, 
AR = RI - R, by: 
where Ri is the slant range from antenna i to the resolved 
surface area and n is a constant depending on the mode of 
IFSAR operation. For an IFSAR using a single transmit- 
ter, n = 1 and YE = 2 for an IFSAR using dual transmit- 
ters with interleaved transmissions from each. The Can- 
berra IFSAR is a dual transmitter design. 
During data processing, the surface elevation is estimated 
by computing the phase difference between the posts in 
each S A R  image. Although the phase difference is caused 
by the path length difference fiom the surface point to the 
two SAR receiver antenna phase centers, direct phase 
difference is used because direct phase measurement is 
much more accurate than range difference measure- 
ment. it 
The sensitivity of computed terrain elevation error to 
phase error is proportional to the ratio of the slant range to 
the baseline length 
RA 
2 m B  * 
s, =- 
where A is the radar wavelength. Since R is large for an 
IFSAR operating at high altitude, the sensitivity to phase 
error is large. Use of the shortest practical wavelength and 
the maximum baseline length minimizes the error sensi- 
tivity. 
Maximizing the baseline requires that the IFSAR anten- 
nas and receivers be placed in pods on the tips of the 
wings of an aircraft with long wingspan. The Canberras 
are the only aircraft in existence that can be operated at 
high altitude with wingtip pods. With this configuration 
the illustrated Canberra IFSAR configuration realizes a 
19-meter baseline. With a slant range of 40 kilometers the 
phase error sensitivity of the Canberra IFSAR will be 
about 5 meters per radian of phase error. 
Once the IFSAR design and the operational geometry are 
set, the only way to reduce elevation error is to use signal 
processing to minimize the phase error. The usual method 
used in to limit phase error in SAR processing is to aver- 
age the signals from multiple pixels. Called multiple look 
processing, this has the same effect as reducing the SAR 
resolution. (The SAR signal level increases with the size 
of the SAR image pixel so lowering the SAR image 
resolution increases the signal-to-noise ratio and reduces 
the phase error.) 
With multiple look processing, the position of the post is 
taken as the center of the area covered by the averaged 
pixels. The post spacing will be considerably larger than 
the dimensions of the single-look SAR image pixel. For 
an airbome IFSAR, a post spacing of one meter will re- 
quire SAR image resolution of 25 to 30 centimeters in 
range and at least 50 centimeters in azimuth. 
3. PROPAGATION LIMITATIONS 
Numerous propagation phenomena affect the IFSAR sig- 
nals. The two phenomena of primary concem are refrac- 
tion and attenuation by hydrometeors. The end effect of 
these phenomena is higher surface topography measure- 
ment errors. The error due to refraction is caused by 
variation of propagation speed and curvature of the 
propagation path. Attenuation due to hydrometeors re- 
duces the SNR and causes a corresponding increase in 
phase difference measurement error. 
Atmospheric Reji-activity 
Atmospheric gases cause the propagation speed of mi- 
crowave signals to be lower than the free space speed and 
a range measurement computed with a measured round- 
trip propagation time will have range error proportional to 
the excess propagation time. Unlike range error due to 
noise, which is different for each range measurement, this 
error will be the same for repeated range measurements 
over the same path. Consequently, the error appears as a 
slant range error bias (SREB). 
The propagation speed in the atmosphere can be quanti- 
fied in terms of refractivity, N, which is defined as [6] 
2 - 7 0 0  
N = (q -1)-106 (7) 
where q is the refractive index of the atmosphere in the 
frequency band of interest. For frequencies from lower 
edge of L-band to the upper edge of Ku-band, the refrac- 
tivity can be approximated by 
where p is the atmospheric pressure in millibars, Tis the 
temperature in Kelvin, and s is the specific mass of at- 
mospheric water vapor in grams of water vapor per kilo- 
gram of air. The first term in the equation accounts for the 
effects of nitrogen and oxygen and the second term ac- 
counts for water vapor. 
The specific mass of water vapor can be expressed in 
terms of the partial pressure of water vapor, e: 
s = 622($). (9) 
Most atmosphere pressure, temperature and humidity 
(PTH) models define PTH variations with altitude as 
monotonic decreasing functions of altitude. (The distribu- 
tions of PTH with altitude are referred to hereafter as PTH 
profiles.) Under this condition the refractivity is a mono- 
tonic decreasing function of altitude, h, and can be esti- 
mated with the exponential equation: 
where a and b are constants. For the CCIR reference at- 
mosphere, a = 315, b = 0.136 km-' and h is in kilo- 
meters. 
The actual PTH profiles of the atmosphere are highly 
variable and not necessarily monotonic functions of alti- 
tude. Consequently, a more accurate way to model atmos- 
pheric refractivity is to use equation (8) with values from 
measured PTH profiles. For the analysis here we assume 
the PTH profiles for the mid-latitude summer (MLS) at- 
mosphere model. The h4LS PTH profiles from sea level to 
20 km altitude are shown in figure 6. (Data used for these 
plots are from tables in the Infrared Handbook [6]).  
The refractivity profile computed with the PTH profiles in 
figure 6 is shown in figure 7. The refractivity profile 
computed with equation (10) and the CCIR reference at- 
mosphere is also shown. The plots show that the CCIR 
model produces overall lower refractivity and the CCIR 
model refractivity is considerably lower than the MLS 
model refractivity the in the first kilometer of atmosphere. 
Consequently, the CCJR model refractivity would predict 
smaller refractive effects on IFSAR signals. 
Pressure Profile 
I2O0 7 
3 1000 
3 600 
400 
200 
0 
e! 
& 
300 
280 
260 
2 8 240 
220 
0 5 10 15 20 
Altitude (km) 
Temperature Profile 
200 
5 10 15 20 
Altitude (km) 
Humidity Profile 
l5 7 
12 h 3 
8 9  
= 3  
.a 
$ 6  
'0  5 10 15 20 
Altitude (km) 
7igure 6, The PTH profiles for the mid-latitude 
ummer atmosphere model. 
Mapping Errors 
The IFSAR processing algorithm uses the slant range to 
compute both the surface elevation (equations 1 or 2) and 
the cross track position (equation 3). A slant range error 
bias will cause corresponding mapping errors in h and x. 
These are called the elevation error bias (EEB) and the 
cross range error bias (CREB) respectively. These errors 
are due to both the excess time delay and the curvature of 
the propagation path. 
For an atmosphere with the PTH profiles modeled at dis- 
crete altitudes, the calculation for the SREB is: 
2-701 
Refractivity Profile 
360 I 
n 4 8 12 16 20 
Altihule (km) 
rigure 7, Refractivity profile for the MLS atmosphere 
tnd using equation (10) with the CCIR reference at- 
nosphere. 
where Ni is the refractivity at altitude hi and y is the ele- 
vation angle of the propagation path. Each value of re- 
fractivity is computed using equation (8) with the PTH 
values at the corresponding altitude, hi. 
Figure 8 shows a plot of the SREB versus elevation angle 
from 20 degrees to 60 degrees (computed for propagation 
paths from sea level to 20 km altitude). The plot shows 
that, for the MLS model, the SREB ranges from approxi- 
mately three meters at 60 degrees elevation to 7.5 meters 
at 20 degrees elevation. The SREB will change very little 
with change in aircraft altitude, but it will be strongly 
affected by variation in surface altitude where the refrac- 
tivity is greatest. For example, the SREB over Denver, 
CO will be smaller than the SREB over Los Angeles, CA. 
Figure 9 shows that the corresponding CREB due to ex- 
cess time delay (for a flat earth surface) ranges from 2.6 
to 6 meters. The SREB can be determined and removed 
from the IFSAR data if the PTH profiles are known. In 
practice the PTH profiles would be estimated from local 
weather data and measurements would be made with sen- 
sors carried aboard the aircraft. Additional data would be 
obtained from dropsonds deployed from the aircraft. PTH 
profiles would be are estimated from local weather data, 
measurements made with sensors carried aboard the air- 
craft, and dropsonds deployed from the aircraft. The re- 
quired path length correction would then be computed by 
using equation (1 1) with the best estimate of the PTH 
profiles. 
Simulations with perturbations of the PTH profiles from 
the MLS model were conducted to estimate the residual 
indeterminate SREB that can be expected from errors in 
PTH profiles. For these simulations, PTH values at each 
altitude were produced with a normal random number 
generator with mean set to equal the corresponding MLS 
value and the standard deviation scaled to fit typical 
variations observed in weather data. Figure 10 shows an 
example of PTH profile deviations from the MLS model 
obtained by simulation. These profile deviations were 
used to compute the results shown in following figures. It 
should be noted that these profiles and the results that 
follow represent an average case from many random pro- 
files that were run. 
Figure 11 shows the residual indeterminate SREB result- 
ing from the PTH profile perturbations in figure 10. The 
errors range from five centimeters at 60 degrees elevation 
to fifteen centimeters at 20 degrees elevation. Numerous 
simulations found a mean residual SREB in the range of 8 
to 10 centimeters. 
Phme Diyerence Error 
The phase difference, 4 , between the two S A R  signals is 
used in equation (4) to compute the elevation angle, 6 .  
The phase difference depends on the slant range differ- 
ence [equation (5 ) ] ,  so all errors in both slant range meas- 
urements will cause phase difference errors that translate 
into surface elevation errors. 
SREB for MLS Model 
Elevation angle (degrees) 
Figure 8, Slant range error bias (SREB) for propaga- 
tion paths from sea level to 20 km altitude. 
2-702 
1 4  
CREB for MLS Model 
0 10 20 30 40 
Cross Track Range (km) 
Figure 9, Cross-range error bias (CREB) for slant 
'ange error bias shown in figure 8. 
In SAR interferometry, where the SAR images are re- 
corded at different times, the phase difference error is due 
to the difference in SREB for each receiver. This differ- 
ence will be the net sum of differences due to different 
refkactivity profiles and different geometry. With SREBs 
of 6, and 6,, the phase difference computation will 
cause an EEB of 
Since R lqB can be large, the surface elevation errors 
can be substantial even if (6, - 6, ) is small. 
The IFSAR technique offers a considerable advantage. 
Because propagation is through the same atmosphere the 
path length errors will tend to cancel. Indeed, if the 
propagation for both signals is along the same path the 
errors will be zero. In practice the two propagation paths 
have different elevation angles that cause (albeit small) 
bias in surface elevation error. 
The path length difference for transmission from the sur- 
face to 20 km altitude in the MLS model atmosphere, 
shown versus the surface range in figure 12, is on the or- 
der of millimeters for a 19-meter baseline. The path 
length difference scales directly with baseline length. 
Figure 13 shows that, due to large phase error sensitivity, 
the range difference errors in figure 12 will cause surface 
elevation errors that range from 0.5 to 3 meters. This is a 
bias error that is determinate (and can be removed) if the 
atmospheric refractivity profile is known. 
Humidity & Temperature Deviation 
- 
- 10 -5 0 5 10 
Deviation from MLS Model 
'igure 10, Random PTH profile perturbations from 
he MLS model PTH profiles. 
The required surface elevation correction can be com- 
puted by using measured or estimated PTH profiles. Fig- 
ure 14 shows that residual indeterminate errors, (due to 
errors in the PTH profiles used to compute the correction) 
are on the order of 1 to 6 centimeters. 
Rain Attenuation 
Since storms are ordinarily accompanied by heavy rainfall 
the attenuation of the IFSAR signals by rain must be 
taken into account. A highly accurate analysis would have 
to take into account a range of rain rates, droplet sizes and 
spatial distributions. Here we make approximations as- 
suming the rain is uniform in rate, droplet size and spatial 
distribution. Under these assumptions the rate of attenua- 
tion rate in decibels per kilometer can be modeled as [5] 
2-703  
10 20 30 40 
Cross Tranck Range (km) 
Tigure 12, Maximum IFSAR path length difference 
or the MLS model. 
Cross Track Ground Range (km) 
rigure 14, The residual indeterminate elevation er- 
ors due to indeterminate PTH profile deviations 
rom the MLS model. 
where Y is the rain rate in mm/hr, and K( f ,  p) and 
a( f .p) are functions of the radar frequency, f; and po- 
larization, p. 
A practical concurrent storm damage data collection sys- 
tem must be capable of operation through long paths of 
heavy rain. It becomes imperative, then, to use a radar 
signal frequency that will not suffer high signal attenua- 
tion through heavy rain. (e.g., 150 mm/hr). 
Figure 15 shows the one-way microwave radar signal 
attenuation, in decibels per kilometer, versus radar fie- 
quency for a rain rate of 150 "/hr. The actual radar sig- 
nal attenuation will be doubled due to the two- way path 
through the rain. To avoid excessive attenuation the radar 
frequency should be in L, S, or C-band (1-5 GHz). If X- 
band (8-10 GHz) is used, the signal should use vertical 
polarization. Use of Ku band (12-18 GHz) is not advis- 
able. 
4. SIMULATION EXAMPLES 
MLS Atmosphere Model 
I I I 0 
Cross Track Range (km) 
Figure 13, IFSAR surface elevation error due to dif- 
'erential propagation delay. 
2-704 
Simulations were used to demonstrate the appearance of 
storm damage data observed in DSM differences. Actual 
IFSAR DSMs were modified to represent various types of 
topography. Simulations were then used to modify the 
DSM to represent storm damage. The original DSMs 
were obtained by modifying existing IFSAR DSM data. 
The data has one meter posting and approximately 30 cm 
elevation precision. 
Elevation changes due to storm damage were based on 
changes observed in images of storm damage caused by 
Figure 18 shows an example of IFSAR DSM changes for 
washout and debris covering a road. The top image shows 
the DSM prior to the storm and the bottom image shows 
the DSM with the road washed out and debris covering. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
Sites of possible storm damage can be detected by ob- 
serving changes in surface topography caused by the 
storm. This is possible because material movement or 
Figure 16, Simulation of DSM changes for wide area flooding. I 
hurricane Andrew and other storms. The storm damage deposition cause changes in surface topography. The to- 
images were found by searching the Internet. 
Figure 16 shows an example of simulated IFSAR DSM 
changes due to flooding. The image on the left shows the 
DSM of the area prior to flooding. Elevation is color- 
coded with red the highest surface elevations blues the 
lowest surface elevations. Green areas are the ground. 
Red areas are objects such as trees and building that pro- 
trude above the ground. Dark blue are water surface. 
Figure 17 shows an example of DSM changes for trees 
fallen across a road. The upper left image shows the 
original DSM and the upper right image shows the simu- 
lated changes caused by the fallen trees. The lower image, 
which shows the difference DEM, clearly shows the 
fallen trees and the missing trees. The image also shows 
random surface elevation errors of with a standard devia- 
tion of 2.0 meters. 
_ - _  
pography changes can-be detected, located, and sized by 
comparing a DSM collected prior to the storm with a 
DSM collected during the storm. Collateral data (e.g., 
photo images) can be used to classify the damage 
High altitude IFSAR can be safely used to collect surface 
topography data during the storm. An analysis of atmos- 
pheric propagation during the storm may cause DSM er- 
rors on the order of 1 to 3 meters. These errors are well 
below the levels that will cause large rates of false dam- 
age detection. 
6. REFERENCES 
[l] Malliot H. A., "Digital Terrain Elevation Mapping 
System", 1996 IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference 
Proceedings, Vol. 4, pp. 91-105, Feb. 3-10, Snow Mass 
at Aspen, CO. 
2 - 7 0 5  
383-391, 1995. 
[2] Malliot H. A., "DTEMS Interferometric SAR Design 
and Method of Baseline Tilt Determination", 1996 IEEE 
Aerospace Applications Conference Proceedings, Vol. 4, 
pp. 107-127, Feb. 3-10, Snow Mass at Aspen, CO. 
[3] Rosen P. A. et. al., "Synthetic Aperture Radar Interfe- 
rometry", Proceedings IEEE, Vol. 88, No. 3, pp. 333- 
382,2000. 
[4] Madsen, S. N., Martin, J. M., and Zebker, H. A.: 
"Analysis and evaluation of the NASNJPL TOPSAR 
across-track interferometric SAR system", IEEE Trans. 
on Geo-science & Remote Sensing, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 
[5] L. Boithias, Radiowave Propagation, McGraw Hill 
Book Co., 1987. 
[6] W. Wolfe & G. Zissis, The Infrared Handbook, US 
Government Printing Office, 197. 
Harold A. Malliot is founder and CTO of High Altitude 
Mapping Missions, Inc. Mr. Malliot is also CTO of Kauai 
Airborne Sciences, Inc. Mr. Malliot was employed for 21 
years at the Lockheed Martin Missiles & Space Research 
and Development Division in Palo Alto, Ca where he 
* 
Simulated IFSAR DSM of the area 
prior to the storm. 
Simulated 
Fallen Trees 
t 
DSM of Simulated changes due to 
fallen trees laving across the road. 
- 
Figure 17, Simulation of DSM changes for fallen trees. 
2-706 
worked on electromagnetic remote sensing systems, sat- 
ellite borne radar, synthetic aperture radar, and SAR 
interferometry. Prior to working at Lockheed Martin Mis- 
siles & Space Mr. Malliot was employed for six years at 
ESL Inc. where he conducted research on optical sensor 
two years of additional graduate work at the University of 
Santa Clara and other institutions. 
Figure 18, Simulation of DSM changes due to washed-out road and debris covering the road. 
systems and lasers. Prior to ESL, Mr. Malliot workedfor 
six years at SRI International on position location and 
communication systems R&D. Mr. Malliot received the 
BSEEfi.om San Francisco State University (1963), MSEE 
porn the University of Santa Clara (1969) and completed 
2-707  
