Space Based GMTI Using Scanned Pattern 
Interferometric Radar (SPIR)' 
Karen Marais' and Raymond Sedwick3 
MIT Space Systems Lab 
77 Mass Ave Rm 37-458, Fbn 37-431 
Cambridge, MA 02 139 
karenm@mit.edu, sedwick@mit.edu 
617-258-0742,617-253-783 1 
Abstract-A method of performing space based Ground 
Moving Target Indication (GMTI) using radar 
interferometric processing is presented. The algorithm, 
referred to as Scanned Pattern Interferometric Radar (SPIR), 
uses the high angular variability of a sparse array Point 
Spread Function (PSF) to collect sufficient data from the 
signal return that the clutter and targets can be separated 
without an a priori assumption of the clutter statistics. It is 
shown that clutter within the main lobe of the individual 
aperture pattern can indeed be separated from the targets, 
using the deterministic geometric relationship between 
observation direction and clutter Doppler shift. If the 
computational domain is extended to the side lobes of the 
gain pattern, clutter entering through these lobes can also be 
extracted. Constraints on the cluster geometry are derived 
from the invertibility of the PSF matrix. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. INTERFEROMETRY 
3. 
4. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SPIR h m m  
GMTI AM> THE SPIR mm 
5. 
6.  VALIDATION OF SPIR 
INVERTIBILITY OF THE PSF MATRIX 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Ground Moving Target Indication (GMTI) using separated 
spacecraft interferometry at radio wavelengths promises to 
be a powerful new all-weather surveillance tool. We discuss 
the design of such a system, which is being developed as 
part of the Air Force Research Laboratory's (AFRL) 
TECHSAT21 program. 
GMTI is typically used to locate large vehicles such as tanks 
and trucks in military applications. Current systems, such as 
JSTARS [l], use airborne platforms to provide temporary 
coverage in regions of interest. These systems provide good 
performance but are manpower intensive and require 
significant deployment time. Space-borne radar offers near 
continuous global coverage without appreciable operator 
risk. 
The primary differences between air- and space-borne radar 
are the increased range and field of view. Increased range 
results in large signal attenuation from free space loss. In 
target detection radar, ground return obscures targets and is 
referred to as clutter. Increased field of view produces 
severe clutter, since a greater ground area is illuminated. As 
discussed in [2], there are three fundamental design 
considerations for space-borne radar. First, the radar 
requires sufficient power-aperture product to detect targets 
at the required search rate. Second, the angular and range 
resolution must be high enough to locate the target with the 
required degree of accuracy. Third, the radar must reject 
clutter and noise sufficiently to provide the specified 
probability of detection and false alarm rate. This, 
development of an effective space-borne radar system 
presents many challenges. 
Single aperture systems are a compromise between high 
resolution and broad coverage. Broad coverage, or large 
field of view, requires a wide beamwidth, while high 
resolution requires a narrow beamwidth. In addition, clutter 
suppression is computationally intensive and requires prior 
knowledge of the target as well as an appropriate clutter 
model. Performance is therefore limited by the quality of 
prior target information and the accuracy of the clutter 
model. 
In contrast, multiple aperture systems can provide coverage 
corresponding to the diameter of a single aperture and 
resolution proportional to the maximum separation between 
individual apertures. Space-Time Adaptive Processing 
(STAP) has recently been proposed for use in multiple 
aperture systems [3]. STAP takes advantage of the high 
resolution properties of the interferometer, but does not use 
all the available information in the return signals. Like single 
aperture methods, STAP is limited by the accuracy of the 
clutter model and additionally must assume the position and 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE ' Graduate Research Assistant, MlT Space Systems Lab 
Research Scientist, MIT Space Systems Lab 
4 - 2 0 4 7  
velocity of any targets. Careful maintenance of aperture 
positions in the cluster is necessary to achieve an adequate 
level of clutter suppression, and complete clutter 
suppression is theoretically impossible in two-dimensional 
footprints. 
TECHSAT21 is a technology demonstrator program with an 
experimental multiple aperture radar payload. It consists of 
clusters of microsatellites (less than 100 kg) that orbit in 
close proximity (on the order of hundreds of metres). Each 
microsatellite is capable of coherently detecting not only 
retum signals resulting from its own transmission, but also 
retum signals resulting from the transmissions of other 
satellites in the cluster. 
Scanned E’attem Interferometric Radar (SPIR) combines the 
individual aperture signals in a way that allows ground 
clutter to be characterized completely and removed. This 
method depends not on the statistics of the clutter, but solely 
on the clutter position and Doppler shift. While the clutter 
amplitude and phase are random in nature, the Doppler shift 
is entirely predictable due to the known angular location of 
the clutter footprint. The algorithm relies on “de- 
convolving” the gain pattem of the synthesized aperture 
from the received signals to reveal the true ground scene. 
In conventional interferometry, de-convolution is usually 
performed. entirely in the spatial domain, and removes the 
artefacts that appear in the image as a result of incomplete 
U-v plane, filling. SPIR processing uses the distinctive 
features of the interferometer response, and their effect on 
both spatial and frequency information, to separate ground 
clutter retim from target return. The statistical nature of the 
clutter is irrelevant and the probability of detection is based 
solely on the signal-to-noise ratio of the received signals. 
A descripiion of the process begins with some fundamentals 
of interferometry in Section 2. Section 3 describes SPIR and 
gives a mathematical derivation, while Sections 4 and 5 
discuss some implementation issues. Results of a simple 
validation experiment are given in Section 6. 
2. INTERFEROMETRY 
Interferometry can be implemented in a number of ways, 
depending on the application. Imaging interferometers cross- 
correlate the time domain signals from multiple apertures to 
measure the magnitude and phase of the spatial Fourier 
components. The quality of the constructed image will 
depend OM the sampled spatial frequency resolution. Missing 
U-v components cause grating lobes that introduce artefacts 
into the image. 
Single Slit Aperture 
As an example, consider a 1-D ‘filled’ aperture, formed by a 
slit of width a = 0.1 m (Figure 1). 
i 
’r- - - - - - -  
.. .-_. 
! 
-1.5708 -0.7854 0 0.7854 1.5708 
tl (radiaw] 
Figure 1 - Point Spread Function of a Slit 
The respcinse pattern, or Point Spread ]Function (PSF) of a 
‘square’ aperture is a sinc function, given by 
sin( 7cu sin 0)  
nu sin B 
where U =- a / A .  This is the spatial Fourier transform of the 
aperture g,eometry, where U and sin 0 are Fourier pairs like 
f and t .  The PSF is the response of the aperture to a point 
source. One consequ:nce of this is that points that are closer 
together tlhan the angular separation of the first nulls of the 
PSF ( A / a  for the slit) cannot be identified as separate 
points. This defines the resolution of the aperture. The 
second consequence is that information that is located in the 
side lobes (as they are referred to when considering 
diffraction) of the I’SF overlays infonmation in the main 
lobe, so that the response in each pixel is sensitive to energy 
originating from other parts of the scene. 
Single Baseline Sparye Array 
If the aperture is approximated (albeit poorly) by two 
pinholes located a baseline distance a = 0.1 m apart (Figure 
2), the point spread function is given by 
cos(nu sin 0)  (2) 
which is again the spatial Fourier transform of the aperture 
geometry, this time approximated by two delta functions. 
Since this PSF is peiiodic in sin0 (with constant ‘amplitude), 
the grating lobes (as they are referred 10 with interference) 
bring in i is much irtformation from multiple points in the 
scene as that found in the main lobe. The ambiguity 
associatedl with this ;spectral aliasing is very high, making it 
difficult to reconstruct a scene with any clarity. The 
resolution of this ‘sparse aperture’ is as good as with the slit 
( A/ a ), but the quality of the image is low. 
4-2048 
I I , 
I I 
I I 
-1.5708 0.7854 0 0.7854 1.5708 
0 [radians] 
Figure 2 - Point Spread Function of Two Point Apertures 
By adding additional pinholes, the synthesized aperture 
response will more closely approach that of the slit, and the 
quality of the image will continue to improve as the PSF 
tends toward that of equation (1). The information from the 
various pinholes can be pair-wise correlated or combined in 
some other manner, each way producing slightly different 
results. 
In a separated spacecraft interferometer each pinhole can be 
thought of as representing a spacecraft. Therefore our aim is 
to get acceptable image quality using as few as possible 
satellites. 
Sparse Aperture Synthesis without Cross Correlation 
Cross-correlation of signals is not the only way to synthesize 
the sparse array. If the incoming signals are summed, the 
resulting signal will have contributions that were spatially 
weighted by the PSF. By introducing appropriate time 
delays in the aperture outputs before summing, the direction 
in which the 'main' peak is located can be shifted left or 
right, changing array sensitivity to different regions of the 
scene. If the signals are at radio frequencies (X-band and 
below) the information from each aperture can be recorded 
digitally and the 'scanning' of the PSF can be done as post- 
processing. 
3. INTRODUCTION TO THE SPIR ALGORITHM 
As described in the previous section, time shifting the 
outputs of the apertures in a coordinated fashion will 
effectively steer the array back and forth. By examining the 
content of the signal under these changes in focus direction, 
each constituent of the signal can be determined. 
A Simplified Model of SPIR 
A simple model of the SPIR approach is shown in Figure 3 .  
The three boxes labelled RGB represent three footprint 
cells, which contain targets of unknown size. The array of 
arrows is the gain pattern associated with a sparse aperture 
~ 
4 -2049  
with gains of 1,5,3,2 and 4. As the gain pattern is placed on 
the ground in a certain position, each of the gains multiplies 
the strength of the signal (radar cross section) from the 
corresponding cell. However, only the total signal strength is 
measured at the spacecraft. As shown, with the gains 3-2-4 
covering the cells, the total signal strength is 27, whereas 
with 5-3-2 and 1-5-3 covering the cells, the total strengths 
are 26 and 20 respectively. With 3 samples taken 
(corresponding to the 3 unknowns) the problem can be 
formulated as a matrix equation, and provided the matrix is 
invertible, the values within R, G and B can be determined. 
I RI G I  B I  
A 
U 4  - 21
Figure 3 - An Example of the SPIR Methodology 
Of course, in a real system the situation is much more 
complex, we discuss some of the issues in Section 3.  
A ID Mathematical Derivation of SPIR 
Having established qualitatively the concept of SPIR, we 
now present its mathematical foundation. We perform the 
analysis for a one-dimensional footprint viewed from a 
linear interferometer array. 
We assume that one satellite transmits and all the satellites 
receive the reflected signal. Multiple satellite transmits can 
be thought of as a series of single transmitter results. Such 
results may be combined to increase the probability of 
detection while decreasing the false alarm rate. 
The transmitting satellite transmits a signal of the form: 
srrmSmi, ( t  ) = A ( t  ) e@cr (3) 
where A(t) is an amplitude factor (modulation), which varies 
much more slowly than the carrier eiq' . 
For this analysis we will set 
A ( t )  = 1 
The received signal at satellite i is a scaled, time and 
Doppler spread version of the transmitted signal. 
The scale factor is given by the inverse of range squared (for 
signal amplitudes). We assume that the variation in scaling 
factor between satellites is negligible. 
The time delay from a particular footprint cell to the i" 
satellite is the sum of the transmission and reflection delays. 
Time dela.ys are measured relative to the time delay to the 
transmitting satellite. 
In terms of wavelengths, the received signal is delayed by 
X. 
Awavelengthi = sin Op A 
= ui sin Op 
where Op is the angle to the ground and 
The RCS is represented by the amplitude factor O. For 
convenience we define 0 to be a function of position and 
frequency such that it is zero at frequencies where there is 
no Doppler return 
(7) 
Noting that a digital1 y sampled frequency can be represented 
as 
we replace the sum of the carrier and Doppler frequencies 
with 
(4) 
The signal received by satellite i from the entire footprint in 
the absence of noise is therefore given b y  
is the spatial wave number corresponding to the i" satellite's 
position, xj, relative to the transmitting satellite. 
The Doppler shift of a footprint cell as observed by a given 
satellite is a function of the relative velocity between the 
transmitting and receiving satellite and the footprint cell. 
Each cell. will have a range of Doppler frequencies 
associated with it, representing the variation in line-of-sight 
velocity across a cell. In the case where a cell contains a 
target, the target's line-of-sight velocity is represented as an 
additional Doppler frequency component for that cell.. 
In pulse-Doppler radar systems the Doppler frequency is 
obtained by digitally sampling N points of the time signal at 
the pulse repletion frequency (PRF) and taking the discrete 
Fourier transform. This gives a discrete set of frequencies 
for each cell 
The radar cross-section (RCS) of a footprint cells or target 
represents how much of the incoming radar signal is 
reflected back to the transmitting aperture(s). As a first order 
approximation, we assume that the RCS of any given 
footprint cell or target is constant with respect to time and 
viewing angle. 
The single aperture response is a function of angle and is 
given by E ( 8  ). For a uniformly illuminated rectangular 
aperture of width d, I?( 8) is 
r 
Similarly, for a unilormly illuminated circular aperture of 
diameter d, E( 8 ) is 
4 - 2 0 5 0  
In order to focus on a particular cell 6, in the footprint, the 
received signals at each satellite are time shifted and added 
(12) 
.Discretising the footprint into cells gives 
i=l p=O 
k=O 
Discretising the time variable and assuming that we have N 
samples in total 
Taking the discrete Fourier transform (Dm) to obtain the 
frequency response 
Evaluating the summation over m 
0 k # l  N-I  .2nm 
m=O z e j " ( * - I )  N k = l  
Therefore 
p=o 
- 
4-2051 
i=l 
(17) 
Set 
G(Bp,8,) = 
j2nu, (sin ep-sh eq ) 
i=l 
This is the point spread function for a 1D interferometer, 
focused on a point at angle 0,. 
Then 
In matrix notation: 
S=$GZ 
where 
Therefore the RCS-Doppler profile of the one-dimensional 
strip can be recovered using the constructed signal s(Bq, t )  
and the PSF of the aperture, G(6,  0,). 
The two-dimensional case is simply an extension of the one- 
dimensional case. 
4. GMTI AND THE SPIR ALGORITHM 
In this section we discuss issues associated with the 
application of interferometry, and specifically, SPIR, to the 
GMTI problem. 
Multiple Targets Within a Resolution Cell 
We first recognize that there may in fact be multiple targets 
in each of the cells, and one of these targets will in fact be a 
cell-sized patch of ground whose (unwanted) return we refer 
to as clutter. How then to separate the targets? MTI systems 
are only interested in moving targets, therefore we may use 
Doppler shift to differentiate between targets and clutter. 
In the example of Figure 3, we can imagine that the 'targets' 
within each cell have Doppler shifts, which if a target is 
moving will be different from the corresponding footprint 
cell's Doppler shift. If the retumed signal is Fourier 
transformed with respect to time, the frequency content of 
the signal will become apparent. The same processing that 
was described before can now be done for each individual 
frequency, down to the frequency resolution of the system. 
The frequency resolution depends on the signal integration 
time; as integration time is increased the signal is 
characterized more completely and frequency resolution is 
improved. Integration time is limited by the maximum time 
over which the Doppler shift of the ground and targets does 
not change appreciably. 
Processing a 2-Dimensional Footprint 
The 1-D processing just discussed can be applied to real 
systems by range-gating the return to isolate return from 
individual ranges. These range gates can then be SPIR 
processed as 1-D strips (iso-range) across the footprint. 
Altematively, the 2-D processing can simply be an extension 
of the 1-D case, where instead of scanning the point spread 
function in only one direction, it is scanned in range and 
cross-range. Assume that the footprint can be divided into m 
x n cells. 'The PSF main lobe is scanned over all the cells, as 
shown in Section 2 this provides enough infomition to 
solve for the RCS of each cell. 
For each data point, mn cells are multiplied with mn gains 
and the result is summed to produce a single value (ignoring 
the Doppler processing for now). If each of these operations 
is represented by a row of a matrix acting on a vector of 
data, then the matrix row and the data vector are both mn 
long. In addition, to invert the matrix of gains (the PSF 
matrix) a total of mn rows must be generated to make the 
matrix square. These correspond to placing the main lobe in 
each and every footprint cell. 
The method of solution has some bearing on the geometry of 
the sparse: arrays. In the case of the 1-D processing with 
range gaxing, a linear array of satellites is sufficient, 
provided they are spaced in such a way that the PSF matrix 
is invertible, or at least of high rank. 
For 2-D processing, the apertures should be arranged 
spatially i:n two dimensions. This allows slewing of the main 
lobe in both dimensions. 
Unlike STAP, which must maintain precise aperture position 
to place nulls over competing clutter, SPIR's only 
requirement is knowledge of the PSF matrix, so that 
knowledge of the satellites' positions is more important than 
fine control. 
Range Ambiguities 
The 2-D processing capability allows for the elimination of 
the problem of range ambiguities. Consider the case where 
the PRF is high enough that the length of the footprint 
contains two range ambiguities. If range gating is performed, 
the data from both ambiguous ranges will overlap. However, 
if 2-D processing is performed only on the cells that 
comprise the ambiguous ranges (shown in Figure 4) then 
enough data can be collected to separate the information 
coming from each range. 
Figure 4 - Footprint with a Single Range Ambiguity 
The computational load required to remove range ambiguity 
is a function of the number of cross range cells and the 
number of ambiguitils. Since the system must be solved for 
each range ambiguity, the computationall load scales with the 
square of the numbeI of range ambiguities. 
Doppler ALmbiguities 
Although it has been demonstrated how range ambiguities 
can be processed, the approach quickly becomes 
computationally expensive as the number of range 
ambiguities is increased. An alternative approach is to make 
the PRF low enough that no range ambiguities exist, which 
in turn produces Doppler ambiguities. In a similar manner to 
standard radar processing, these Doppler ambiguities can be 
removed by employing PRF jitter, or switching. 
As shown in Figure 5,  the result of the SPIR processing is to 
range, cross-range and Doppler. Each target (or footprint 
cell) will appear in a separate cell of tllis cube, unless two 
targets which are very close to each other are also moving 
with the same velocity, in which case they will appear as a 
single target. 
generate a data cube of information, where the axes are 
Figure 5 - Using Jitter to Eliminate Dloppler Ambiguity 
4 - 2 0 5 2  
With Doppler ambiguity, a ghost image will appear for each Table 1 - Unrestricted Array Spacing and PSF Size 
7 1 { 6 3 1 7 5 2 )  
target. In fact the number of ghosts for each target is what 
defines the ambiguity. The nice characteristic is that the I # I  Relative Spacing I MaximumNumber I 
43 
position of the ghost along the Doppler axis is dependent on 
the PRF, whereas the Doppler position of the real target 
does not. By using multiple PRFs, ghosts can be identified 
by their tendency to move around. A convenient use of this 
characteristic is to non-coherently add successive data 
cubes, entries corresponding to true targets will add up 
constructively, while entries corresponding to ghosts will 8 I / 8 1 0 1 3 2 7 8 1  
of Cells 
52 
( 3 1 5 2 )  
{ 4 1  1 7 3 )  31 
not. 
~~ 
I 
9 I None -_ 
10 I ( 1 6 1  1 1 8 6 4 3 2 2 2 ]  I 91 
11 I ( 1 8 1 3 9 1 1 6 8 2 5 2 8 )  I 107 The processing load using PRF jitter scales linearly with the 
number of selected PRFs. Therefore Doppler ambiguity 
resolution using PRF jitter is less computationally intensive 
than range resolution. 
Optimal placement of satellites in a two-dimensional cluster 
is more complex and is not discussed here. We shall see that 
limiting the cluster to one dimension does not place 
excessive constraints on the system. 5 .  INVERTIBILITY OF THE PSF MATRIX 
The main constraint on the application of the SPIR 
algorithm is the ability to solve equation (20). It is possible 
to obtain approximate solutions for singular systems, 
however, to most accurately assess the performance of this 
algorithm, we consider only PSF matrices that are invertible. 
We will focus the discussion on linear arrays, since the 
constraints can be extended in a straightforward manner to 
2-D array geometries. 
Minimum Redundancy Arrays 
The key to a non-singular PSF matrix is to maximize the 
spatial period over which the PSF repeats. In this way, 
shifting the PSF to form the PSF matrix will not produce 
rows that are linearly dependent. To obtain narrow PSFs 
with long spatial periods, we require a high number of 
different baselines. The most baselines for a given number 
of apertures can be obtained by using minimum redundancy 
arrays (MRAs). Two classes of these arrays exist, restricted 
and unrestricted. The unrestricted array maximizes the 
number of spatial frequencies sampled, whereas the 
restricted array maximizes the number of contiguous spatial 
frequencies, with some being duplicated. Our interest is 
therefore with the unrestricted arrays. The relative spacing 
of the unrestricted arrays (normalized to the smallest one in 
each case) is given up to 11 array elements in Table 1 [4]. 
Numerical analysis revealed a trend in the maximum 
dimension of full rank matrices for each configuration. It 
appears that matrices larger than the tabulated values will 
not be full rank. With the number of footprint cells 
determined, a requirement on the ground resolution would 
then determine the field of view that could be processed 
using SPIR, as shown in Section 6. 
Solving the System of Linear Equations 
Restricting the PSF matrix to be invertible does not 
guarantee that it will be well conditioned. The conditioning 
of the matrix rapidly worsens as its dimension is increased. 
The implication is that as the number of footprint cells is 
increased, the corresponding PSF matrix becomes more 
poorly conditioned. Singular value decomposition (SVD) 
was found to give very satisfactory results even for matrices 
with high condition numbers, with low computational cost. 
An additional advantage of SVD is that it is not essential 
that the PSF matrix be full rank. By eliminating a sufficient 
number of the smallest singular values (which are associated 
with linearly dependent rows), the system can be solved, for 
a small loss in accuracy. Clearly there is a trade-off to be 
made between good numerical conditioning and loss of 
information. 
6. VALIDATION OF SPIR 
Initial Implementation 
In our initial evaluation of SPIR, we begin by limiting the 
cluster to be one-dimensional and side looking, as shown in 
Figure 6. Since the PRF will be chosen low enough to avoid 
range ambiguities, we may limit the footprint to be a strip at 
constant range, extending in the cross-range direction. 
We select a cluster of eight satellites from Table 1. The 
maximum number of cross-range cells is 107. The 
associated PSF (assuming uniformly illuminated rectangular 
apertures) is shown in Figure 7. 
4 - 2 0 5 3  
Figure 6 - Linear Satellite Array with Four Satellites 
A highly simplified model is used to generate the ground 
and target retum, later evaluations will use clutter models. In 
our model the radar cross section of footprint cells and 
targets is constant regardless of viewing angle or incident 
frequency. The clutter Doppler frequency varies Xinearly 
across the footprint, it is simply a function of grazing angle 
and cluster velocity. Each footprint cell contains only one 
discrete clutter Doppler frequency. Target Doppler shift is a 
function of the vector sum of the velocity of the footprint 
cell the target is in, as well as its own velocity. Noise is not 
included in the signal model at this stage. 
ss 
Figure 7 - Point Spread Function for an 8-Satellite 
Unrestricted Array 
We may then use the equation (14) to generate the retum 
signal as a function of time and footprint cell angular 
location. 'Taking the DFT of this signal results in the 
composite signal S(S,. m). Figure 8 shows an exampl.e, with 
two different targets. 
Solving equation (20) for the radar cross-section matrix, a, 
gives the brue ground scene, as shown in Figure 9. 
Figure 8 .- Composile Signal for a Footprint Strip with Two 
Targets 
Figure 9 .- Recovered Signal for a Footprint Strip with Two 
Targets 
The two tiirgets are clearly visible. The low velocity target is 
close to the clutter, while the higher ve:locity target is well 
separated. Note that due to sampling of the Doppler shifts, 
the higher velocity target is aliased and :.mually appears at a 
lower Doppler frequency index. 
Future Work 
Having proven the concept, future work will first focus on 
extending the footprint into two dimensions. Clutter Doppler 
shift will be modelled more accurately; the number of 
discrete Doppler frequencies in a cell will depend on its 
extent and the Doppler frequency resolution. Clutter RCS 
will also be modelled more accurately, wing various clutter 
models. Noise will also be included; this will allow the 
evaluation of different thresholding schemes. 
Another important factor in the application of SPIR is the 
high computational load. Future work will investigate 
processing optimisatiion and ways of effectively distributing 
the processing load between satellites in the cluster. 
4 - 2 0 5 4  
7. CONCLUSIONS 
Space-based interferometric radar provides significant 
advantages over single aperture space-based radar. Multiple 
aperture interferometers can provide both high resolution 
and wide coverage. A cluster of small, cheap satellites can 
provide good performance, with lower system-level risk. 
We have proposed an algorithm for use in space-based 
interferometric radar. Scanned Pattern Interferometric Radar 
(SPIR) uses concepts from interferometry to accurately 
reconstruct the true ground scene. Moving targets are 
completely separated from clutter, therefore detection 
performance is limited only by signal to noise ratio. 
The primary advantage of SPIR is that it does not require 
accurate clutter information or prior target information to be 
effective, unlike other interferometric algorithms such as 
STAF’. 
We have performed a mathematical derivation of SPIR for a 
one-dimensional cluster. Simulation of a simple case showed 
that SPIR does indeed reconstruct the ground scene, as 
expected. 
Future work will build a more representative simulation and 
examine distributed processing options. 
REFERENCES 
[l] DeLap, R.A., “Recent and Current Air Force Space 
Based Radar Efforts”, IEEE Aerospace Conference 
Proceedings, 1999. 
121 Cantafio, Leopold (editor). Space Based Radar 
Handbook, Artech House, 1989. 
[3] Klemm, R. “Introduction to Space-Time Adaptive 
Processing”, IEEE Electronics & Communication 
Engineering Journal, Volume 11, Issue 1, February 1999 
KAREN MARAIS was bom in 
Pretoria, South Africa in 1973. She 
received her BS in Electrical 
Engineering from the University of 
Stellenbosch, South Africa, in 
1994, and her BS in Mathematics 
and Applied Mathematics from the 
University of South Africa in 1998. 
She has worked for a number of 
years in the South African 
aerospace industry. Currently she is a graduate Research 
Assistant at the MIT Space Systems Laboratory. Her 
research interests include space-based radar, 
communications and systems engineering. 
DR. RAYMOND SEDWICK was 
bom in Chicora, Pennsylvania in 
1970. He received his BS in 
Aerospace Engineering from Penn 
State University in 1992, and his SM 
and PhD in Aeronautics and 
Astronautics from MIT in 1994 and 
1997 respectively in the area of 
advanced space propulsion, with a 
minor in Physics. He then held a 
Postdoctoral position at the MIT Space Systems Lab for two 
years, studying distributed satellite systems and satellite 
formation jiying. Dr. Sedwick is currently a Research 
Scientist at the MIT SSL, where his research interests 
continue to be space propulsion, orbital mechanics, and 
most recently space-based radar. He is a member of the 
AAS, Sigma Xi, Sigma Gamma Tau, and a senior member of 
the AIAA. 
[4] Moffet, A.T. “Minimum-Redundancy Linear Arrays”, 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, AP-12, 
pp 172-175. 
4 - 2 0 5 5  
