Damage Identification by NSMS Blade Resonance 
Tracking in Mistuned Rotorw 
Dr. Mathieu Mercadal, Dr. Andy von Flotow, Peter Tappert 
Hood Technology Corporation 
1750 Country Club Road 
Hood River, OR 9703 1 
hoodtocht i r ' lcomnus~~~.~om 
541-387-2288 
Abstract- Damage in rotor blades, including cracks, tend to 
shift the blades' resonant frequencies. Blade resonances 
have thus been envisioned as a damage indicator. This 
paper studies issues that arise in blade resonance 
identification using Non-contacting Stress Monitoring 
Systems (NSMS) when blade resonances have slight 
variation (mistuning) and are dynamically coupled. The 
study compares simulation results to experimental data 
obtained during seeded fault tests. The main findings are as 
follows: 
0 The forced resonant response of a blade is seldom 
dominated by the blade's uncoupled dynamics. 
Changes due to damage in one blade are thus often 
reflected in the responses of many blades. 
To reliably identify damage by looking at one 
individual response at a time, the shift in resonant 
frequency resulting from damage must be larger than 
the frequency redistribution due to blade-to-blade 
coupling (e.g. 1%-2%). Only for uncoupled blades can 
smaller shifts in resonance fiequency be reliably 
detected. 
For finer damage identification (e.g. less than 1%), a 
global identification method utilizing all blade 
responses at once must be use to determine blade 
dynamics and coupling. This can be attempted with an 
NSMS system, which senses every blade response. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
3. COUPLED SYSTEMS, COUPLING STRENGTH 
4. MODELING AND SIMULATION OF CRITICALLY COUPLES 
5. &SONANCE AND RESONANCE SHIFT DENTIFICATION 
6. DAMAGE DETECTION OF SIMULATED SYSTEM 
7. EXPERIMENTAL IDENTlFICATION OF BLADE DAMAGE 
SYSTEMS 
AT CARL 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
High cyclic stress on turbo-machinery rotor blades leads to 
high cycle fatigue and crack propagation. The appearance 
of cracks, especially in high stress regions, changes the 
dynamic response of the blades. Figure 2, for example, 
shows calculated frequency shifts of the 2nd torsion mode of 
an F100-PW-100 fan blade as a function of crack length and 
crack location (the calculation models one blade only). 
It has been proposed for some time now to use blade 
resonances as a blade damage indicator [ 11. Blade response 
is cumbersome to operationally monitor using strain gages, 
but advances in Non-contacting Stress Monitoring Systems 
(NSMS) make it possible to monitor every blade on an 
entire disk with a very small number of sensors which are 
non-intrusively located on the engine case [2]. Hence, it is 
now conceivable to monitor blade response as a part of a 
Prognostics and Health Monitoring (PHM) system. The 
question becomes how to identify blade resonances from 
blade response. Hood Technology is currently using 
identification algorithms that treat the response of one blade 
at a time to detect damage in that particular blade (blade 
response may be monitored by several sensors). Section 2 
of this paper shows blade resonance identification based on 
this current procedure and the shortfalls associated with it. 
More complex identification algorithms can be devised to 
treat the responses of several blades together in order to 
accommodate inter-blade coupling. Such algorithms are 
numerically more intensive and require very good 
measurements to resolve system modes. To develop and test 
such algorithms a simulation model is used. The model, 
introduced in Section 3, consists of nearly identical, weakly 
coupled resonators. Blade responses obtained with the 
model are qualitatively and quantitatively close to responses 
measured during tests. Section 4 contains the mathematical 
derivation of the model and discusses the results of the 
simulation of a simple, two resonator system. 
New blade resonance identification methods are introduced 
in Section 5. These methods, with increasing complexity, 
try to estimate system modes and inter-blade coupling. A 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 EEE 
* Updated September 15,2000 
7 - 3 2 6 3  
statistical and very straightforward method is also 
introduced. Current and newly proposed methods are 
extensively tested against simulation data in Section 6. They 
are also tested against seeded fault test data obtained at the 
CARL facility, as discussed in Section 7. 
2. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
It is easy to extract the frequency, the resonance factor Q, 
the amplitude and the phase of a blade resonance from the 
NSMS response when the blade has a simple resonance. 
However, blade responses are coupled aerodynamically and 
mechanically through the hub, their mounting platform or 
through the shroud, depending on the rotor construction. 
Figure 1 shows an example of NSMS tip-delay 
measurements of a coupled first torsional mode response 
from two blades belonging to a 33-blade, integrally bladed, 
19" Titanium compressor rotor at CARL [3,4]. The 
response of Blade #13 is closely matched by a Single- 
Degree of Freedom model (SDOF). A best SDOF fit can 
also be found for Blade #6, a weakly responding blade, but 
other dynamics are clearly involved in the response. Note 
that the amplitude of Blade #13 response is 3 times that of 
Blade #6. Such variability in response amplitudes is 
commonly observed and, on a given rotor, this variation 
ranges from a 3:l to a 1 O : l  factor, even though blades are 
nearly identical and are excited uniformly. High responding 
blades exhibit simple responses, weakly responding blades 
exhibit complex dynamics. Identifying blade resonance 
using the response of a single blade appears therefore to be 
straightforward for high responding blades; for weakly 
responding blades, this procedure is however more 
problematic. For PHM application, one needs a reliable, yet 
numerically efficient procedure with a low rate of false 
alarms. 
FIOO-PW-I00 Fan Blade, 2nd Torsional Mode vs. Crack Length 3.4 
3.3 
3.2 
3.1 
3.0 
2.9 
2.8 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 .o 1.2 
Crack Length - inches 
Figure 2 F100-PW-100 fan blade. Changes in 2nd Torsional (2T) frequency as a function of crack length. Calculated results 
from Pratt & Whitney. 
CARL, Dec 6, 99, Baseline: Blade #6 a  
I 
-1 
6600 6650 67CQ 6750 6800 6850 6900 6950 7Mx) 
RPM 
Figure 1 NSMS Response: Blade #6 and #13 1T response, SDOF fit, baseline run, Dec 06,99. 
7-3264 
3. COUPLED SYSTEMS, COUPLING STRENGTH 
General 
Rotor blades are usually designed to be identical, but 
variations are introduced during the fabrication process. 
This leads to slight mismatches in blade dynamics. This is 
referred to as mistuning. Blade mistuning is typically less 
than a few percent. For example, the standard deviation of 
the second torsional mode of the 33 blades of CARL'S 19" 
HJK12141 rotor is 1.0% [4]. 
Blades interact aerodynamically, through the hub to which 
they are attached, and sometimes through a shroud added at 
midspan to provide damping. The dimensionless variability 
in resonance frequency is sometimes close to the 
dimensionless coupling. In that case, although coupling is 
weak, it may become "critical" and lead to a large variability 
in the amplitude of the observed blade responses. The blade 
with the largest response typically vibrates 3 to 10 times 
more than the blade with the smallest response. At CARL 
[4], this ratio was 3.6 for the first torsional mode. During 
Seeded Fault Engine Tests at Pratt & Whitney in 1998/1999 
[2], variability in second torsion (2T) response amplitudes 
on the fan blade of an FlOO engine was at least 4. [2] 
An Idealized Model 
Figure 3 is an idealization that takes into account blade-to- 
blade and blade-through-hub coupling. By randomly 
distributing blade resonances, it is possible to 'lmistune" the 
rotor. By varying the hub's inertia and varying the coupling 
stiffness between blades, it is possible to change coupling 
and obtain a "critically" coupled system. Blade resonances 
typically have a Q factor in excess of 200. 
4. MODELING AND SIMULATION OF 
CRITICALLY COUPLED SYSTEMS 
Blade Response, Modal Response 
Blade responses are linear combinations of system modal 
responses. Theoretically, the matrix of linear coefficients 
transforming blade responses into modal responses is a 
complex matrix. However, when damping is small, this 
matrix is almost real. Furthermore, in blade coordinates, 
this matrix coincides with the matrix of left eigen-vectors for 
the system's stiffness matrix. Defining: 
KV=VK 
K= diag(kl, k2, . . . kN), k, scalar "stiffness" of the i" 
K= stifhess matrix of coupled system. 
V= matrix of eigenvectors: V = [V1)V21.. lVN], such 
mode. 
that ki Vi = K Vi 
If X = [xl; xz: . . . XN] is the vector of tip displacements, and 
w the frequency of the excitation, blade responses in the 
frequency domain are calculated as follows: 
x(jw) =(K + j d  - w2j1 B u(jw) 
= V(K + j w c  - o2)-' V-IB uow) = v x(j0) 
where: 
x(jw) = vector of system's modal responses, each 
response being a single degree of freedom 
oscillator whose resonance coincides with a system 
mode. 
= the damping matrix (C is diagonal = C) 
= N by 1 complex vector, whose k" entry has unit 
magnitude (all blades are excited with identical 
strength) 
excitation. 
C 
B 
u(jo) = complex vector representing the strength of the 
The NSMS response, N(w), is the real part of the phase 
shifted blade response (phase shift depends on the 
circumferential clocking of the excitation). Since V is real, 
N(w) = Re{X(jw) (exp(j0)) = Re(V Xow) exp(j0)) 
= V Re {X(jw) exp(j@)) = V N(w) 
Base (Hub) 4 
Blades nearly identical when 
mounted on stiff mount (mi 
vary from 1% to 3%) 
Base many times more 
massive than blades 
Hub resonance much lower 
than blades' 
Coupling through base 
and/or from blade to blade 
Figure 3 A lightly coupled subsystem model. Weak blade-to-blade coupling is provided inertially through the massive hub, 
or elastically through a shroud or through an elastic hub. 
7 - 3 2 6 5  
Or, conversely: N(w) = V-' N(w) = W N(o) 
Hence, NSMS responses are also linear combinations of 
NSMS modal responses. The matrix of coefficients 
transforming blade into modal NSMS responses is the 
matrix of left eigenvector W. This remains true as long as 
damping is small, whatever coupling strength is present. 
A Two-Blade Example 
A system similar to the one presented in Figure 3, but with 
only two "blades", is first simulated to understand the basics 
of critical coupling. Two identical subsystems with Q = 200 
and stiffness mismatched by 1% are gradually coupled 
together using a spring. As the coupling spring reaches 
0.5% (or half the mistuning), the amplitude response ratio is 
maximized. For small mistuning, critical coupling is always 
half the spring mistuning and the response ratio increases 
with Q. In Figure 4, the response ratio is 2. Interestingly, 
the response of the soft blade is moderately increased (less 
than 20%) whereas the response of the stiff blade is 
decreased by almost 50%. We conclude that critical 
coupling is a destructive interaction between the blades: the 
soft blade acts as a tuned mass absorber for the stiff blade. 
5 .  RESONANCE AND RESONANCE SHIFT 
IDENTIFICATION 
In this section we present 4 methods to identify blade 
resonant frequency ftom NSMS data. These methods are: 
a. Single Degree of Freedom Fit of individual blade 
responses. This method was used by Hood Technology 
and others in several SFET tests. 
b. Single Degree of Freedom fit of combinations of blade 
responses. This method is being investigated as a 
means of inexpensively identifying blade coupling. 
Model based identification. This is a global 
identification method where all responses are used at 
once and a structure for the coupled stiffness matrix is 
assumed. This method is computationally intensive, but 
promises to generate the uncoupled blade resonances. 
Response correlation from run to run. This method 
skips the identification step and directly compares past 
to present responses to detect resonance shifts. 
SDOF Fit of Single Blade Response 
A Single Degree Of Freedom (SDOF) model contains six 
parameters [2] :  
1. Resonance frequency, 0 
2. Resonance factor, Q 
3. Response amplitude, A 
4. Phase fiom vibration node to detector, 0 
5 .  Mean response, M (corresponds to the phase from 
shaft reference to detector) 
6. Linear trend, L, which takes into account axial shaft 
motion and blade twist as a function of load and 
RPM [2] .  
These six parameters can be identified by minimizing the 
quadratic error between the modeled SDOF and the 
measured blade response. The search algorithm converges 
well even when the response exhibits coupling, although the 
fit is of poor visual quality (see Figure 1). 
Assuming that the identified SDOF responses are the system 
modal responses N(o) (no guarantee, except maybe for 
resonances identified using the response of high responding 
Weakly Coupled, Mistuned Two-Blade System 
Response of every 
blade if decoupled 
0.97 0.98 0.99 1 1 .Ol 1.02 1.03 
Normalized Frequency 
Figure 4 A two-blade system with critical coupling. 
7 - 3 2 6 6  
blades), then it is possible to a-posteriori solve for the 
eigenvector matrix W by solving the following set of linear 
equations: 
N(w) = WN(o) 
where N(w) are the blade responses. Measured NSMS 
responses typically contain several hundred data points over 
the relevant RPM range. W is thus obtained through a 
pseudo-inversion. The most common solution is the least 
square solution. W should be an orthogonal matrix. 
SDOF Fit of Optimal Blade Response Combinations 
As pointed in Section 4, blade responses can be linearly 
combined to produce a system mode. A system mode 
exhibits an SDOF response. The parameters of the SDOF 
are the frequency, amplitude and phase of a system mode. 
When coupling is weak, the linear combination can be 
expected to be dominated by the response of one blade. One 
could subtract from that blade response a proper linear 
combination of other blade responses in order to converge 
on an SDOF which is the exact match of a system's mode. 
For Blade # 1, this problem becomes: 
Find (01, Q1, AI, 01 ,  L1, Ml), the six parameters of a SDOF 
model and N-1 real coefficients Wlk, k # 1, N = number of 
blades, that minimize the norm of the error function: 
E(r)=(N1 (r) -I- Z W l k  N &'))-SDOF(fii, Qi,Ai ,@I. Li ,Mi) 
This search procedure adds N-1 parameters to the single 
blade search described in the previous section. The vector: 
W1 = [1.0, wI2, ..., wlN] should be a left eigenvector 
associated with system mode Cl,. The vector can be 
normalized at the end of the identification procedure. The 
procedure can be repeated N times, insisting on the j' trial 
that wj be 1. Once all blades have been processed, the 
coupled stifhess matrix can be calculated as follows: 
K = W-' diag(ClI2, Cl:,. . . , ONz) W 
Where W = [WlT1W2 I...lW, '. For each row, the 
frequencies: 
k# 1 
should be the uncoupled blade frequencies. 
This approach is computationally appealing. However, the 
problem is not numerically well-conditioned for system 
modes with large modal overlap (modal bandwidth larger 
than modal spacing.) 
Model Based Identification 
Model based identification is computationally much more 
demanding than the SDOF fit of single blades or optimal 
combinations of blade responses. The method should, 
however, converge and produce the exact values for system 
modes and inter-blade coupling if the model is correctly 
parameterized and the excitation is sufficiently rich. 
Here we assume a stiffness matrix K with a structure chosen 
to reflect a selected coupling mechanism. The coupling 
mechanism should be selected based on physical knowledge 
of the system. The stiffness matrix K may be constrained to 
be positive real. K may be assumed to be tri-diagonal with 
coupling involving neighboring blades only. Coupling can 
be firther simplified by assuming identical inter-blade 
coupling strength for all blades, as was used in the 
simulation. 
In the model-based approach, all responses are evaluated at 
once using equations in Section 4. The number of equations 
is NRpM x N, where NWM is the number of RPM data points 
and N the number of blades. The minimum number of 
parameters is N x 6 if no coupling is assumed (stifhess, Q, 
amplitude, phase, mean and trend). The number of 
parameters increases to N x Ncoupling where Ncoupling is 
the number of coupling degrees of freedom, when coupling 
is added. For example, Ncoupling = 1 when each blade is 
connected to its neighbors only with an independent spring. 
If all coupling springs are identical, the number of additional 
parameters drops fiom N x 1 to just 1. 
Although it is computationally more demanding, the method 
properly identified the parameters of the simulation model 
when the simulated responses were used as an input. The 
procedure included over 250 parameters and over 2,000 data 
points. The algorithm ran for a few minutes on a 233 MHz 
Pentium 11 laptop. 
Response Correlation, Correlation Factor 
Assume that an old and a current blade response are 
available, function of RPM: Kld(r) and Kew(r). Further 
assume that K&r) = KId(r - &), that is, that the response 
frequency has shifted by AR. The correlation between 
Ke,(r) = R,,Id(r ) becomes: 
KId(r - AR)dr 
'max - 'min 'max - 'min 
2 < A R <  - 
The correlation factor, p(AR)  is the normalized cross 
correlation, or: 
When the new response is equal to the old one but frequency 
shifted, i.e. = R&r - A b ) ,  p is maximum and equal 
to 1 for AR = A&. If the response is distorted, or when 
7 - 3 2 6 7  
noise is present, the maximum p is less than 1. Frequency 
shift is selected as the value maximizing p(AR). The peak 
value of p provides a confidence index in the detected shift. 
The correlation factor is insensitive to simple changes in 
response amplitude and to translation of the origin: if heW(r) 
= h KId(r) + p, p(0) = 1. This has practical importance in 
the NSMS application since the reference shaft sensor may 
be moved (thus shifting the response by p) and the intensity 
of the response may depend on operation conditions (thus 
scaling all responses by h). 
Cross-correlation can be very efficiently calculated using 
Fast Fourier Transform algorithms. 
6 .  DAMAGE DETECTION OF S m A T E D  SYSTEM 
A model of 33-blade, weakly coupled, mistuned system was 
derived with the following goals (to model observed 
characteristics of the CARL rotor:) 
Amplitude response ratio around 3.5, peak response 0 
around 0.025 in. 
0 Q=250, 
0 Center frequency at 6,750 RPM, 24E excitation. 
Mistuning (without coupling) 1% of nominal. 
In this study, we determine how shifts of individual blade 
resonances affect blade responses and system modes. This 
assumes that we can identify system modes from blade 
responses. Changes vary depending on how "critically" 
blades couple to neighbors. 
Using the model, damage was simulated by softening the 
resonance of one blade at a time. The system modes are 
then calculated with the damaged blade. Figure 6 shows the 
result of a perturbation of 1% on a strongly interactingL 
weakly responding blade. This change only results in a 
maximum shift of 0.2% in system modes. The resonance of 
the strongly interacting blade must be changed significantly 
(4%) to see a significant shift in system modes (Figure 7,) 
For weakly interacting, strongly respondinq blades, 
detecting changes is easier. Figure 8 shows the system 
modes after a weakly interacting blade has been perturbed, 
1%. The identified system mode also shifts by nearly 1%. 
The number of blades was chosen to be that of CARL'S 
HKJ12141 compressor. Figure 5 shows the normalized 
resonance frequency of individual, uncoupled blades as a 
function of blade number. The distribution of blade 
resonances is normal, with standard deviation of 1.0%. 
Coupling is added between adjacent blades. The spring 
constant is 0.8% of the average blade stiffness. 
System Mode Shifts 
Critically Coupled System Simulation: Blade Resonances 
I 
1.03 . . - _ , .  . . - .  . . . . ., . . . . i . .  . .,. . . . . . . ! " i  I I 
0.98 . . - _ , _  . . . . , -  . . . . . - - ~ - . . . , -  . - - - , -  - . t '  v .  
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Blade Number 
Figure 5 Individual, uncoupled blade resonance vs. Blade Number. The standard deviation is 1.01% of nominal. 
7 - 3 2 6 8  
Resonance after 1% Perturbation of Blade 1 
1.04 
1.02 
x 
C 
$ 1.01 
3 
IL 
3 1 -  
€ 
z" 
0.99 
0.98 
I 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 I -+ Original 1 
.--E?-- Perturbed 
0.97 1 I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Mode Number 
Figure 6 System mode shifts with 1% change in Blade #l's resonance. 
Resonance after 4% Perturbation of Blade 1 
1.04 1 
I 
I '  I 
0.97' I I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Mode Number 
Figure 7 System mode changes with 4% change in Blade # 1's resonance. 
Generalizing, system modes are not reliable indicators of 
blade damage which shifts individual blade eigenfrequency 
by less than about 20,  where G is the standard deviation of 
the blade resonance distribution. Both svstem modes and 
couzding should be identified to be able to discern damage 
in low responding blades, which strongly interact with 
neighboring blades. Many system modes are present in the 
response of strongly interacting, weakly responding blades. 
For such blades, blade damage will show weakly in a 
number of system modes, until the damage is large enough 
that the blade's resonance leaves the interaction band. 
Remaining modes will still be affected by the change. 
Single Blade SDOF Fit 
For every simulated blade response, an SDOF model is 
fitted to the data. Convergence is rapid for every blade. 
The identification process is repeated twice, once with a 1% 
shift and once with 4% shift in the resonance of Blade #1. 
SDOF identified frequencies are plotted (Figure 9) versus 
blade number since every fit is obtained fiom the data of a 
single blade. Interestingly enough, a 1% damage in Blade 
#1 does not shift the identified frequency for Blade #1: only 
the phase and amplitude of the response (which are not 
shown here) are affected. The identified frequencies of 
Blade #2 and #33 are however noticeably modified. The 
7 - 3 2 6 9  
Resonance after 1% Perturbation of Blade 19 
1.04 
0.98 i 
-43- 
+ 
Identified Blade Modes, Nominal Case 
Identified Blade Modes after 4% shift in Blade #1 
1.02 - 
h 
? 
3 
LL 
U 
p 1.01 - 
.- w
3 1 -  !z 
z" 
0.97 ' 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Mode Number 
Figure 8 Coupled mode shifts with 1% softening in Blade # 19's resonance. 
SDOF Fit of Indiwdual Blade Responses 
1.04 1 I 
4% damage in Blade #1 leads to a 3% shift in its identified 
frequency, while the identified frequencies of Blade #2 and 
#33 are perturbed by an amount equivalent to that produced 
by a 1% damage in Blade #l. Here, damage in Blade #1 
could lead to declaring Blade #1, #2 and #33 as damaged. 
SDOF Fit of Optimal Blade Response Combinations 
This method identifies eigenvectors as well as modal 
frequencies. It is numerically efficient in that it searches for 
a single resonance per search and repeats the search process 
as many times as there are blades. 
Figure 10 plots the identified frequencies versus the actual 
system modes. The procedure tends to identify certain 
modes more than once and fails to detect many system 
modes. The method tends to identi@ softer modes. The 
procedure does produce the right eigenvector for system 
modes corresponding to weakly interacting blades, as 
illustrated in Figure 11. When a mode is identified several 
7 - 3 2 7 0  
Simulated Blade Response: Resonance Frequencies 
1.04 
-rk- System Modes + Coupled Blade/Single Mode Identification 
1.03 - 
1 -  
% 
c s 
8 
s 
2 
.- A 1 -  
€ 
2 
E 1.02 - 
E 1.01 - 
LL 
-0 
- .- 
0.98 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Mode Number 
Figure 10 Result of SDOF identification of optimally coupled blades on simulated system responses. Comparison to system's 
modes. 
-0.2' I I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Blade response number 
Figure 11 Mode 4 left eigenvector vs. identification result. 
times, a scaled eigenvector is generated, which contains a 1 
at the location specified by the optimization. 
Modifying the procedure to enforce orthogonality between 
eigenvectors is a logical next step. This was attempted with 
little success. Another approach is model-based 
identification, which does enforce the proper characteristics 
for the parameters. 
Model Based Identification 
The model-based identification approach converges 
perfectly and produces the exact parameters when used 
against simulated blade responses. Once the coupled 
stiffhess matrix is calculated in blade coordinates, it is easy 
to obtain the individual stifhess of the uncoupled blades and 
detect minute stiffness shifts in individual blades. 
The of the approach was not tested in the presence of noise, 
nor was it tested with an inaccurate model. 
7 - 3 2 7 1  
Shgt Identification Using Response Cross-correlation 
For coupled blades, resonance shifts result in changes in 
both response shape and amplitude. Correlation between the 
healthy and damage blade responses will thus be less than 1: 
Figure 11 shows correlation as a function of RPM shift for 
Blade #1 response after a 1% resonance shift of the 
decoupled resonance of Blade #l. The maximum is 0.7 and 
identifies a 0.4% shift in resonance. This is larger than the 
0.2% shift seen in system Mode 7 (Figure 6), but still 
underestimates the actual shift. 
Conclusion 
The simulation of weakly coupled, slightly mistuned 
resonant subsystems generates responses which are 
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to what is measured 
on rotors by NSMS systems in actual test campaigns. In 
particular, one observes a variability in response amplitudes 
between low responding blades and high responding blades. 
A simple two-blade idealized system shows that a critical 
amount of coupling leads to destructive interaction between 
blades and a drastic reduction in the amplitude of the 
response of the stiff blade. The response of the soft blade is 
amplified, but only by a small amount. The soft blade acts 
as a tuned absorber for the stiff blade. 
7 - 3 2 7 2  
Simulation of a 33-blade idealized model, with blades 
coupling only to direct neighbors was also developed. The 
parameters were tuned to have a resonance distribution and 
amplitude variability equivalent to what was measured at 
CARL. The simulation shows that the shift in resonance of 
individual blades has various results: 
predicts shifts for blades which interact weakly. For 
strongly interacting blades, the method can be made to 
work using heuristic elements such as searching for 
softening blades only, or ignoring cases where the 
peak value of the cross-correlation small. 
For blades interacting weakly with their neighbors, a 
change in blade resonance frequency mostly shows in 
the response of the damaged blade. Conversely, 
damage done to other blades does not significantly 
affect the response of such blades. 
For critically interacting blades, simulated damage 
shows in the response of several blades. Once a 
coupled blade is softened, its amplitude generally 
increases and the shape of its response (vs RPM) and 
the response of its neighbors is strongly modified. The 
changes in response of neighboring interacting blades 
all happen in the first percent of resonance shift. No 
further changes are noticed in neighboring blades after 
damage exceeds 1% or so. The damaged blade, on the 
other hand, begins to respond as an isolated blade as 
its resonance is shifted further. 
NSMS responses can theoretically be used to obtain 
both the system modes and the coupling matrix. It is 
thus theoretically possible to calculate individual blade 
resonances from the coupled responses and more 
accurately identify and track blade damage. 
Identification of coupling is necessary to identify shifts 
of less than 1-2% for blades which critically interact 
with their neighbors. 
A simple approach for detecting resonance shift is to 
calculate cross-correlation between nominal and 
perturbed blade response. The method correctly 
Blade 1 Response 
20 
15 
10 
5 
- .; 0 
-5 
-15 lot 
-- 
6600 6650 6700 6750 6800 6850 6900 
RPM 
l r  I 
.- 
0 
-100 -50 0 50 100 
Shift in RPM 
Figure 12: Blade#l nominal response; response after 1% shift in resonance, and cross-correlation. 
7 - 3 2 7 3  
Wake Control Rods 
.......................................................................................... 
....... ./ ' *  .................................................................................................................................... I 
Figure 13: CARL Wake management experimental setup. 
7. EPERIMENTAL bENTIFICATION OF BLADE 
DAMAGE AT CARL 
Experimental Setup 
The CARL facility at the Wright Patterson Air Force 
Laboratory was built by Pratt & W h e y  to study stage 
matching. The facility includes a 19", 33-blade, integrally 
bladed core compressor and a wake generator system 
comprised of 24 vanes which are 3/16" thick and have 
symmetrical airfoil with no angle of attack or twist. Hood 
Technology has conducted HCF mitigation experiments at 
CARL,. To support testing, Hood Technology deployed its 
own NSMS system. The system used four custom-made 
Capacitec sensors as blade detectors. The sensors were 
placed to sample blade vibration at four locations along its 
chord. The sensor tips are 0.060" in diameter. 
Damage Simulation of Blade # I l ,  #22, #33 
In a second HCF campaign at CARL, Hood Technology 
had 3 blades modified (Figure 14) in order to test damage 
detection capabilities using NSMS. The first torsional mode 
of three blades was softened by adding tip masses. Four 1/8 
gram strain gages were added at each edge on each face of 
Blade #11, #22 and #33. . From calculation of the modal 
mass of Mode 1T ( [ 5 ] ) ,  it was predicted that this would 
nominally soften the resonance by 3%. This calculation 
does not account for the mass of the glue, which fbrther 
loaded the blade tips and further softened the resonance. 
This softened the nominal resonance at 6,600 RPM to about 
6,350 RPM. Resonance sweeps were performed from 6,500 
RPM to 6,900 RPM. For operational reasons, no sweeps 
7 - 3 2 7 4  
0.5 kg 
ass: 
Figure 14: CARL compressor 1T Mode Shape. Modification to Blade 11,22 and 33. Gages added 0.5 grams to the blade. 
This is expected to move blade resonance down by 3% into the 6300 RPM range. 
were made in the 6,300 RPM region (shaft resonance). 
Hence the data collected in May 2,000 missed the shifted 
blade resonance for the three modified blades. 
Identification Results 
Four identification procedures were tested to detect blade 
damage: 
1. SDOF best fit to each response. 
2. SDOF of optimally combined responses where every 
blade response is modified by a linear combination of 
other blade responses to unveil a system mode. 
3. Model based identification. 
4. Shift identification using cross-correlation. 
Figure 15 shows the result of the identification process of 
Method 1 and 2 using the December 1999 data. The 
produced modes are very close and one sees a tendency to 
identify modes several times. One measure of goodness for 
the fit is the orthogonality of the eigenvector matrix which 
can be calculated a posteriori (single blade method), or is 
generated as part of the identification process (optimal 
combination). Method 1 produces a very badly conditioned 
eigenvector matrix. Method 2 produces a nearly orthogonal 
eigenvector matrix with the December 1999 data, but not 
with the May 2000 data. Both methods detect a uniform 
fiequency shift caused by temperature (May weather was 
about 40F warmer, and the resonances are about 114 percent 
softer). 
No satisfactory coupling model could be found to obtain a 
good fit with actual data collected at CARL using model- 
based identification. Poor convergence was observed while 
the complexity of the coupling model kept increasing 
(coupling to neighbor, to next three neighbors, though hub, 
etc.) 
The correlation method produces interesting results which 
corroborate the simulation results. Figure 16 shows the peak 
correlation between December 1999 and May 2000 for 
every blade. The lowest correlation factors are obtained for 
the "damaged" blades since the sweep RPM range did not 
contain the resonance of the modified blades. A number of 
strongly interacting blades have low correlation factors as 
well. The method also detects a uniform frequency shift due 
to temperature. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Damage caused by high cyclic stress in turbo-machinery 
rotor blades is expected to cause a shift in the resonance of 
the damaged blade. With the use of an NSMS system, it is 
now possible to unobtrusively monitor the dynamic response 
of every blade. Obtaining blade characteristics from blade 
response is, however, difficult because of mistuning and 
weak interaction. Rotors have nearly identical blades which 
are weakly coupled either aerodynamically or mechanically 
through the hub, their platform, shrouds etc. Simulation 
indicates that critical coupling leads to significant reduction 
of the amplitude of the response of a blade interacting with a 
slightly softer one. Coupling increases the soft blade 
response as well, but by a limited amount. 
Simulation results show that the resonance of weakly 
interacting, strongly responding blades can be readily 
identified. A damage-induced shift mostly affects the 
damaged blade and is weakly visible in other blade 
responses. However, many blades interact critically with 
neighbors. For such blades, slight damage can only be 
detected by identifying system modes as well as blade-to- 
blade coupling, Damage in one blade significantly changes 
the response of many other interacting blades although 
system resonant frequencies change little. As damage 
grows, and once the blade dynamics has been modified 
enough to take it out of the interaction range, it is easy to 
7 - 3 2 7 5  
CARL, December 99: I T  Mode, 24E Excitation 
7000 
6950} 1 -E+-- SDOF of lndiwdal Response 1  SDOF of Combined Responses 
6850 - 
5 6800- 
[r 
6750 - 
6700 - 
6650 & I 
6600 I I I 
Blade Number 
Figure 15: System mode frequency estimates from single blade SDOF fit and optimally combined SDOF fit. 
Correlation between December 1999 and May 2000 Responses 
Modified Blades. Low correlation 
because search window is too narrow 
High, even though amplitudes have changed 
and frequencies have shifted due to 
temperature 
0.2 
., 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Blade Number 
Figure 16: Peak correlation between December 1999 and May 2000 response vs. Blade number. 
track frequency shifts. With typical levels of mistuning and 
coupling it thus seems difficult to unambiguously detect 
shifts of individual blade resonances of less than 2%, that is, 
less than twice the standard deviation of the mode 
distribution. Hence, the simplest data interpretation method, 
correlation, seems to be the best. 
Tests at the Air Force's Compressor Aero Research Lab 
(CARL) conducted by Hood Technology provided NSMS 
data for a 33-integrally bladed Titanium rotor. A baseline 
test conducted in December 1999 and follow-up tests in 
May 2000 included sweeps of the first torsional mode. For 
the May 2000 tests, three blades were modified by adding 
tip masses. This resulted in eliminating the 1T resonance of 
the three modified blades from the sweep range. Several 
resonance identification techniques were tested using the 
data. The results obtained by simulation were corroborated 
by the CARL data. An almost orthonormal eigenvector 
matrix was produced by the combined blade fit using the 
December data. The procedure failed, however, to generate 
near-orthonormal matrix with the May 2000 data. This 
further shows the limit of this "local" approach . Model 
based identification approaches have succeeded in 
7 - 3 2 7 6  
simulation but have failed on data, presumably because the 
correct coupling model was not found for the CARL rotor. 
A computationally inexpensive method is one where the 
cross-correlation between a reference and a current response 
is calculated. This approach produces good results both 
with simulated data and with actual test data. The method 
seems to better detect small damage in critically interacting 
blades than the more complex methods investigated. Failure 
isolation (pointing to the damaged blade) remains a 
challenge. When significant response changes are detected, 
even with small shifts, the method is able to detect a failure, 
but one should rely on heuristic corroborating elements to 
properly isolate damage to a given blade. As damage 
increases, and shifts typically greater than 2% occur, the 
method is expected to correctly identify the damaged blade 
as well. 
Unusual changes in amplitude may be a good indicator of 
incipient failure. Simulation predicts that interactions 
between blades mostly tend to reduce blade response. 
Damaged low responding blades will see their resonance 
drift away from the frequency band of beneficial interaction 
and will see the amplitude of their response grow. This 
could also accelerate damage. A combination of correlation, 
amplitude change and frequency shift might be made to be a 
reliable indicator of damage. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  SBIR Phase II: Health Monitoring of Rotating 
Turbomachinery Parts: Gas Turbine Rotor and Blades 
PHM Index Design Part I: m e o w  and Design 
Considerations, November 1999, N68335-99-C-0116, Hood 
Technology Corporation. 
[2] SBIR Phase I Health Monitoring of Rotating 
Turbomachinery Parts: Final Report, May 1999, N68335- 
98-C-0162, Hood Technology Corporation. 
[3] Stage Matching Investigation, Final Report, October 
1988-June 199 1, Contract F336 15-88-C-2801, WL-TR-9 1- 
2098, Pratt & Whitney. 
[4] SBIR Phase 11: Gas Turbine High Cycle Fatigue 
Detection, Measurement and Control, HCF Mitigation 
results at CARL: November/December 1999 Results, 
January 2000, NO042 1-98-C- 1046, Hood Technology 
Corporation. 
[5] SBIR Phase 11: Gas Turbine High Cycle Fatigue 
Detection, Measurement and Control, Forced response 
Analysis, April 1999, Contract NOO421-98-C-1046, Hood 
Technology Corporation. 
Dr. Mathieu Mercadal (no picture available) has been 
Chief Scientist at Hood Technology Corporation since 1994. 
From 1991 to 1994, he was a Research Engineer for 
Dassault Aviation. He received an MS in 1985 and PhD in 
1990, both from MIT's Department of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics. He received a BS from Ecole Centrale de 
Paris in 1985. 
Dr. Andreas von Flotow (no picture available) is founder, 
president, and chairman of Hood Technology Corporation, 
formed in 1993. He was a professor of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics at MIT from 1985 to 1992. He received a PhD 
from Stanford in 1984. 
Peter Tappert (no picture available) has been a Project 
Engineer at Hood Technology Corporation since 1995. He 
received an MS in 1994 and BS in 1993 from Virginia Tech's 
Mechanical Engineering Department. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Mike Richman 
Bill Hardman 
Andy Hess 
Bill Copenhaver 
CARL staff 
Ted Fecke 
7 - 3 2 7 7  
