Level-0 Telemetry Collection for Spacecraft Command 
and Data Handling Subsystems 
Michael E. Epperly, Buddy J. Walls 
Southwest Research Institute 
6220 Culebra Road 
San Antonio, TX 78230 
Mepperly@SwRI. edu 
210-522-3477 
Abstract-This paper presents Southwest Research 
Institute’s (SwRI) continuing development of flexible Level- 
0 command and telemetry collection hardware. Results of 
the requirements analysis, systems design and hardware 
fabrication and test are presented in detail. 
The objective of this research program was to provide a 
module that could handle a variety of interfaces accessible 
from either a spacecraft’s main computer or an on-board 
micro-controller. The module must serve as a level-0 “safe” 
mode processor and be able to execute commands received 
from the ground. The system designed as a result of this 
IR&D will be used in those applications where a critical 
need exists for a level-0 “safe” mode processor. The design 
may also be used to speed up system throughput by way of 
parallel processing with the main computer. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
TCM ARCHITECTURE 
TCM DESIGN 
RADIATION CONSIDERATIONS 
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
CONCLUSIONS 
ACRONYM TABLE 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems 
(CCSDS) is a multi-national organization established over a 
decade ago to set standards for spacecraft communication at 
all levels from the spacecraft to the ground system and on to 
the user communities. The CCSDS recommendations 
establish a standard format for all uplink command data and 
downlink telemetry data based on a specified packetization 
scheme. CCSDS recommendations provide increased 
commonality of both hardware and software systems across 
program boundaries, reducing the cost of the ground 
systems. For example, two mid-size explorer programs 
(IMAGE and MAPS) take advantage of this commonality by 
sharing a ground station at Goddard Space Flight Center. 
These standards are .finally gaining acceptance within the 
space community and are becoming a requirement on most 
new civil and defense space programs. 
A Level-0 or “Safe Mode” processor is a low-level 
command processor that controls the spacecraft whenever 
the main processor is off-line. Such events can happen 
during early orbit activities (before spacecraft is fully 
operational), during load shedding operations (when power 
must be removed from all non-essential subsystems), or 
during an anomaly (like the upset of the main processor due 
to cosmic radiation). During these periods, the safe mode 
processor collects a subset of normal housekeeping 
telemetry, formats it, and downlinks it along with the 
command echo information required by CCSDS 
Telecommand recommendations. This subset of normal 
telemetry collection includes housekeeping telemetry from 
critical spacecraft systems such as attitude control, power 
regulation, solar array control, and payload maintenance. 
To determine the optimal number of interfaces and telemetry 
points, SwRI polled several spacecraft vendors. SwRI used 
this information to implement Level-0 CCSDS command 
processinghelemetry collection with the development of 
Command and Telemetry Module (CTM) and the Telemetry 
Collection Module (TCM). 
To implement the Data Handling System for the IMAGE 
spacecraft, SwRI designed a flexible command telemetry 
board, designated CTM, which performs low-level CCSDS 
command processing functions without the interaction of a 
computer. The module also implements a fully compliant 
CCSDS telemetry downlink. This is an extremely important 
capability because it guarantees that the user can command 
the spacecraft and continue to downlink telemetry in the 
event of a primary computer failure. The CTM, when 
coupled with the TCM, created a low-level command and 
telemetry capability to support any small spacecraft as a 
safe-mode processor and in some cases act as the entire 
command and data handling system. 
2. TCM ARCHITECTURE 
Objectives 
The objective of this research program was to provide a 
design prototype that could handle a variety of interfaces 
accessible from either the systems main computer or the on- 
board micro-controller. The TCM must be capable of 
5-2191 
serving as a level-0 "safe" mode processor and be able to 
execute commands received from the ground. The system 
designed as a result of this IR&D will be used in those 
applications where a critical need exists for a level-0 "safe" 
mode processor. The design may also be used to speed up 
system throughput by way of parallel processing with the 
TCMRequirements 
The TCM should have a sufficient number of U 0  to convey 
system status back to the ground and provide a means of 
independently controlling the spacecraft. The TCM design 
requires three main sections of circuitry: local control, VME 
MUXCTRL 
x4 / 
Figure 1 - ' E M  Functional Block Diagram 
spacecraft's main computer. 
Requirements DeJnition 
In order to determine the requirements for a typical Level-0 
processor, SwRI approached personnel fromi several 
spacecraft vendors to determine the minimum capability and 
the number and sources of telemetry required on a mid level 
explorer mission to provide mission health and status. 
These data were collected and tabulated and the results used 
to establish TCM requirements. 
masterhlave interface, and I/O telemetry interfaces, 
including MIL-STD-1553. Arbitration is needed to control 
access to the I/O functions via the controller and VME slave 
interface. All portions of the TCM design process must 
consider the radiation characteristics of the microcircuits 
used in the design. The TCM circuitry must fit on an 
extended 6U VME form factor to maintain compatibility 
with the majority of existing designs. 
5-2192 
3. TCM DESIGN 
Micro-coatrouer Label 
Address 
0x0000-0~07FF YO 
Micro-controller 
Wait States 
Arbitrated 
A micro-controller controls the TCM and can be used as a 
“back up” processor in the event the main processor is out of 
commission. The micro-controller is responsible for 
capturing current system status and transferring it to the 
CTM over the auxiliary bus where it is downlinked to the 
ground system. In the event the ground system chooses to 
operate in a level-0 “safe” mode, commands can be up- 
linked from the ground to the CTM and transferred to the 
TCM across the auxiliary bus for execution. Various 
interrupts are available to the micro-controller to enable 
timely responses for specific activities. Micro-controller 
support includes PROM, EEPROM and SRAM memory. A 
serial UART is included to communicate with the micro- 
controller from an external terminal 
The United Technology 806196 micro-controller was 
chosen for the TCM. The 80C196 is radiation hardened and 
includes several embedded features that minimize the need 
for additional external circuitry. The features utilized 
include digital I/O ports, a serial Universal Asynchronous 
Receiver-Transmitter (UART), Pulse-Width Modulated 
(PWM) ports, timers and built-in Error Detection and 
Correction (EDAC) circuitry. 
Micro-controller conJiguration-The micro-controller 
operates at 12 MHz and is configured for 16-bit data. The 
address latch enable pin serves to capture the addresses for 
all external micro-controller readwrite operations. A 
54ACTS138 decoder is used to decode external accesses. 
The address decoding for the micro-controller is as follows: 
0x8000-0~1FFF 
Ox2OOO-Ox3FFF 
0x4000-0~7FFF 
0x8000-OxBFFF 
OxCOOO-OxFFFF 
VME ACK Cycle 
PROM 0 
1553 Shared SRAM Arbitrated with 
16Kbytedpage 
SRAM 0 
EEPROM 4 
Internal U 0  resources do no perform external readwrite 
cycles and therefore do not require arbitration. Any external 
I/O resource is arbitrated as either the micro-controller or 
the VME slave interface can take access of the particular 
resource for any given instant in time. Further decoding 
occurs within the FPGA’s for the I/O based accesses. 
EEPROM and PROM accesses are buffered by 
54ACTQ16646 buffkrs to prevent bus contentions during 
chip de-selection as these devices are typically slower when 
transitioning from driven to the high-impedance state. The 
SRAM is considerably faster and does not present this 
limitation. 
To reduce the amount of time the PROM accesses require 
before providing valid data, the PROM is constantly 
accessing data based on the current address. This mode of 
operation enables the PROM to run with zero wait states as 
opposed to the traditional chip-select method. 
EDAC-The micro-controller can be hard-wire programmed 
to perform EDAC on PROM, EEPROM and SRAM 
memory. The EDAC can only operate on word operations, 
however. For SRAM EDAC to operate properly, the user’s 
code must only perform on even word (16-bit) boundaries. 
The EDAC circuit is capable of detecting and correcting 
single bit errors and detecting double and most triple bit 
errors. 
Interrupts-The following external interrupts are available 
to the micro-controller: 
10 Hz 
1553 Interrupt (Logical OR of MSG-RDY and 
YOU-FAIL interrupts 
VME Talk 
ADC Complete 
Differential Sense 
Receive Aux Command 
FIFO Empty 
MC Talk 
VME Master/Sluve 
The TCM operates as a VME A32D16 master/slave 
interface. The main processor can access the TCM to use the 
I/O resources. The VME slave intempt interface operates as 
Release on Acknowledge to enable timely responses for 
specific interrupt activities. Arbitration is included to 
provide the ability to access the shared U 0  resources with 
the micro-controller. 
The VME slave interface is implemented in an FPGA. This 
design is based on a previous design and imported into the 
TCM design. The VME slave interface operates from a local 
16MHZ oscillator and provides an A32 D16 interface with 
interrupt capability. The TCM provides normal VME Slot- 
0 functions including bus arbitration and interrupt handling. 
Datu Transfers-The VME Slave interface enables a main 
process or master capable card to access the TCM I/O 
resources. All VME slave accesses require arbitration 
between the VME slave interface and the micro-controller 
with the exception of VME based interrupt acknowledgment 
cycles. Since the address decode for VME slave operations 
is considerably larger than the micro-controllers 1 Mbyte 
space there is no need for the VME to page the 1553 Shared 
SRAM. 
The majority of the data paths between the slave VME and 
the TCM 80C196 processor are shared with the master 
VME. The memory map for the board allows the processor 
5-2193 
Figure 2. TCM Top View 
direct access to the VME bus. A section of memory from 
Ox800 to OxOFFF allows the microprocessor to initiate 
sixteen-bit VME read and write cycles. The upper address 
bits are specified with a holding register that is configurable 
on a per-cycle basis. 
Interrupts-The VME slave interface provides the following 
VME interrupts: 
1oHz 
1553Interrupt 
0 VMETalk 
ADC complete 
0 Differential Sense 
0 Receive Am Command 
0 FIFOEmpty 
Each of these interrupt sources can be hard-wire cmtigured 
to operate on a give priority fiom 1 to 7. A priority of 7 
represents the highest priority and 1 the lowest. Each 
interrupt source may further be masked by s o l h e  to 
prevent the interrupt. The default configuration is all 
interrupts masked. Software may mask all interrupt sources 
in the event s o h e  wishes to use event polling. A separate 
register is provided for this purpose, and when written to, 
will clear the condition. 
If the user wishes to perform VME interrupt 
acknowledgment cycles spawned from the main processor, 
the interrupts of interest would be unmasked and the board 
ID registers configured to identify the board during interrupt 
servicing cycles. The interrupt acknowledgment cycle 
would automatically clear the pending interrupt when 
serviced. This configuration is more typical of a flight 
system and requires the least system resources to operate. 
Interfaces 
The TCM has a variety of input and output interfaces for 
status and control capabilities. These interfaces are 
accessible by both the micro-controller and the VME slave 
interfaces (main processor). A 12-bit analog to digital 
converter was necessary to determine thermistor and analog 
input values to sufficient resolution. A combination of 
single-ended and differential analog inputs provides the 
TCM with a versatile analog input interface. DAC outputs 
are also provided as a source for variable analog output 
5-2194 
control. Both digital inputs and outputs are provided for placed after the differential amplifier to maintain a sampled 
discrete logic control functions. Pulse Width Modulation version of the analog inputs while the ADC is performing 
(PWM) outputs provide yet another means of variable conversion. The last stage is comprised of an OP27 
output control coupled with high precision. A military amplifier that allows for both gain and offset adjustments 
standard 1553 interface is included to allow communications prior to reaching the ADC. 
Differential Sense-The TCM will accept a differential input between the various sub-systems. 
YO Interface Summary voltage. The TCM uses three OP400 amplifiers in a 
The TCM contains a flexible interface capability. The 
interfaces fall into three basic categories: analog YO, digital 
U 0  and communication. A summary of the various 
interfaces is as follows: 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Thermistors 
Analog Input 
Differential Sense 
Analog Output 
Digital I/O 
Optical Inputs 
Pulse Width Modulation 
1553 Communications 
Serial Communications 
12-bit, 50 External, 
5 VME 
lZbit, 16 differential1 
45 single ended 
Capture MET for given 
trip-voltage input 
8-bit, 3 channels 
32 channels, byte 
configured for I/O type 
3 channels 
3 output channels 
1 redundant interface 
BC or RT 
1 channel, TTL levels 
differential amplifier configuration to process the input. The 
output of the differential amplifier is fed to the input of a 
comparator for comparison against a separate fixed voltage 
level to determine a trip voltage. Once the trip voltage has 
been met, an interrupt is generated and the Mission Elapsed 
Timer (MET) is captured for later retrieval. This provides a 
mechanism by which the elapsed time can be correlated to 
the differential voltage exceeding the specified trip voltage. 
Analog Outputs-Three Digital to Analog Converter (DAC) 
outputs are available on the TCM. The voltage output of the 
DAC is based upon the duty cycle of the PWM output. The 
PWM output is based upon an 8-bit value and thus the DAC 
output is an 8-bit value. The PWM output feeds a RC filter 
that provides an average voltage based on the PWM duty 
cycle. The average voltage is further buffered and amplified 
by Analog Devices OP400 amplifiers before reaching the 
external connector. The OP400 can be short-circuited for an 
indefinite time without damage to the amplifier. The RC 
time constant of 20mS was chosen to minimize voltage 
droop to within a single count over the duration of the PWM 
period of 42.67~s. The RC filters time constant also defines 
the amount of time for a full step voltage change, which for 
an eight-bit count would result in approximately 5 time 
constants or 1OOmS. 
Of 50 e*erna1y vME’ On-board 
and 4 Built In Test (BIT) thermistors are available on the 
TCM. Each thermistor interface includes a 1OK Ohm 
resistor in parallel for linearization. A single 1mA current 
source is multiplexed with the selected thermistor to provide 
thermistor excitation. The thermistor circuits utilize a 
summation amplifier to level shift the thermistor voltage by 
5 Volts to span the ADC range of +/-5V. The resulting 
analog voltage is further realized as an analog input and 
placed within the same path to the ADC for 12-bit resolution 
ADC digitization. OP-27 amplifiers were used to provide 
adequate slew rate to ensure a 1OV step to within 12-bit 
accuracy in approximately 60uS. 
Analog Inputs-A total of 16 differential or 45 single ended, 
+/-5V precision references, DACl-3, +5V and +/-12V 
primary and redundant power sources and analog ground 
analog inputs are available for conversion. The analog 
voltage range can be hard-wire configured but must be the 
same for all analog input sources. The TCM was originally 
designed to accommodate a +I-5V voltage span. The analog 
input design utilizes the Harris RH1840 radiation hardened 
16 channel analog multiplexers to provide the necessary 
switching of the various inputs into the Analog Devices 
AD524 bipolar differential amplifier. Additional capabilities 
exist for software configuring the first 15 analog inputs into 
either single ended or differential operation. Various Harris 
HS303RH radiation hardened analog switches provide the 
necessary type conversion for this capability. A Harris 
HS2420RH radiation hardened sample hold microcircuit is 
Digital I/-Thirty-two digital U 0  points are provided by 
the TCM. Each bank of 8 (4 total) can be s o h a r e  
programmable for input or output operation. All digital U 0  
is TTL or CMOS compatible. A National 54ACTQ16646 
microcircuit is used for both input and output operation. A 
series 200-Ohm resistor provides short circuit protection. 
All external connectors are pulled high using a 100-KOhm 
resistor to ensure unconnected inputs do not oscillate. The 
digital YO may also drive National 54AC05 outputs for 
open collector output use. 
Mission Elapsed Timer-The TCM provides a 48-bit 
mission elapsed timer (MET) accessible by the micro- 
controller and the VME slave interface. The upper 24-bits 
of the MET represent seconds and the lower 24-bits 
represent fractions of one second. The MET may be loaded 
by the CPU or VME Slave interface and the load may be 
synchronized with an external pulse. The MET may also be 
stored on an external event so timing information can be 
gathered. 
Optical Inputs-There are three optical inputs on the TCM. 
The optical isolation is provided using a HP HCPL-6551 
quad package microcircuit whose bandwidth is 9h4Hz with 
an isolation of 1500Vdc. A 1-KOhm resistor is placed in 
series with the voltage input of these devices to provide a 
5-2195 
current limit to the photo diode. The micro-controller’s 
serial interface is optically protected through this dewice. 
Pulse Width Modulation-Three PWM outputs are available 
on the TCM. The PWM outputs are made available on an 
external connector and also serve to drive the DAC outputs. 
The PWM period is s o h a r e  configured for 42.6.7~s. For 
each P W M  output, a single %bit quantity determines the 
duty cycled. Each PWM output is buffered prior to reaching 
the external connector using National 54ACT14 
microcircuits with 200 Ohm in series resistors for short 
circuit protection. 
1553 Communications-A single UTMC 1553 SUMMIT 
controller (69151DXE) is used for primary and redundant 
1553 communication. The 1553 interface can be configured 
for both short and long stub applications. 32K;bytes of 
shared SRAM are available for the 1553 memory interface. 
Special arbitration performed in the FPGA ensures proper 
access to both the memory and the 1553 SUMMIT 
controller. The SUMMIT controller may be software 
configured for either Bus Controller (BC) or Remote 
Terminal (RT) operation. 
Serial Communications-The micro-controller provides an 
internal serial UART that communicates at T[z 0-5V 
levels. The configuration parameters such as baud rate, 
parity, data bits and a mode of operation are software 
configured. Two National 54ACT14 microcircuits are used 
to buffer the transmitter output with 200 Ohm in series 
resistor for short circuit protection. The receive input is 
optically isolated. The external interface must provide the 
appropriate level shifting if desired to communicatc: with +/- 
12V levels for PC serial RS-232. 
4. RADIATION CONSIDERATIONS 
Total Ionizing Dose 
Total Ionizing Dose (TID) is used to define the totid amount 
of radiation the microcircuit can withstand before specified 
criteria are not met. Cobalt 60 radiation sources are 
generally used to test the microcircuits. As a result of TID, 
the microcircuit might degrade from either a fictional 
viewpoint or need additional power or both. Some 
microcircuits might not function as specified in the data 
sheet after 30 Krad TIDY but the degradation does riot pose a 
significant effect as used in the design. The miJ0riQ of 
microcircuits after exposure will have increased power 
consumption. The dose rate to which the total dose is 
accumulated cm sometimes change the behavior of the 
microcircuit adding another level of uncertainty / complexity 
to the analysis. Additional shielding can decrease the TID at 
the microcircuit but is costly in terms of additional mass and 
weight. TID is usually expressed in rad( Si) and a given dose 
rate. Functional parameters and power consumption are 
usually measured during various exposure levels. A 30 
Krad TID baseline was used for TCM parts selection. 
~ 
5-2196 
Single Event Latch-up 
Single Event Latch-up (SEL) can be either destructive or 
non-destructive. Destructive latch-up results in permanent 
damage to the microcircuit and non-destructive latch up 
usually requires the system to cycle power to clear the 
latched condition. Both types pose a potential hazard to the 
mission. Sometimes latch detection circuitry is placed in the 
design to monitor and prevent the circuitry in question from 
latch up and possibly perform automated power cycling 
once detected. This approach requires additional circuits 
resulting in additional mass, power and size. The best 
approach is to design with microcircuits that have a 
reasonably high SEL to minimize the chance of latch up 
fiom occurring. The magnitude at which this condition 
occurs is expressed as SEL whose units are MeV/(mg/cm2). 
Parts selected for TCM had an SEL threshold of 100 MeV 
or greater. 
Single Event Upset 
Single Event Upsets (SEU) is non-destructive and results 
from an energetic particle hitting a memory node (flip-flop 
or equivalent) within the microcircuit and upsetting the 
device (toggling the stored state). Upsets can refer to the 
flipping of memory bits or momentary upsets in the 
operation of the microcircuit. Error Detection and 
Correction (EDAC) circuitry can effectively detect and 
correct single bit errors in memory devices and detect 
double bit errors. Designers can also include triple vote 
mechanisms intemal to Field Programmable Gate Array 
(FPGA) designs, if deemed critical. These methods all 
require additional circuitry, possibly resulting in additional 
mass, weight and power. Where necessary, the TCM 
implements both of these techniques. 
5 .  PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Power 
Power measurements provided in Table 1 were acquired 
under the following conditions: 
0 TClM is in its power up configuration state 
0 MicTo-controller executing monitor instructions 
0 NoVMEactivity 
0 1553 communication is idle 
Table 1. Power Measurements 
Weight 
The weight of the prototype TCM with frame attached was 
1.48 lbs or 0.671 kg. Figure 1 is a view of the assembled 
TCM. 
Table 2: Radiation Hardened Microcircuit Selection 
Parts Selection 
Refer to Table 2 below for a list of parts selected for the 
TCM. The listed microcircuits are suitable for space 
qualifiedradiation harsh environments. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The TCM provides users with a powerful Level-0 capability 
in a small-integrated package. The TCM may be integrated 
in a variety of spacecraft C&DH architectures as either a 
stand-alone unit or a backup processor. Coupled with the 
Command Telemetry Module, the pair provides all of the 
capabilities necessary to command and control a small 
spacecraft. 
7. ACRONYM TABLE 
ADC 
BC 
CMOS 
CTM 
DAC 
EDAC 
EEPROM 
FPGA 
IR&D 
PROM 
Analog to Digital Converter 
Bus Controller 
Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor 
Command and Telemetry Module 
Digital to Analog Converter 
Error Detection and Correction 
Electronically Erasable Programmable 
Read Only Memory 
Field Programmable Gate Array 
Internal Research and Development 
Programmable Read Only Memory 
PWM 
RT 
SEL 
SEU 
SRAM 
SWRI 
TCM 
TID 
TTL 
UART 
UTMC 
Pulse-Width Modulator 
Remote Terminal 
Single Event Latch-up 
Single Event Upset 
Static Random Access Memory 
Southwest Research Institute 
Telemetry Collection Module 
Total Ionizing Dose 
Transistor Transistor Logic 
Universal Asynchronous Receiver 
Transmitter 
United Technologies Microelectronics 
Center 
REFERENCES 
[ 11. The VMEbus Handbook, W. D. Peterson, VITA, 
Scottsdale, Arizona, 1997. 
Michael Epperly is a senior research engineer with 
Southwest Research Institute. Prior to joining Southwest 
Research, Mr. Epperly spent 13 years at Westinghouse 
Electric Space Division, as a lead digital designer on the 
Defense Meteorological Satellite Program. Since coming to 
Swm, Mr. Epperly has managed the Central Instrument 
Data Processor for the I M G E  satellite program, the New 
Millennium Intelligent 1553 Controller for the DS-1 
satellite program, the ESA/ROSETTA ROSNA Waveform 
Capture System (WCS), as well as programs producing 
5-2197 
CCSDS command decoderddata formatters for QuikSCAT 
and ICESat. Mr. Epperly received his bachelors in 
electrical engineering from the University of Texas, and 
masters degrees in electrical engineering, computer science, 
and systems engineering from n e  Johns Hopkins 
University. 
Buddy Walls is a research engineer with Southwest 
Research Institute. Prior to joining SwRI, Mr Walls worked 
on low bit rate ‘speech coding as part of the recent 
Department of ‘Defense Digital Voice Processing 
Consortium study. Since joining SwN, he has developed 
m t o m  hardware for the IMAGE, QuikSCAT, Cor.iolis and 
ROSETTA satellite missions, as well as the CAPER 
sounding rocket program. Mr. Walls is currently serving as 
deputy program manager for SwRIs PCI / VMlC Bridge 
eflort, as well as project manager for the PCI / VME 
Assembly development. Mr. Walls has a Bachelors and 
Masters degree in electrical engineering #om Oklahoma 
State University. 
5-2198 
