Potential for the Use of Internet Protocols in Aviation1 
Chris Dhas 
Computer Networks & Software, Inc. 
7405 Alban Station Court, Suite B201 
Springfield, VA 22150-23 18 
chris.dhas~,ci~s~;.com 
(703) 644-2 103 
Chris wargo 
Computer Networks & Software, Inc. 
7405 Alban Station Court, Suite B201 
Springfield, VA 22 150-23 18 
chris.wargo@;cnsw.com 
(703) 644-2103 
Abstract 
For the last 15 years, the global aviation community has 
pursued the development and implementation of an industry- 
specific set of communications standards known as the 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Network (ATN). Efforts 
are continuing to gain a full understanding of the differences 
and similarities between ATN and Internet architectures as 
related to Communications, Navigation, and Surveillance 
(CNS) infrastructure choices. 
This paper presents the results of previous research into the 
ATN and Internet protocol architectures and a technical 
comparison of the two. From this research, the conclusion 
was drawn that operational benefits may be realizable to the 
aviation community if it chooses to use Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF) standards as the basis for a future CNS 
infrastructure. Some future services may also be useful to 
the community. These services are additional benefits 
associated with the use of the Transport Control Protocol 
and Internet Protocol Version 6 (TCPm6). These 
protocols are available today. The services are not presently 
supported by the AT”s transport service protocols, the 
Transport Protocol Class 4 and Connection-less Network 
Protocol (TP4/CLNP). 
Table of Contents 
This paper is organized into three major sections. Section 1, 
an introduction, provides some general information and 
background for the preparation of the paper. Section 2 is the 
heart of the document, which compares the ATN and 
TCPAP architectures and describes similarities and 
differences between the two. Where indicated, future 
services of benefit to the aviation community are also 
described. Section 3 provides some conclusions drawn from 
the comparison detailed in section 2. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 1983 a Special Committee on Future Air Navigation 
Systems (FANS) was established to study, identi@ and 
assess new concepts and new technology in the field of air 
navigation, including satellite technology. A major result of 
the work was the global Communications, Navigation, and 
Surveillance/Air Tr&c Management (CNS/ATM) concept 
identifying the use of data communications and satellite- 
based systems. An integral part of the CNS/ATM concept is 
the Aeronautical Telecommunication Network (ATN). [I] 
The ATN comprises application entities and communication 
services that allow ground, air-to-ground, and avionics data 
subnetworks to interoperate. This is achieved by using 
common interfaces, services, and protocols based on 
international standards. ATN has been specified to provide 
data communications services to Air Traffic Service (ATS) 
providers and AircraR Operating agencies for the following 
types of communications t r f ic :  
0 Air Traffic Services Communication (ATSC). 
0 Aeronautical Operational Control (AOC). 
0 Aeronautical Administrative Communication (AAC). 
0 Aeronautical Passenger Communication (APC). 
In addition, NASA’s Advanced Communications for Air 
Traffic Management (AC/ATM) Project is developing new 
communications technologies and tools that will enable Free 
Flight, an operating mode in which pilots will have the 
freedom to select their path and speed in real-time. The goal 
of the AC/ATM Project is to enable a communications 
inf+astmcture providing the capacity, efficiency, and 
flexibility necessary to realize the benefits of the future 
mature Free-Flight environment. The capabilities and scope 
of communications technologies needed to accomplish this 
goal depend on characteristics of the Free-Flight 
environment. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
3-1345 
There are many operational concepts being proposed for a 
future ATM system to enhance user flexibility and 
efficiency. Among them is the idea of using Intemet 
protocols as network and transport layer alternatives to 
ATN. This paper examines both architectures and compares 
their relative capabilities. 
Features and Capabilities ATN 
2. COMPARISON OF ATN AND TCPm’ 
ARCHITECTURES AND PROTOCOLS 
The ATN and TCPm network architectures support “best 
effort” communications services. Aeronautical 
communications requires a level of Quality of Service 
(QoS), security, and mobility. Some of the qualities needed 
for an Aeronautical Intemet include: 
0 High Availability 
0 Mobile Communications 
0 Message Prioritization 
0 Policy Based Routing 
TCP/IPv6 
ATN offers a reliable, robust, and high-integrity 
communication service between two computer systems (End 
Systems), either at a fured location such as an ATS Unit, or 
mobile node, such as an avionics end system. At the same 
time, ATN takes into account communications parameters 
(e.g., transmission paths and end-to-end delay) required by 
supported applications. 
Quality of Service (QoS) Limited services - priorities 
Ground-Ground Architecture 
The TCIP/IP architecture is comprised of application-level 
and network-level Intemet service.s. Application-level 
services are application programs that operate across a 
TCP/IP-lbased Internet. All of the end-user functions that are 
divided among the upper three Open Systems 
Interconnection (OSI) layers are incorporated into each 
application program individually in the TCP/IP architecture. 
Therefore, TCP/IP applications operate directly over a raw 
transport interface. The TCP/IP transport layer provides an 
end-to-eind communications service and the network layer 
offers a datagram intemetworking service similar to that of 
ATN. 
Same as air-ground protocol stack 
Flows, Differentiated Service (DikBerv), 
mobility 
Full support - including 
The concept behind open systems networking is to provide 
an environment where multivendor, interoperable hardware 
and sofiware systems based on internationally recognized 
and publicly available documentation can be acquired off 
the shelf to build information infrastnicture. Open systems 
networking today is about OS1 and TCP/IP. The 
aeronautical community defined the ATN architecture based 
on the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards. 
In conbast, TCP/IE’ has evolved into an open systems 
networking altemative. Table 1 compares the ATN and 
TCP/IP architectures. 
future based an Public Key 
Infrastructure (PIU) 
Multicasting No support 
Network Management Common Management Information 
Protocol (CMIP) is more complex - 
limited implementation 
expensive to implement 
cost Few developers, therefore more 
Table 1. ATN and TCP/IP Architectural Comparison 
capability; PKT available now, 
significantly less expensive 
Multicasting supported 
( S N M P )  is simple and widely tested and 
available 
~~ ~ 
[Air-Ground Architecture 1 ~ ~ c t i ~ n a l l y  equivalent I Functionally equivalent 
I real time protocols 
1 IP Security (IPSec) Security I Security Label- Limited capability -- 
3-1346 
Air-Ground Architecture 
Figure 1 shows the ATN and TCP/IP protocol architectures. 
It consists of an application layer that interfaces to the 
application processes. ATN application processes 
communicate using the application entity (AE). 
Ground-Ground Architecture 
In the ground-to-ground networking environment, ATN uses 
the full protocol stack, including the presentation and 
session layers. The ground-to-ground TCPLF' network 
architecture is the same as the air-to-ground architecture. 
The application layer interfaces to the ' upper layer 
communications service that consists of the standard OS1 
upper layer session and presentation protocols that offer 
added value on top of the transport service. [l], [Z] 
Application 
Layer 
Fast Byte 
COPP & COSP 
Transpolt 
Layer (TP4) 
Layer (CLNP) 
Figure 1. ATN and TCP4P Protocol Architectures 
The upper layer communications protocols interface to the 
Internet communications service that consists of the OS1 
transport and network layers. The network layer in the 
Internet communication service interfaces to various 
subnetworks. In ATN the subnetworks can be air-to-ground 
or ground-to-ground networks. 
. In an air-ground networking environment bandwidth 
efficiency is very important. In ATN, bandwidth efficiency 
is achieved by using the concept of Fast Byte. In the Fast 
Byte architecture the protocol control information (PCI) in 
the presentation and session layers of the OS1 protocol 
architecture are replaced by a byte each in the two layers 
and presentation and session layer services are provided by 
the application. 
With Fast Byte, the Connection Oriented Presentation 
Protocol (COPP) and Connection Oriented Session Protocol 
(COSP) replace the OS1 presentation and session layers and 
move this functionality into the application layer, which 
produces a protocol architecture where the application layer 
interfaces directly to the transport service. In ATN, Tp4 and 
CLNP provide the transport service. The resulting protocol 
architecture is similar to the TCP/IP protocol architecture 
except that the transport service is provided by the 
TPUCLNP protocols. 
Transport Service 
The transport layer is the basic end-to-end building block of 
end system communication. Everything above the transport 
layer is associated with distributed applications and 
everything below the transport layer is transmission network 
oriented. 
In a connection-oriented operation, the data stream 
submitted to the transport layer by the source transport user 
must be delivered to the destination transport user without 
loss. There may not be duplication of any of the octets in the 
data stream, and the octets must be delivered in the same 
order as that in which they were submitted. The transport 
layer must also provide end-to-end detection and recovery to 
identify and correct errors introduced into the data stream by 
the network. 
Am Connection-oriented Transport Protocol- In ATN, 
TP4 provides a reliable data path for the upper layers as part 
of a connection-oriented service. The ATN (OSI) transport 
layer identifies the functions associated with the connection- 
oriented transport service (COTS). Connection-oriented 
transport service functions include: 
0 Multiplexing of connections onto network connections 
(and demultiplexing them at the destination). 
0 Sequence control to preserve the order of transport 
service data units submitted to the transport layer. 
0 Segmenting transport service data units into multiple 
transport protocol data units (and reassembling of the 
original transport service data units at the destination). 
0 Blocking multiple transport service data units into a 
single transport protocol data unit (and unblocking it 
into the original transport service data units at the 
destination). 
0 Concatenating multiple transport protocol data units 
into a single network service data unit (and separating 
into the individual transport protocol data units at the 
destination). 
0 Error detection to ensure that any difference between 
the data submitted to the transport layer at the source 
and data that arrive at the destination is detected. 
0 Error recovery to take appropriate action when errors 
are discovered by the error detection function. 
0 Flow control to regulate the amount and pacing of data 
transferred between transport entities and between the 
adjacent session and transport layers. 
0 Expediting data transfer to permit certain transport 
service user data to bypass normal data flow control 
(similar to the urgent data in TCP). 
3-1347 
TCP/IP Reliable Stream Service-In the TCPLF’ protocol 
architecture, TCP provides a reliable connection-oriented 
transport service. RFC 793 describes TCP as providing 
robustness in spite of unreliable communications media and 
data transfer that is reliable, ordered, full duplex, and flow 
controlled. [3] End-to-end transport service functions 
supported by TCP include: 
0 Multiplexing of multiple pairs of processes with upper 
layer protocols. 
0 Sequence control to preserve the order of octets 
submitted to TCP. 
0 Flow control to regulate the flow of data across the 
transport connection. 
0 Push, whereby a sending upper layer protocol process 
can force both sending and receiving TCP processes to 
deliver data to the receiving upper layer protocol 
process. 
Don’t segment, more segments, suppress error 
I in octets (value always 
1 in 500 millisecond units 
0 Urgent data, an interrupt data service whereby a 
sending upper layer protocol process may request that 
datai marked urgent be processed quickly by the 
receiving upper layer protocol process. 
4 bits 
4 bits, represented i n  32 bit words 
Type of Service I Class 
16 bits, in octets 
16 bits, in octets 
16 bits 
Don’t fragment, more fragments 
13 bits, represented in units of 8 octets 
1 octet, represented in 1-second units 
The transport service provided by TP4 and TCP is 
functionally equivalent. The process of establishing a 
transport connection and providing reliable data transfer and 
connectiaa termination of each protocol1 is also operationally 
similar. This comparison, shown in Table 2, is based on a 
study performed by the US. Defense Communication 
Agency (DCA, now DISA) and the National Academy of 
Sciences, which concluded that TCP and TP4 are 
functionally equivalent and provide essentially similar 
services. [3], [4] 
Table 2. Comparison of TP4 and TCP Functions 
Network Service The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) provides 
mechanisms for reporting errors in IP datagram processing 
CLNP using the discard option conveyed in the CLNP error 
report. Even though the processing is :slightly different both 
cLNP IP have multiple options a2d the sets of options 
defined .are identical. Table 3 compines the functions of 
At *e network layer, *e protocol the at hosts 2nd gateways. Equivalent functions me provided for Connectionless Network Protocol (CLNP) and the TCP/IP 
IP. The cLNP and IP are 
functionally identical and both protocols support best effort 
delivery. In addressing, CLNP supports variable length 
addresses, whereas IPv4 accommodates fixed 32-bit cLNp with those of Ip. 
addresses and IPv6 supports 128-bit addresses. [2], [5], [6], 
architecture 
Table 3. Comparison of CLNP and IP Functions 
I I I  Function CLNP P 1 
3-1348 
Higher layer protocol 
Lifetime control 
Addressing 
Options 
Not present 
500 millisecond units 
Variable length 
Security 
Priority 
Complete source routing 
Partial source routing 
Record route 
Padding 
Not present 
Reason for discard (Error PDU only) 
Routing 
Am Routing Architecture-The routing architecture in 
ATN (OSI) is basically the same as the routing architecture 
in other connectionless networks, including TCP/IP. The 
conceptual framework and terminology of ATN are more 
highly elaborate than those of its roughly equivalent peers. 
The ATN routing scheme consists of: 
0 A set of routing protocols that allow end systems (ES) 
and intermediate systems (IS) (routers) to collect and 
distribute the information necessary to determine 
routes. 
0 A routing base containing this information from which 
routes between end systems can be computed. 
0 A routing algorithm that uses the information contained 
in the routing information base to derive routes 
between end systems. 
In order to optimize the resources required to effectively 
route data packets in a global Internet, ATN routing uses a 
hierarchical architecture and is divided into three functional 
tiers: 
0 End-system to intermediate system routing in which the 
principal routing functions is discovery and 
redirection. 
0 Intra-domain intermediate system to intermediate 
system routing (router to router) in which best routes 
between ESs within a single administrative domain are 
computed. A single routing algorithm is used by all ISs 
within a domain. 
0 Ipterdomain intermediate system to intermediate 
system routing in which routes are computed between 
administrative domains. 
TCP/P Routing Architecture-The TCP/IP routing 
architecture today is almost identical to the OS1 routing 
architecture. Hosts use a discovery protocol to obtain the 
identification of gateways (routers) and other hosts attached 
to the same network. Gateways within autonomous systems 
(routing domains) operate an interior gateway protocol 
(intradomain IS-IS routing protocol). Between autonomous 
systems, they operate exterior or border gateway protocol 
(interdomain routing protocols). The details are different but 
the principles are the same. 
Protocol identifier 
1-second units 
32-bit fixed (IPv4), 128-bit (IPv6) 
Security. 
Precedence bits in TOS 
Strict source route 
Loose source route 
Record route 
Padding 
Timestamp 
Uses ICMP messages 
Redirection capability is present in both the TCP/IP and 
ATN routing architectures and they are functionally the 
same. In TCP/IP redirection is part of the Internet control 
message protocol (ICMP). In OSI, the redirect function and 
the redirect message are part of the ES-IS protocol. 
Addressing 
ATN uses the Network Service Access Point (NSAP) 
address at the network layer to identify end systems. IPv6 
uses the 128-bit IP address. Although it was not possible to 
map the NSAP address into an IPv4 address, IPv6 has 
allocated address space for the NSAP; therefore, it is 
possible to map the NSAP address to the IPv6 address. 
Potential Aviation Industry Benefits 
The use of TCP/IP may provide some important technical 
features and capabilities to achieve future airline benefits in 
the form of additional services. These services are 
additional benefits associated with TCP/IPv6 and are 
available today. These services do not exist within 
TP4lCLNP. These features include: 
File Transfer Protocol-FTP is a very simple, and widely 
popular, application used today on the Internet. FTP is 
included with almost every PC or laptop computer today. 
When a file is transferred over the Internet, it is almost 
always done via the FTF' program. 
3-1349 
Table 4. FTP - Potential Benefits to the Aviation Industry 
APPLICATION 
Weather Graphics 
Database Updates 
Maintenance 
Procedures and 
Information 
Airport Information 
BENEFIT OTHER NOTES I 
Color weather graphic products to the cockpiit on demand or 
sent by the Flight Dispatcher from the ground. 
Updates to onboard databases such as navigation (FMC), 
datalink frequency and priority tables, cabin file servers for 
passenger systems, etc. 
Uplink troubleshooting procedures and/or pages from the 
maintenance manual if required for problem resolution 
onboard and in concert with ground maintenance coordinators 
File of airport informatnon to support actual ar planned 
diversions to airports unfamiliar to flight crews (i.e. Off-line 
airports) 
May require some type of 
Level C cwtification. Could 
also be a ‘gatelink’ type 
application 
Access from internal airline 
database of maintenance 
information 
Access from internal airline 
airport database. 
I 
Voice over IP-Voice over IP (VoIP) is more of an 
emerging set of technologies than a ,specific service 
provided by the Internet. Digitized voice is sent by End 
Systems attached to the Internet as packets of data. The 
difference is that voice requires special handling, which 
email or web-surfing or other applications do not. 
Voice over Internet protocol (Vow) is the provisioning of 
phone service over the Internet. In sharp contrast with 
conventional telephony, it carries voice traffic as data 
packets over a packet-switched data network instead of as a 
synchronous stream of binary data over a circuit-switched, 
time-division multiplexed (TDM) voice network. 
Using VoIP technology, existing local-area networks 
(LANs) can be leveraged to carry all internal voice traflic as 
well as data. Those Internet connections can also be used to 
carry voice trafiic outside the premises with varying degrees 
of difficulty. 
Web-Casting-Web Casting is the ability for an End System 
to sign up for and receive data being periodically 
distributed, sometimes very frequently, to multiple End 
Systems over the Internet. Webcasting (netcasting or 
Internet broadcasting) is the transmission of live or pre- 
recorded audio or video to PCs that are connected to the 
Internet. Similar to TV or radio, webcasting provides “one 
to many” communications. 
Webcasting, which is broadcasting over the Web using the 
Internet protocol (IP), significantly reduces the time 
required to locate specific information. This technology uses 
narrowcasting principles to turn the Internet into a personal 
broadcasting system with individualized programming 
capabilities. Webcasting applicatioins include routine 
transmissions, pre-flight briefings, ATC-CDM applications, 
and mult i-location, multi-participant conferencing. 
The software that enables webcasting is known as streaming 
media. Streaming media technologies transmit audio and 
video from a centralized source, known as a server, to a 
client on the PC, known as a media player. When the user 
requests a streaming media file, the server sends a stream of 
data to the media player where it plays as it is received. 
With streaming media the goal is to bypass the limitations of 
the World Wide Web. Using Intemet-based technologies 
that are mostly proprietary, media data is fed to the user as 
the media is viewed. 
Rather tlhan a stateless data connection, streaming media is 
more of a continuous connection. Much like TV or listening 
to the radio, the images or audio are received just before 
viewing or hearing them. 
3-1350 
Table 5. Webcasting - Potential Benefits to the Aviation Industry 
APPLICATION BENEFIT OTHER NOTES 
&tine Transmissions 
Pre-Flight Briefmgs 
ATC-CDM Applications 
I 
In-House Multi- 
Department Status 
Briefings. 
Training 
Digital ATIS or TWIP, in an auto-update mode of 
operation 
Dispatchers could pre-record audio and/or video 
briefings for each flight and store these for access by 
flight crews at a later time. 
This is done now via ACARS, but it 
uses a lot of resources to do it. 
Webcasting may be more efficient. 
This would be useful when flight 
crews brief fiom remote locations 
that don’t have weather graphics 
capability. Graphics could be part of 
the briefing package. This is a 
ground-ground application, but with 
f ie  transfer, briefings could be 
accessed via datalink. 
Ground-ground application Current flow control, Slot Swap, FSM and System 
Command Center activities could be webcast for 
multi-user display and input 
Webcast information could be used during hairline 
status briefings. Displays would show real time 
airline status. 
Stored videos containing various training topics 
could be accessed at home, at work, etc. These would 
be updated online by a training department 
Ground-ground application 
A requirement to view a pre- 
determined number and type of 
videos may replace the twice a year 
recurrent training done today. 
MobiliQ Support 
ATN fully supports mobile communications over a wide 
variety of mobile cornmdcations subnetworks, including 
aeronautical mobile-satellite service (AMSS), VHF digital 
link (VDL) and SSR Mode S. Using ATN, it is possible for 
a ground system to communicate with airborne avionics in 
any part of the world. In ATN mobility management is 
closely associated with the Inter Domain Routing Protocol 
and Boundary Intermediate System (BIS). 
The ATN Mobile Routing Strategy is based on a two-level 
concept of default route providers. The fust level is 
provided by a default route provider to all aircraft in a given 
region (known as an ATN Island). This default route 
provider is kept informed about routes to all aircraft 
currently in that region and hence can always provide a path 
to such aircraft. Several such default route providers may 
exist in the same region and collectively they are said to 
form the ATN Island’s Routing Control. 
A71V Mobility Management-BIS-BIS communications over 
a Mobile Subnetwork may be either air-initiated or 
ground-initiated for a given subnetwork type. Three classes 
of procedures are identified. These are: 
0 Air-Initiated (i.e., when the Airbome Router initiates 
the procedure). 
0 Ground-Initiated (i.e., when the Air/Ground Router 
initiates the procedure). 
0 Air or Ground-Initiated (i.e., when either the Airbome 
or the AidGround Router may initiate the procedure). 
Route initiation is always asymmetric with a clearly defined 
initiator and responder. In all cases, the ATN Router in the 
responder role follows the same procedures. For Air- 
Initiated Route Initiation, the Air/Ground Router is the 
responding ATN Router. For Ground-Initiated Route 
Initiation, the Airborne Router is the responding ATN 
Router. 
Mobile IPvbMobility and portability are two modes of 
operation to support mobility management. With portable 
operation the mobile system can be operated at any one of a 
set of points of attachment, but not during the time that the 
computer changes its point of attachment. If the mobile 
system is moved fiom one place to another, its network 
connections have to be shut down and reinitialized at the 
new point of attachment to the network. 
In a truly mobile operation, the mobile system can remain in 
almost continuous contact with the network resources 
needed by its applications. Using mobile protocols, neither 
the system nor any of the applications running on the system 
need to be reinitialized or restarted, even when network 
connectivity is frequently broken and reestablished at new 
points of attachment. 
3-1351 
Internet nodes typically use the IP address of a destination 
node when searching for connections to that destination. The 
IP address of a remote endpoint also serves to identifj the 
endpoint and is used by IP as destination address in the IP 
header. The destination address carries with it the indication 
of a particular network and the destination address is 
typically unchanged during transit (disregarding source 
routes). ‘Therefore, the network toward which a datagram is 
routed usually directly depends on the identity of the desired 
remote endpoint, as known to the source of the datagram. 
Since there are typically two IP addresses associated with 
each mobile node, there is a need for one or more directories 
to store the associations. The directory should be indexed by 
the IP address used to identify the mobile node to the 
Internet at large. Each entry should contain the associated IP 
address, which can be used to locate the mobile node. This 
associated address is known as the “care-of’ address. 
Internet nodes typically use the IP address of a destination 
node when searching for connections to that destination. The 
IP address of a remote endpoint also serves to identify the 
endpoint and is used by IP as the destination address in the 
IP header. The IP header precedes the higher-level protocol 
headers and payload. The destination address carries with it 
the indication of a particular network (that is, it uniquely 
specifies a particular network’s prefix), and the destination 
address is typically unchanged during transit (disregarding 
source routes). Therefore, the network toward which a 
datagram is routed usually directly depends on the identity 
of the desired remote endpoint, as known to the source of 
the datagram. 
Quality of Service 
QoS and A73-h ATN the dialogue service requires 
Quality of Service (QoS) parameters to be specified. These 
parametcm are Class of Communication, Application 
Priority, and Residual Error Rate. For a CPDLC user the 
Class of Communication parameter is an option. In the event 
this parameter is not provided by the CPDLC user, it is 
supplied by the dialogue service. As part of the Transport 
Connection (TC) establishment phase, Transport Service 
(TS) users can negotiate the QoS parameter:; to be 
associated with a transport connection. 
Use of expedited data is also negotiated. QoS parameters are 
used to describe the desired characteristics of the data flow 
over the TC, rather than to provide mechanisms for the 
transport protocol to enforce specific characteristics. All the 
choices made during the connection establishment phase 
remain viilid for the whole TC lifetime, 
QoS is of special importance because of the wide variation 
in service provided by the ATN network service. However, 
there are practical difficulties in a conriectionless Internet to 
support dynamic route selection based on differential QoS 
requirements. The capacity requirements of CNS/ATM 
applications can be met through a combination of network 
design and capacity planning. The strong QoS requirements 
of certain ATSC applications can be met by reserving 
subnetwork paths for applications data and by respecting 
routing policy requirements, restricting their data to travel 
over only certain aidground data links. 
QoS and TCPLP-The global reach and ubiquity of the 
Intemet has created a transport mechanism for all sorts of 
applications. New applications such as voice over IP and 
packetized video can present multimedia data in real time. 
Low-bandwidth and text-based data may include a “high- 
priority” marker if they carry mission-critical information. In 
both cases, the network must handle the application packets 
in a special way so that the data is delivered to the end user 
ahead of other traffic. Although IP networks currently offer 
no easy .way to either identify such packets or subsequently 
give theim special handling, this situation is beginning to 
change. Quality of Service, the network capability to 
provide a non-default service to a subset of the aggregate 
traffic, is becoming part of the IP-based infi.astructure. IP 
QoS will1 have a significant economic impact as the Intemet 
evolves fom a best-effort delivery mechanism to a universal 
transporf and service delivery medium, for large volumes of 
data. 
Until reciently, IP networks supported one service class, best 
effort. The network would make its best attempt to deliver 
packets to their destinations but with no guarantees and no 
special resources allocated for any of the packets. QoS was 
not an issue since the dominant applications continue to be 
HTTP, IFTP and e-mail, all of which use TCP and adapt 
their sending rates to whatever capacitq the network offers. 
3-1352 
./ 
Table 6. QoS - Potential Benefits to the Aviation Industry 
h APPLICATION * OTHER NOTES 
11 Differentiated Service I This is a scalable QoS implementation using aggregated I Issues remain on implementing 
flows to manage classes of service. 
Expedited forwarding minimizes transmission loss, delay, 
and jitter. 
Assured forwarding provides class-based priority handling. 
QoS policies at the network level 
where there are potentially large 
numbers of boundary 
components. 
Another issue is the ability to 
extend Differentiated Services 
within its specified traffic parameters). and maximal datagram delays); it 
Security 
In today's open systems networking environment, security is 
an important function. A number of protocols have been 
designed at various levels to provide security services. The 
layer where security service is provided is a function of the 
end user application as well as user requirements. 
Regardless of where in the protocol architecture security 
services are implemented, the following services form the 
foundation to build a security infrastructure: 
0 Key management 
0 Confidentiality 
0 Nonrepudiation 
0 Integrity/authentication 
0 Authorization 
Depending on where in the protocol stack the security 
services are implemented, it is possible to provide some or 
all of the services identified above. In addition, it may be 
possible to provide some services at one layer and the rest at 
a different layer. 
Am Security Strategy and Techniques-The ATN security 
strategy is to provide secure exchange of ATS information 
via the ATN and protect ATN resources from unauthorized 
access. The goal is to ensure that a message delivered via the 
ATN can be unambiguously authenticated by the receiving 
entity and that appropriate control is used to access ATN 
resources. In addition, the security techniques are applicable 
to mobile as well as fvred users of the network. ATN 
security techniques consists of access control, 
authentication, and data integrity functions. 
The main areas of vulnerability of the ATN are air-ground 
data paths (satellite, VHF, HF and Mode S), data transfer on 
shared service networks (e.g., through services provided by 
public carriers), and physical access to equipment and 
circuits (the impracticability of achieving physical security 
at isolated or remote locations). The initial analysis of the 
basic risks to which the ATN is exposed indicates the urgent 
need for security mechanisms to protect ATN airlground and 
groundground messages. 
Access control services are provided to prevent the 
unauthorised use of resources. Authentication services are 
provided to ensure the identity of entities. This may be 
accomplished using asymmetric and symmetric 
cryptographic mechanisms to provide strong authentication 
services. Data integrity services are provided to ensure that 
ATN data is not altered or destroyed in an unauthorised 
manner. Although no requirements exist for confidentiality 
(encryption of ATS application data), the ATN information 
security strategy defines a set of security related functions 
and a cryptographic setting that may be used by States and 
organisations in support of applications not subject to ICAO 
standardisation. 
TCP/IP Security Architecture-A number of protocols have 
been designed to secure traf€ic at various levels in the 
network. JP Security (IPSec) is specified to provide security 
at the network layer. IPSec allows per flow or per 
connection security and thus allows for very fine-grained 
security control. 
IP packets have no inherent security. It is relatively easy to 
forge the addresses of IP packets, modify the contents of IP 
packets, replay old packets, and inspect the contents of IP 
packets in transit. Therefore, there is no guarantee that IP 
datagrams received: 
0 Are from the claimed sender (the source address in the 
0 Contain the original data that the sender placed in 
0 Were not inspected by a third party while the packet 
IP header). 
them. 
was being sent from source to destination. 
3-1353 
IPSec is a method of protecting IP datagrams. This 
protection takes the form of data origin authentication, 
connectionless data integrity authentication, data content 
confidentiality, anti-replay protection, and limited traffic 
flow confidentiality. IPSec provides a standard, robust, and 
extensible mechanism that provide security to IP and upper- 
layer protocols. A default mandatory-to-implement suite of 
algorithms is defined to assure interoperability between 
different implementations. 
IPSec protects IP datagrams by specifying the trafEc to be 
protected, how that traffic is to be protected, and to whom 
the traffic is sent. IPSec can protect packets between hosts, 
between network security gateways (e.g., routers or 
firewalls), or between hosts and security gateways. 5' I m e  an 
IPSec-protected datagram is, itself, just another IP packet, it 
is possible to nest security services and provide end-to-end 
authentication between hosts and send the IPSec-protected 
data through a tunnel that is protected by security gateways 
using IPSec. 
Either the Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) or the 
Authentication Header (AH) method can be used protect IP 
datagrams or upper-layer protocols. AH provides proof-of- 
data origin, data integrity, and anti-replay protection. ESP 
provides all that AH provides in addition to optional data 
confidentiality. One subtle difference between the two is the 
scope of authentication coverage. It should be noted that the 
ultimate security provided by AJ3 or ESP is dependent on 
the cryptographic algorithms used by them. 
The security services that IPSec provides require shared 
keys to perform authentication andor Confidentiality. A 
mechanism to manually add keys for these sewices is 
mandatory. This ensures interoperability of the base IPSec 
protocols. Of course, manual key addition scales poorly so a 
standard method of dynamically authenticating IPSec peers, 
negotiating security services, and generating shared keys is 
defined. This key management protocol is callled IKE 
(Intemet Key Exchange). 
The shared keys used with IPSec are for either a symmetric 
cipher (when confidentiality is needed) or for a keyed 
message authentication code (for data integrity) or for both. 
The need for IPSec implementation to be fast makes existing 
public key technologies, such as RSA or DSS, too slow to 
operate on a packet-by-packet basis. Presently, public key 
technoloby use is limited to initial authentication during key 
exchange. 
Network Management 
The importance of networks and internetworking that 
support critical applications depends on the availability of 
the network to remain in operation. As networks are 
interconnected to share information, network availability 
and reliability become important issues. Hence, there is a 
need for network management to manage the resources in 
the enterprise. The TCP/IP and OS1 worlds have developed 
technologies to solve the problem of network management. 
The TCP/IP approach is based on a management protocol 
called Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). The 
OS1 approach is based on a managemeint protocol called the 
CommorI Management Information Protocol (CMIP), also 
designed with the philosophy apparent fiom its name, 
provide a common protocol flexible enough to solve all 
problem!;. [SI, [9] 
IS0 beg.an developing a network management extension to 
the OS1 reference model in the early 1980s, but did not 
complete this initial design phase until : h o s t  a decade later. 
The OS1 Network Management Framework (ISOAEiC 7498- 
4:1989) describes a model that is more general in nature. 
[lo1 
This moldel subdivides the network management problem 
space into five system management functional areas 
(SMFAs). These are fault, performance, configuration, 
security, and accounting management. This model was 
originally intended to organize development of individual 
standards that would define technologies to implement and 
automate each identified task. In practice, however, it was 
found that most tasks are common to several areas. The 
current approach is to develop standards representing system 
managernent functions (SMFs), each ofwhich defines a self- 
contained tool that can be used by a number of management 
applications. 
Like SNMP, the OS1 management framework and a model 
known ras the systems management overview identify a 
number of components that together provide management 
capabilities. The components include a managing system, a 
managed system, a management communications protocol 
(CMIP), and management information. An OS1 management 
system serves as the interface between management 
applications with which network administrators deal, and the 
network or system to be managed. On Tihe other side, an OS1 
managed system provides an access point to the resources to 
be managed and carrying out management operations 
directed at specific resources and forwarding notifications 
that indicate events related to those resources. The resources 
themselves are modeled as managed objects. 
S N M P  was designed and deployed quickly, solving the 
immediate problem of managing the Internet and then 
moving beyond to other networking environments. CMlP 
took longer to design, and its deployment is slowed both by 
its inherent complexity and by the market success of S". 
3-1354 
Implementation Cost 
In a previous research effort, the potential costs of 
implementing the ATN architecture versus that of TCP/IP 
were analyzed. The results of this analysis were presented to 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Glenn 
Research Center, in Cleveland, Ohio, in a report titled, 
“ATN Transport & Network Layers Implementation Cost 
Analysis.” [ 113 
As noted earlier, the use of the Internet is expected to be 
much greater than ATN, therefore it was assumed that 
implementing TCP/IPv6 to transport ATN application data 
would be significantly less expensive than using TP4/CLNp. 
The purpose of this analysis was to validate that assumption. 
The approach used to estimate the cost for implementing the 
transport and network layer protocols was to develop a 
network architecture that would support ATN applications. 
Next, an estimate was made as to the number of architecture 
components that would be equipped during the study period 
(2001 - 2020). Components included aircraft end systems, 
routers, and ground-based end systems. 
Pricing data estimates were then gathered from transport and 
network layer software developers. A costing model using 
constant dollars was developed and the cost for each 
implementation determined. Implementation costs were 
compared for various business and government sectors. 
The results. summarized in the following table, indicate that 
it will cost over $370,000,000 more (in constant dollars) to 
implement TP4/CLNP over the next 20 years than it would 
to implement’TCPhPv6. It must be noted that TP4/CLNP 
software development costs are based on the estimated 
prices of only one software developer. (There are few 
developers of TPWCLNP software, and only one would 
provide prices for the analysis.) In any case, the magnitude 
of the difference is significant and justifies implementing 
TCP/IPv6 instead of TPWCLNF’. 
Table 7. Implementation Cost by Organization 
ES & IS Software 30,010,800 2,500,900 
Airline Operations Control 
Air/Ground Router 
GroundGround Router 
Host (ES) 1,531,250 61,250 1,470,000 H Subtotal 39,417,050 2,614,650 36,802,400 
ES & IS Software 3 7,634,295 3,136,19 1 34,498,104 
ES & IS Software 48,459,000 4,038,250 44,420,750 
Air/Ground Router 63,375,000 422,500 62,952,500 
63,027,000 GroundGround Router 63,450,000 423,000 
2,812,500 405,000 2,407,500 
24,200,000 734,000 23,466,000 
153,837,500 1,984,500 151,853,000 
General Aviation Aircraft 
ES & IS Software 13,812,000 1,15 1,000 12,661,000 
Air/Ground Router 26,812,500 178,750 26,633,750 
5,125,000 205,000 4,920,000 
Subtotal 45,749,500 1,534,750 44,214,750 
Communication Service Provider 
Air/Ground Router 63,450,000 423,000 63,027,000 
388,547,345 13,731,341 374,816,004 
The following assumptions were used in the analysis: 
0 The transport and network layers (aircraft and 
ground) are independent of the ATN application that 
uses them (i.e., the ATN applications perform exactly 
the same using TPUCLNP or TCPAPv6). The ATN 
applications that have been defined in the ICAO ATN 
SARPs [I] are: Context Management (CM), 
Controller Pilot Data Link Communication (CPDLC), 
Flight Information Service (FIS), Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS), Air Traffic Services 
Message Handling Services (AMHS), and Air ‘Trafic 
Services Interfacility Data Communications (AIDC). 
‘ 0 ATC applications, such as CM and CPDLC, will 
require a dedicated router aboard the aircraft. This 
assumption is consistent with the current policy in the 
FAA and is based upon safety of flight concerns. This 
means that the router supporting the cabin of a 
commercial aircraft could not provide the routing 
functionality for ATC applications. The cabin routers 
in the future will provide services to the passengers 
using TCP/IP. Combining the routers would generate 
additional cost savings if TCP/IP were used for ATC 
applications. 
0 The aircraft End System (ES) transport and network 
layer functionality will be combined in the same 
component that provides the Intermediate Systeim (IS) 
router functionality. Rockwell Collins’ design for the 
American Airlines aircraft that will participate in the 
CPDLC Build I/IA tests combines the ES and IS 
functionality into a single Communications 
Management Unit (CMU). 
0 The FAA will not mandate the use of ATN 
applications for entry into terminal airspace prior to 
2020. Without an FAA mandate, it is considered 
unlikely that most General Aviation (GA) aircraft and 
helicopters would be equipped. However, the FAA 
might mandate usage in controlled enroute airspace 
(above 18,000 feet). A possible mandate plus 
potential Free Flight fuel savings would motivate 
aircraft owners (including the military) to equip. 
0 Aircraft flying in controlled airspace will equip prior 
to 2020. 
0 ATN equipped aircraft will employ ATN applications 
in all phases of flight - tower, Terminal Radar 
Approach Control (TRACON), and enroute. As a 
result, the ground infrastructure will have to be 
equipped to accommodate all phases of flight. 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
For the last 15 years, the global aviation community has 
been pursuing the development and implementation of an 
industry-specific set of communications standards known 
as the Aeronautical Telecommunications Network (ATN). 
Efforts are continuing to develop a full understanding of 
the difl’erences and similarities between the ATN and 
Internet architectures as they relate to Communications, 
Navigation, and Surveillance (CNS) infrastructure 
choice:;. Previous research and technical comparisons of 
these two protocol architectures have provided some 
useful (conclusions: 
0 The transport and network layers of the ATN and 
TCP/IP architectures are functionally equivalent in 
meeting the communications protocol requirements 
of aeronautical related applications. 
0 Interoperability among aeronautical related 
applications will eventually be achieved. However, 
internetworking will likely use IPv6Apng (IP next 
generation) as the network layer architecture 
standard, driven by fiscal and engineering 
economics to implement the lowest life-cycle cost 
solution. 
0 The number of users needed to begin to realize the 
global benefit of the ATN is still five or more years 
away. By 2005, there will be one billion users of the 
Internet, compared to less than 15,000 users that will 
be reachable in the same lime via ATN over 
TP4/CLNP. 
0 130th ATN and TCPAP provide support for mobile 
c:ommunications and networking. 
0 ATN establishing Quality of Services during the 
connection phase, which are maintained throughout 
the connection. TCPAP is currently a “best effort” 
service class but is moving toward providing non- 
default services for a subset of the aggregate tra6c. 
0 130th ATN and TCP/IP provide security services: 
access control, authentication, data integrity, and 
confidentiality. 
0 Although both architectures support network 
management, ATN’s network management 
application, the Common Management Information 
IProtocol, is more complex and less widely used than 
the Simple network management Protocol used by 
0 Finally, and perhaps most importantly, TCP/IP will 
“m. 
lbe considerably less costly to implement. 
In summary, impressive computing power, connected 
through the pervasive world of the Internet, is causing 
fundamental changes in the wqy business is being 
transacted. 
Although the airline industry is just beginning to adopt an 
e-busyness paradigm, IP-based connectivity solutions will 
be integrated into their operations at an increasingly rapid 
pace. The information demands of the airline and its 
equipment, personnel and customers, will drive these 
changes. 
Similarly, the information and connectivity demands of air 
traf€ic services will create additional pressure for the use 
of IP-based communications for non-flight-critical 
aeronautical applications. 
3-1356 
Operational benefits could potentially be realizable to the 
global aviation community given that it chooses to use 
IETF standards as the basis for a future CNS 
Mastructure. 
The collaborative nature of the future free flight concept, 
which has its mature state vision embodied in the NASA 
Distributed Air Ground - Traffic Management Concept, 
could be significantly assisted by the use of the public 
Internet infrastructure. 
e11 
121 
e31 
141 
e51 
e61 
[71 
REFERENCES 
Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) for 
the‘ Aeronautical Telecommunication Network 
(Am),  ICAO DOC 9705/AN956. 
David M. Piscitello and A. Lyman Chapin, ed., 
Open Systems Networking TCPIIP and OSI, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1994. 
Jon Postel, ed., RFC 793, Transmission Control 
Protocol, University of Southern California, 198 1. 
National Academy of Sciences Report, “Transport 
Protocols for Department of Defense Data 
Networks: Report to the Department of Defense and 
the National Bureau of Standards,” Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press, 1985. 
Jon Postel, ed., RFC 791, Internet Protocol, 
University of Southern California, 198 1. 
W. Richard Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume I :  
The Protocols, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
1994. 
Gary R Wright and W. Richard Stevens, ed., 
TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 2: The Implementation, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1995 
[SI Andrew Tannenbaum, Computer Networks, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 198 1. 
[9] Marshall T. Rose, Simple Book: An Introduction to 
Management of TCPUP-Based Intemets, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 199 1. 
[ 101 OSI Network Management Framework, ISOmEC 
[ l l ]  “ATN Transport and Network Layers 
Implementation Cost Analysis,” Report to the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, Prepared 
by Computer Networks and Software, Inc., 2000. 
7498-4, 1989. 
BIOGRAPHY 
Chris Dhas iv the President of Computer Networks & 
SoJhyare, Inc. He has held the positions of Director of 
Systems Engineering for Telenet, Manager of Network 
Architecture for GTE Laboratories, and Assistant 
Professor. He was an IEEE Journal guest editor for 
special issues on Knowledge-based Systems for 
Telecommunications and Network Protocols. He h m  
lectured on Broadband Networks, ISDN Protocols and 
Architectures, Network Design and Performance 
Analysis, and X 2 5  Protocols. He was the editor of an 
IEEE book on Broadband Switching. He h m  a BSEE 
from the University of Kerala, India, and an MBA, Ms 
and PhD in Computer Science from Iowa State 
University. 
Chris Wargo is the Chief Operating OBcer and 
Executive Vice President for Computer Networks & 
SoJtware, Inc. He has held positions as Vice President 
and General Manager for AMNC, Inc., Manager, 
Strategic Planning and Advanced Programs 
Development, RCA Automated System, and Systems 
Engineer, GTE Sylvania, Electronic Systems Group. He 
has a BSEEfiom the University of Wisconsin and an MS, 
Systems engineering, fiom the University of Southem 
California. 
3-1357 
