Data and Information Fusion for Gas Path Debris 
Monitoring 
Celia Fisher 
Smiths Industries Aerospace 
Data Management Systems - Europe 
School Lane, Chandlers Ford 
Hampshire, SO53 4YG 
United Kingdom 
+44 (0)23 SO24 2000 
fisher-celia@si.com 
Abstract-An overall Prognostics & Health Management 
System (PHM) implementation has the fundamental 
function of integrating information from multiple system 
elements and fusing this information into useful knowledge 
about system health. Effectively developing this function 
requires a structured approach to ensure that data level 
fusion, feature level fusion, and information level fision are 
performed in a coherent architecture. In order to achieve the 
goal of engine health management necessary for Prognostics 
and Health Management (PHM), a suite of advanced 
monitoring tools is required. These tools must have the 
capability to monitor and diagnose different aspects of the 
engine’s health so that the combined, or fused, data and 
information from the tools provide an accurate picture of the 
current and predicted engine condition. 
Gas path debris monitoring is one of the tools that can be 
used to achieve this objective. Engine Distress Monitoring 
System (EDMS) and Ingested Debris Monitoring System 
(IDMS), were demonstrated on the JSF Seeded Fault Engine 
Test (SFET) program carried out in 1998 and 1999. These 
tests provided a clear indication of the capability of gas path 
debris monitoring to be a useful tool for PHM. Previous 
papers have described the technology, and the data 
processing approach applied, and results fiom the SFET. 
This paper describes specific examples fkom the S E T  
employing the case study methodology. Case studies 
include gas path component faults and wear conditions. 
The focus is the data and feature level fusion required to 
turn the gas path debris data into a useful input to the higher 
level information fusion function. 
1. 
2. 
3.  
4. 
5 .  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
CASE STUDIES 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
REFERENCES 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Gas path debris monitoring, in the form of the Ingested 
Debris Monitoring System (IDMS) and Engine Distress 
Monitoring System (EDMS) is used for the detection of 
debris ingested into the intake and debris present in the gas 
path of the engine from faults. The data from lDMS and 
EDMS is used to discriminate whether ingested material is 
potentially damaging and for the diagnosis of gas path 
component faults, such as rubs, erosion, augmentor faults 
etc. The technology is described in detail in Reference [l]. 
Considerable experience with the technology during engine 
tests has shown its potential for use as one of the tools in a 
Prognostics and Health Management system. In particular, 
for the JSF engine, the Seeded Fault Engine Tests (SFET), 
carried out in 1998 and 1999, provided a clear indication of 
the capability of gas path debris monitoring and its potential 
contribution as part of the suite of advanced monitoring 
tools. Some of the results fkom the S E T  are presented in 
Reference [2]. 
In order to maximise the effectiveness of the technology in 
an overall propulsion PHM system, the diagnostic and 
prognostic information requirements of the technology must 
be adequately defined. The integration and fusion of the 
data and information with output from the other PHM 
system tools and the overall PHM concept must also be 
identified. 
The case studies methodology, described in Reference [3] ,  
has been used in two ways: 
To evaluate and determine the diagnostic and 
prognostics information required from EDMS and 
IDMS. This considers which aspects of the processing, 
diagnostic and prognostic algorithms will be used and 
what indicators are required from these algorithms. 
To explore and define the fusion and correlation 
approach at the data, feature and information levels, 
including fusion with other engine PHM techniques. 
This paper includes examples of case studies that have been 
used, and the outcome and some of the issues identified. 
0 
6-3017 
The case study scenarios are based on the faults from the 
SFET. 
2. CASESTUDIES 
A number of case studies have been carried out which cover 
a range of engine faults that are detected using the gas path 
debris monitoring technology. Scenarios have been 
developed which identify what information is required from 
EDMS and IDMS in order to provide useful maintenance or 
operational information. These include faults or events 
which may require immediate notification to the ground 
crew or mission management system as well as incipient 
problems which do not require remedial action in the short 
term but should be tracked to provide information for the 
prognostics assessment of the engine and air vehicle (AN). 
In each case the information required fkom EDMS and / or 
IDMS is different, so the diagnostics and prognostics 
approach can be developed. Different data and information 
is used for additional correlation: in some cases to provide 
increased confidence in the diagnosis and prognosis and in 
other cases to assist in the identification in what may be 
causing the problem and its severity. 
The following case studies are examples of some of the 
different scenarios that may occur. They highlight key 
issues and benefits of applying a structured methodology to 
the data available from an advanced PHM tool to provide 
the optimum information for both the propulsion and overall 
air vehicle PHM systems. 
Incipient Engine Fault Related to Air Vehicle Operation 
Objectives of Case StudPThe objectives of this case study 
are: 
0 To identify the specific data and information required 
from EDMS for fault isolation and for meaningm 
tracking of the fault. 
To identify data and information fusion requirements 
from other parts of the PHM system (propulsion or air 
vehicle) for correlation, both of the fault and the engine 
I air vehicle operation. 
0 
Outline of ScenarieThe scenario considers high pressure 
turbine (or other) rubs occurring during high ‘g’ or other 
strenuous air vehicle manouevres. The engine fault is 
intermittent and does not need immediate maintenance 
action nor does it impact mission availability initially, 
however it needs to be tracked. The cumulative effects of 
rubbing may result in additional blade tip stresses and 
accelerate damage. Blade rubs may be related to any of the 
following: engine build problems, air vehicle operation or 
mission profile. The incipient fault data and diagnosis is 
downloaded to the ground based part of the PHM system for 
tracking, possibly against a cumulative threshold. Related 
data and information fkom the fleet can be used to determine 
the root cause. 
Analysis-The first part of the analysis focuses on the 
information required for diagnosis and prognosis by the 
propulsion PHM system. 
The general requirements are to: 
0 diagnose the fault and its effect on the engine’s 
condition 
provide a prognosis of the overall damage to the engine 
identlfy when it is occurring relative to the engine / air 
vehicle operation 
provide sufficient information for the root cause to be 
determined. 
0 
0 
This can be broken down into ‘areas of responsibility’ 
within the overall PHM system as follows: 
The specific contribution to these requirements from EDMS 
and IDMS can be identified as: 
0 Detection and isolation of the fault as rubbing with 
times of occurrence 
Identification of the affected spool 
Identification of the severity of the rubs 
Confirmation that the fault is not related to ingestion 
Calculate and maintain cumulative indicator(s) related 
to the rubs and their severity. 
0 
0 
Propulsion PHM system: 
Correlation with other PHM techniques to confrm 
severity, and damage caused. 
0 Report engine health I 
maintenance actions required 
0 Prognosis 
Higher level PHM system: 
condition status and 
Air vehicle mission profile 1 operation for correlation I 
identification of when fault is occurring. 
Identification of other sub-system problems I faults so 
that the engine fault can be related to these if 
appropriate. 
Total air vehicle system PHM status. 
Ground based system - tracking of occurrences of rubs. 
Use for fleet statistics or to initiate maintenance action 
when cumulative indicator thresholds are reached. 
Ground based system will be used to determine root 
cause. 
6-3018 
Processing and Data Fusion Requirements-The analysis 
indicates that the following processing and fusion is 
required: 
(a) EDMS and IDMS 
The EDMS data is processed to produce signal components 
which include shaft order related effects as well as 
components which relate to various aspects of the debris 
produced by the fault. 
The EDMS processing includes correlation with the engine 
operating condition and spool speeds so that shaft order 
effects can be related to the spool where any rubs are 
occurring. 
Accel 
The IDMS processing will indicate whether a single object 
or particulate material has been ingested at the time of the 
detected occurrence by correlation with the EDMS data. 
Data and feature level fusion are carried out to identify: 
The results of the SFET analysis indicate that the EDMS 
processing has the capability to detect intermittent, short 
duration rubs and can provide this information (Figure 1). 
That a blade rub has occurred 
Which spool the rub occurred on 
Relative severity of the fault 
Duration of the rub (for each time that it occurs) 
Snap 
-. 25 
5 
0 0 
Time (Seconds) Non-continuous 
~ LP Tacho (Hz) HP Tacho (Hz) + Max 0 2  Energy 
Figure l a  Normal Accel and Snap - Idle to Intermediate. EDMS Shaft Order Energy 
SFET2,23 March 1999, 19:13 to 19:25, 
LPT4 Rub - EDMS Shaft Order Energy 
30 
25 
xa % 
$! 1% 8 e 
15 0 
5 
5 
! 8 1w 
v) 
10 
I 
50 5 9  
0 0 
Time (Seconds) Non-continuous 
LP Tacho IHz) HP Tacho (Hz) + Max02 Energy I 
Figure l b  LPT4 Rub, Accel and Snap - EDMS Shaft Order Energy 
6-3019 
As discrete, short duration rubs will not necessarily cause 
damage that needs to be repaired, these individual 
occurrences should not be reported. However the 
cumulative effect of rubs may be more significant, it can 
therefore be identified that cumulative rub indicators for 
each spool are required. These should incorporate data 
features related to severity as well as duration and with 
experience can be tracked against thresholds to identify 
when remedial action may be required. 
Additional processing to calculate and maintain cumulative 
rub indicators could be carried out at the EDMS level of the 
propulsion PHM system. However association of the engine 
/ air vehicle operation with the occurrences and the benefits 
of including additional information from the other 
propulsion system PHM sensors in this indicator should be 
considered. The case study methodology helps to determine 
the most effective approach to this is to implement it at a 
higher level within the PHh4 system. 
(b) Propulsion PHM System 
The propulsion PHM system includes vibration and 
performance analysis and may include additional techniques 
that can be used for correlation with the EDMS data and 
information. The objectives of the fusion and correlation at 
this level are to: 
Determine whether the rub also caused high vibration 
or performance degradation. 
Identlfy whether any other engine faults occurred at the 
same time. 
Increase the confidence in the diagnosis and severity 
assessment. 
It would also be appropriate to determine whether the air 
vehicle operation contributed to or caused the fault within 
the propulsion PHM system. 
The propulsion PHM system therefore has the following 
additional tasks: 
0 Requesting and receiving data about the air vehicle 
operation at the time(s) of the rubbing for correlation. 
Calculating and maintaining the cumulative rub 
indicators with weighting factors to allow for severity 
based on effects on other PHM sensors and other 
relevant parameters. 
The prognostics function may be carried out on-board or 
off-board for this type of fault, where early detection is 
possible. 
Foreign Object Ingestion During Preparation for A/V 
Launch from Carrier 
Objectives of Case Study-The objectives of this case study 
are : 
To identify the specific data and information required 
from IDMS and EDMS for foreign object ingestion. 
To consider the propulsion system PHM issues related 
to reporting and storing non-damaging FOD 
information: 
- It should not be automatically reported on pilot 
alerting system 
- Should be able to access the information via 
interrogation of pilot vehicle interface. 
Should be stored per flight to allow for later 
checking in case other visual observations need 
substantiation. 
- 
To identify issues related to detailed aspects of 
correlation and fusion of IDMS, EDMS and other 
propulsion PHM system sensor technologies 
To consider the overall air vehicle PHM issues related 
to reporting and storing non-damaging FOD reports: 
Outline of Scenario-The scenario considers the situation 
where non-damaging FOD is ingested during preparation 
for air vehicle launch from a carrier. An exhaust flash is 
seen by the final checker who suspends the launch for 
investigation of the event. 
Analysis-The main issue raised by this scenario relates to 
the fact that the ingested material was actually non- 
damaging. The initial approach to this type of occurrence 
would be for the analysis to be completed by IDMS and 
EDMS processing with no data or report being sent to the 
higher level propulsion PHM system. However the SFET 
results, which included a range of seeded ingested debris, 
both damaging and non-damaging, highlighted that the 
situation covered by the scenario could occur. A strategy for 
dealing with this has to be developed. 
Processing and Data Fusion Requirements-The analysis is 
shown as a sequence diagram in Figure 2. This highlights 
that the following processing and fusion is required: 
(a) EDMS and IDMS 
The results fiom IDMS and EDMS data analysis fiom the 
SFET indicate that non-damaging foreign objects can be 
detected and classified correctly and that the associated 
effects in the exhaust duct (flash) are also detected. Data and 
feature level fusion of the IDMS and EDMS results produce 
the classification information. This is reported to the higher 
level propulsion PHM system. Figure 3 shows the 
IDMSEDMS report produced for this ingestion. 
6-3020 
SUBSYSTEM FADEC PSAM SUBSYSTEM SUBSYS7zM PSAM PSAM PSAM 
IDMSEDMS P M ’ l E R S  SUPERVISER EDDY-CURRENT VIBRATION COLLECT REASONER 
(b) Propulsion PHM System 
read-data 
? analpi: 
___I 
Figure 2 
The propulsion PHM system will correlate these results with 
data or information from the other PHh4 sensors to confrm 
that the object did not cause any detrimental effect on the 
engine. As shown on the sequence diagram, for this 
example the key sensors used for correlation for an 
ingestion event are vibration and the eddy current sensors. 
The IDMS detection can be used to initiate analysis of the 
data from these sensors. The data and features from these 
sensors are fused in the reasoner. In this case the ingestion 
can be verified as being non-damaging as there are no 
detectable effects on these sensors. 
This information can be reported to the overall air vehicle 
PHM system for interrogation if required. 
read-data() + oalysifl 
1 
ANPm PLOT ALERT 
SYSTEM 
OFF-BOARD 
SYSTEM 
(c) Overall AN PHM System 
The overall air vehicle PHh4 system will correlate the 
detected ingestion with the operation at the time of the 
ingestion. The results will be stored and can be accessed for 
download to the off-board system or can be accessed by 
interrogation of the cockpit panel 
Benefits and IssuesThis case study addressed a real 
situation and raised important issues that could have been 
overlooked. The ‘flash’ seen by the final checker could have 
been caused by a number of engine problems, which would 
require investigation. The capability to correlate the ‘flash’ 
with an ingestion, and also to class@ the ingested material 
as non-damaging means that the air vehicle can be launched 
after a brief review of the PHM results, instead of being 
taken out of the mission. 
6-3021 
Figure 3 
The following correlation, information updating and storage 
issues have to be addressed in the PHM system: 
On-board system storage of non-damaging ingestion 
results maintained per flight. 
Interrogation capability of the on-board system is 
required 
Off-board system - it is proposed that non-damaging 
results are overwritten after a specific period of time or 
number of fights. 
Correlation with flight regime so that root causes can 
be identified and possible missionloperational 
modifications made if appropriate. 
3. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
The case study methodology has been used to assist in the 
determination of the data processing and fusion 
requirements for EDMS and IDMS. This paper summarises 
two of the case studies that have been carried out and 
highlights the benefits of using this approach, for EDMS 
and IDMS and for the total PHM related issues associated 
with using advanced technology. 
4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to acknowledge the support of Smiths 
Industries, Pratt & Whitney and the DoD JSF PHM team. 
The author would also like to acknowledge the contribution 
of other members of the case study methodology team, from 
Northrop Grumman, Lockheed Martin, BAE Systems and 
Pratt & Whitney to the work described in this paper. 
5 .  REFERENCES 
[l] H.E.G. Powrie and C.E. Fisher, “Engine Health 
Monitoring: Towards Total Prognostics”. EEE 
Conference 1999, Snowmass Colorado. 
[2] C.E. Fisher, “Gas Path Debris Monitoring - A 21‘ 
Century PHM Tool”. IEEE Conference 2000, Big Sky 
Montana 
[3] Barry Ferrell et al. “Case Study Methodology for 
Information Fusion Interface Definition”. IEEX 
Conference 2001, Big Sky Montana 
6-3022 
