The IMD HUMS as a Tool for Rotorcraft Health 
Management and Diagnostics 
Robert Hess Alan Duke David Kogut 
rhess@aisvt.bfg.com aduke@aisvt.bfg.com dkogut@aisvt.bfg.com 
(802) 877 4710 (802) 877-46 19 (802) 877-4269 
BFGoodrich Aerospace 
Fuel and Utility Systems 
Vergennes, VT 0549 1 
Abstract - The current generation BFGoodrich 
Integrated Mechanical Diagnostics Health and 
Usage Monitoring System (IMD HUMS) is the 
result of many years of development on earlier 
programs. The resulting system provides an 
extensive set of functions to support rotorcraft 
health and diagnostics processing. These 
functions support rotor track and balance 
operations, gearbox and drivetrain mechanical 
diagnostics, operational and structural usage, 
exceedance detection and processing and engine 
power assurance checks. The system is 
comprised of both onboard, flightworthy LRUs 
which perform the requisite realtime data 
acquisition, analysis, display and storage, 
supplemented with networked ground-based 
workstations which provide maintainer 
confguration and maintenance management 
functions along with specialized diagnostics 
tools. The system is being fielded on a number 
of helicopter platforms. These programs 
demonstrate the capabilities of the IMD HUMS 
as a tool for rotorcraft health management and 
diagnostics. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.  
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
HISTORY 
IMDHUMS 
IMD HUMS FUNCTIONALITY 
IMD HUMS ELEMENTS 
CURRENT PROGRAMS 
EXAMPLES 
LESSONS LEARNED 
CONCLUSIONS 
REFERENCES 
1. HISTORY 
BFGoodrich Aerospace has been very involved 
in rotorcraft health management and diagnostic 
system development over the past decade. Its 
first generation health and usage diagnostic 
systems were used to prove the advanced 
processing capabilities being demonstrated in the 
current generation of Integrated Mechanical 
Diagnostics Health and Usage Monitoring 
System (IMD HUMS). Two programs in 
particular provided the groundwork for the BFG 
IMD HUMS - The H-60 HlDS and the H-53 
EOA. 
H-60 HIDS - The H-60 Helicopter Integrated 
Diagnostics System (HIDS) program was 
initiated in 1993 by the U.S. Navy 
NAVAIRWARCENACDIV to advance multiple 
helicopter HUMS technologies[ 11. This program 
performed flight and ground-testing testing to 
demonstrate: 
0 Acquisition of mechanical diagnostics data 
to support development and evaluation of 
diagnostic algorithms. 
Automation of data acquisition, analysis, 
and communications in a flightworthy 
system. 
Integration of engine monitoring, gearbox / 
drivetrain vibration diagnostics, in-flight 
rotor track and balance, parts life usage 
tracking, automated flight regime 
recognition and power assurance checks. 
H-53 EOA - BFGoodrich was awarded a contract 
in April 1996 to install an Integrated Mechanical 
Diagnostics System (IMDS) on two CH-53E 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IFEE 
6-3039 
helicopters. The goal of the program was to 
conduct an early operational assessment (EOA) 
of BFGoodrich IMDS technology for possible 
fleet insertion via the CH-53 Lead the Fleet 
Program. 
The EOA IMDS system was based on the H-60 
HlDS system and consisted of the following 
components: 
KT-1 (Main Processing Unit) - Measures 
aircraft parameters and controls other 
system components 
KT-3 (Vibration Processing Unit) - 
Measures and processes vibration and 
indexing data 
CDU (Control Display Unit) - Displays 
IMDS information on board and allows 
aircrew control of system functions. 
DTU (Data Transfer Unit) - Stores data from 
KT- 1 to a PCMCIA memory card 
CSMU (Crash Survivable Memory Unit) 
COTS Flight Data Recorder 
RMSU (Removable Mass Storage Unit) - 
Hard Disk that records KT-3 vibration data 
GBS (Ground Based System) - Workstation 
for analysis of IMDS data 
The fnst system was installed at 
NAVAIRWARCEN. Once the flight clearance 
was issued, the baseline system was flown. 
Aircraft parameter data was successfully 
collected and displayed on the GBS. 
About this time, BFGoodrich moved its IMD 
HUMS product line forward and reengineered 
the IMDS system as an open architecture, dual- 
use (military/civil) product. The importance of 
the EOA program shifted from it original goal to 
one of risk reduction for new generation IMD 
development. 
A complete Ih4DS system was installed and 
flight test began in 1998. During the flight test 
period, the team accomplished the following: 
Acquired Rotor Track and Balance (RTB) 
influence coefficient data for vibration and 
blade track (Main rotor and tail rotor) 
Performed RTB trials to validate 
BFGoodrich RTB capability 
Acquired baseline mechanical diagnostics 
data including vibration data at traditional 
locations 
Acquired regime data under known regimes 
to validate BFGoodrich regime recognition 
algorithms 
Acquired engine and other aircraft 
parameters for further analysis 
2. IMDHUMS 
Background - In 1997 BFGoodrich started the 
development of its current generation health and 
mechanical diagnostics system. The IMD 
HUMS development was performed under the 
auspices of the DoD Commercial Operations & 
Support Savings Initiative (COSSI). COSSI 
programs are used to streamline the contracting 
process in weapons systems acquisition. They 
emphasize the use of commercial practices to 
create dual use (military / commercial) products. 
COSSI programs provide a phased plan for 
technology introduction. In Phase I, 
BFGoodrich developed a system to demonstrate 
both technical and cost benefit / cost avoidance 
aspects of the system. These include, but are not 
limited to: 
Decreasing maintenance man-hours per 
flight 
Reducing scheduled component removals 
Improving Aircraft Safety 
Identifying failing components prior to 
catastrophic failure 
Providing aircrews with detailed secondary 
indication capability 
Providing support teams with better 
information for making in field component 
life extension calls 
Increasing availability 
Increasing reliability 
Enabling rapid determination of aircraft 
status 
Identifying maintenance and logistics 
actions 
Following a successful Phase I demonstration, 
COSSI programs enter the Phase II fleet-wide 
production deliveries. The current IMD HUMS 
programs with the Navy are completing their 
Phase I efforts and are transitioning into COSSI 
Phase It efforts. COSSI efforts for the Army 
and Marines are in Phase I development and are 
expected to enter Phase II efforts following 
successful cost benefits analyses. 
6-3040 
3. IMD HUMS FUNCTIONALITY 
Typical Functions - The IMD HUMS has been 
designed to support a variety of health and 
maintenance related functions. These include: 
Engine Performance Assessment - The IMD 
HUMS automates traditional engine health 
checks (HIT check, max power checks, etc.) 
in accordance with established engine power 
assurance procedures. Other measures of 
engine health (temperatures, pressures, chip 
detection, etc.) are also monitored. 
Rotor Track and Balance (RTB) - Both 
trackerless and tracker-based RTB 
operations are supported. Both prompted 
and automatic data acquisitions can be used 
to calculate track and balance solutions, on- 
board or at the maintenance facility. 
Absorber Tuning - Vibration information 
collected fkom cabin-mounted accelerometer 
packages is used to support the tuning of 
vibration absorbers. 
Mechanical Diagnostics - Vibration 
information acquired fkom the drivetrain is 
analyzed by the IMD HUMS in-flight to 
ascertain drivetrain health. 
Exceedance Monitoring - Monitoring, 
annunciation and recording of flight manual- 
based limit exceedances or other types of 
limit exceedances (drivetrain vibration 
levels, health indicators, etc.). 
Usage Monitoring - The IMD HUMS 
monitors operational usage parameters 
(engine operating hours, flight hours, etc.) as 
well as calculating structural usage measures 
derived .from usage-spectra-based regime 
recognition. 
IMD HUMS Elements - The IMD HUMS 
achieves its functionality using a number of 
elements: 
0 Data Repository - A common shared 
memory area allowing differing processing 
elements to share information. 
0 Event Monitoring - Periodic or 
instantaneous detection of limit exceedances 
or flight-related events (takeoff, landing, 
etc.). 
0 Automated Procedure Processing - 
Background data acquisition and processing 
/ recording of rotor and drivetrain vibrations 
as well as operational and structural usage 
monitoring. 
e 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Prompted Procedure Processing - User 
driven data acquisition and processing / 
recording of rotor and drivetrain vibrations 
and engine power assurance checks. 
Data Logging - Periodic and event-driven 
logging of acquired data and analysis 
results. 
Display Interface - A generic display 
interface capability can be configured to 
support a BFG-supplied crew display, or the 
system can be co&igured to operate with an 
existing aircraft display, such as a multi- 
function display (MFD). 
U 0  - Management of data acquisition and 
communication with other aircraft 
subsystems. 
Vibration Processing Management - Control 
and acquisition of vibration data. 
Debrief - Post-flight debrief of the aircrew 
and its related electronic logbook operations. 
Maintenance Action Generation - 
Recommendation of specific maintenance 
operations with events observed in-flight. 
Trending - All archival data can be trended 
on the ground to support fault detection. 
Diagnostics - Diagnostics can be generated 
on the ground to support maintenance 
operations. Traditional customer 
maintenance rules can be implemented as 
well as advanced disgnostic techniques. 
CM/MM - The IMD HUMS can utilize an 
existing customer configuration 
management / maintenance management 
system to support serialized parts tracking 
and parts usage. 
Open Architecture - The open design of both 
the hardware and software of the BFG IMD 
HUMS allows it to be reconfigured for new 
aircrafl applications, as well as allowing 
new BFG or third-party hardware and 
software technology to be inserted [2][3]. 
I .  HUMS Processing - Owing to the modular 
design of the IMD HUMS, each of the major 
processing elements described above can be 
configured to provide the health management 
and diagnostic functions. Top-level dataflow 
diagrams for these functions for a typical 
program are presented in Figures la  thru le. 
4. IMDHUMSELEMFNTS 
The IMD HUMS is composed of two major 
elements. On-board acquisition and processing 
6-3041 
is managed by the On-Board System (OBS), the Main Processing Unit (MPU). The MPU 
while ground-based maintainer operations are analyzes the input data for exceedances and 
performed in the Ground Station (GS) element. events, calculates various flight regimes, 
performs various diagnostic algorithms, 
On-Board System - The OBS is responsible for normalizes trend data, and stores the data to an 
collecting, processing, analyzing, and storing onboard data cartridge. The MPU is a VME- 
data obtained from sensors located throughout based system housed in a % ATR enclosure (see 
the aircraft. The principal element of the OBS is Figure 2). 
Data Repository -. 
\ 
History List 
user ,’
Figure la. Organization of IMD HUMS Elements to Perform Exceedance Processing 
Figure lb. Organization of IMD HUMS Elements to Perform Rotor Track and Balance Processing 
6-3042 
CDU 
Exceedance - 
Figure IC. Organization of IMD HUMS Elements to Perform Mechanical Diagnostics Processing 
n 
Instant. 
I' + Keu 
OBS - 
GS =-=: 
-*dl r IULLI I IJ&--G&~~~~~F 
\\\ 
*a** ," ; MAF ''$ 
++Generation,? Data Repository 
****c,==sP~5' 
Figure Id. Organization of IMD HUMS Elements to Perform Engine Power Assurance Processing 
6-3043 
Data Repository 
Figure le. Organization of IMD HUMS Elements to Perform Operational Usage Processing 
Expansanban; 
MPU 
(Main Processing Unit) 
PPU 
(Primary Pmw6sng Unn) 
Figure 2. Ih4D HUMS MPU 
Two specific processors are utilized in the MPU. 
The primary processing unit (PPU) performs 
select data acquisition, processing, and 
communication with external interfaces. The 
PPU is supplemented with the vibration 
processing unit (VPU), which performs high- 
speed data acquisition and processing of 
vibration (accelerometer) data. The MPU 
supports a number of bus and signal interfaces 
(see Table 1). 
A user interface is provided via an on-board 
Control Display Unit (CDU) or other display 
devices connected through a data bus. This 
interface allows the operator to view aircraft 
operating data in real-time and provides 
password protected maintenance information. 
Exceedance alerts and aircraft status data to the 
aircrew is also provided. In addition, this 
interface also provides the aircrew with the 
appropriate prompts for sequencing through the 
diagnostic operations. The acquired flight data is 
stored on the IMD HUMS Data Transfer Unit 
(DTU), a PCMCIA flash memory card device. 
IMD Sensors - The existing aircraft sensors are 
augmented with a set of accelerometer and index 
sensors used to collect vibration data associated 
with the rotor system and drivetrain. These 
sensors are permanently installed on the aircraft 
to allow continuous monitoring and data 
collection of vibration data. Accelerometers are 
mounted on the input and output of each major 
drivetrain assembly as well as throughout the 
cabin area. 
Remote Data Concentrator - For those aircraft 
that do not support modern avionics bus 
communications, a remote data concentrator 
(RDC) is used to collect the required aircraR 
signals. The RDC has been specifically designed 
to collect a wide variety of signal types found on 
aircraft (see Table 2). The MPU can support 
data collection with up to three RDCs. 
6-3044 
Table 1. MPU Interfaces 
Interface TvDe Number 
MIL-STD 1553 (type A or B) 1 redundant bus 
ARINC 429 Tx 
ARINC 429 Rx 
RS-422 
RS-232 
RS-485 
ARINC 717 
Frequency I Tach 
Index 
Accelerometer 
4 
14 
4 
2 
2 
1 
12 
8 
46 
Table 2. RDC Interfaces 
Siena1 Type Available 
Discrete Input 48 
AC Signal 16 
DC Signal 32 
outputs 1 
synchros 4 
ARINC-429 Inputs 1 
Ground Station - The GS is the primary user 
interface with the HUMS system. It is 
responsible for logging and maintaining all flight 
and maintenance data, generating aircraft 
maintenance-due lists based on flight data, 
performing aircraft configuration and parts 
tracking, generating engineering and 
management reports, and archiving data. 
The GS is hosted on a networked server I 
workstation environment. The minimum Server 
hardware requirements are: 
Hardware 
0 
0 24-X CD-ROM Drive, 
0 
0 Six 9.0Gbyte Hard Drives 
0 Network interface 
Dual 400MHz Pentium II Processors 
wl512K Cache. 
5 12Mbytes of installed RAM. 
Software 
0 
0 WindowsNT Server Resource Kit. 
0 Oracle RDBMS 8.0.5.0.0. 
WindowsNT Server 4.0, Build 1381, Service 
Pack 4. 
The minimum client workstation hardware 
requirements are: 
Hardware 
PCMCIA Card Reader 
Network interface 
20X CD ROM Drive 
9 Gbyte Hard Drive 
266 M H i  Pentium II processor 
256 Mbytes of installed RAM 
S o h a r e  
0 WindowsNT Workstation 4.0, Build 1381, 
Service Pack 4. 
0 Microsoft Data Access Components Version 
2.0 Service Pack 2. 
Oracle Client 8.0.5.0.0. 
GBS functions include: 
DTU Initialization and Download 
Parts and Maintenance Configuration 
Tracking 
Usage CalculationsIUpdates 
Condition Indicator Extraction 
Drivetrain, Rotor and Cabin Absorber 
Diagnostics 
Data Graphing, trending, and Reporting 
SystemlUser Administration 
Interfacing to external Applications 
(Interactive Electronic Tech Manuals, 
Customer Configuration / Maintenance 
Management Systems) 
5. CURRENTPROGRAMS 
Navy CH-53E - The first program to use the 
newest generation IMD HUMS was the Navy 
CH-53E Super Stallion. A complete suite of 
HUMS functionality is supported by the IMD 
HUMS. This includes: 
0 
Exceedance Processing 
Rotor Track and Balance Monitoring 
Rotor Monitoring 
Swashplate Monitoring 
Tail Rotor Drive Shaft Monitoring 
Aircraft Absorber Tuning 
Engine Monitoring, including Engine Power 
Monitoring, Engine Life Usage Monitoring, 
Engine Over Temperature Monitoring 
Powertrain Monitoring, including 
Traditional Vibration Analysis Operations as 
6-3045 
well as Advanced Mechanical Diagnostics 
Monitoring 
Oil Debris Monitoring 
Drive Shaft Monitoring 
0 
0 Operational Usage Monitoring 
0 Structural Usage Monitoring 
Free Wheeling Unit ( F W )  Monitor 
The CH-53E IMD HUMS uses the BFG MPU 
and DTU device. As the CH-53 is not a heavily 
bussed aircraft, two RDCs are used to collect the 
requisite discrete signals, angular rates, attitude 
angles, body-axis accelerations, fuel quantities, 
pressures, and temperatures. The MPU is 
configured as a MIL STD 1553 Remote 
Terminal. As such, it collects a variety of flight 
parameters. Crew display is accommodated 
using the CH-53E CDNU. 32 accelerometers / 
index sensors were distributed throughout the 
drivetrain to collect vibration data, A total of 6 
engine accelerometers and 3 cabin accelerometer 
packages were also installed to collect engine 
and cabin accelerations. The locations of the 
IMD HUMS LRUs are presented in Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Location of IMD HUMS LRUs on the 
CH-53E 
The Navy CH-53E IMD HUMS completed a 97 
hour Development Test (DT) program in 2000. 
This test emphasized functional evaluation and 
demonstration of IMD HUMS. Of specific 
interest were fault insertion tests of the rotor 
system. Tests were performed to assess the 
system’s ability to identify the proper 
maintenance actions required to correct out-of- 
balance conditions on the main and tail rotors, 
and out-of-track conditions on the main rotor. A 
series of flights were flown with pre-selected 
main and tail rotor track and balance 
adjustments. The values of these pre-selected 
adjustments were based on solutions provided by 
the Sikorsky Blade Track and Balance (SBTB) 
software. By knowing the baseline value of the 
aircraft’s track and balance condition, simulated 
changes to pitch change rods, trim tabs, and rotor 
hub weights can be made in the SBTB s o h a r e  
until a predicted fault value matches the desired 
fault value (typically 5% lower than the flight 
clearance limit). In the case of the tail rotor, 
only hub weights were adjusted and a series of 
vibration polar plots were be used to determine 
predicted vibration levels. The adjustments that 
resulted in the desired fault value were then 
made to the aircraft. Once the changes to the 
rotor system were made, the aircraR was flown 
(ground turns only for tail rotor adjustments) and 
the IMD HUMS provided an adjustment that 
returned the rotor system to within MlMS limits 
within two test flights. This testing was repeated 
for both sets of algorithms (with and without 
main rotor tracker) used by the IMD HUMS. 
The CH-53E IMD HUMS has successfully 
transitioned from developmental test into its 
operational test (OT) phase. Operation test will 
occur between Q2 and 4 3  2001. An additional 3 
CH-53E will be fitted with the IMD HUMS for 
the OT program. An initial low-rate production 
contract for additional IMD HUMS was awarded 
in October 2000. Installations of the initial 
production system will start after the OT 
installations are complete. 
Navy SH-60B - Concurrent with the 
development of the CH-53E IMD HUMS was 
the development of the Navy SH-60B Seahawk 
IMD HUMS. Developmental testing of the SH- 
60B IMD HUMS started in February 2000. As 
with the CH-53E platform, the testing 
emphasized functional evaluation and 
demonstration of IMD HUMS (engine checks, 
usage, RTB, exceedance detection, and 
mechanical diagnostics). Of most interest were 
the flights used to assess the system’s ability to 
execute diagnostics currently performed in the 
U.S. Naval Aviation Vibration Analysis Program 
(NAVAP)[4]. The VATS currently performs 
these procedures throughout the H-60 and H-53 
fleet. The IMD HUMS was designed to improve 
upon the current methods utilized by the VATS 
by constantly monitoring the vibration levels of 
certain aircraft components to reduce 
maintenance hours spent doing time-based 
maintenance. In addition to evaluating the 
capability of the IMD HUMS to perform output 
shaft balancing and vibration absorber tuning 
operations, the IMD system’s ability to detect 
mis-shimmhg of the SH-GOB’S Thomas 
6-3046 
couplings was also evaluated (both for tail rotor 
drive shaft (TRDS) and the input to the 
intermediate gearbox (IGB)). 
The SH-60B Ih4D HUMS utilized the same basic 
elements as that of the CH-53E, but configured 
specific to SH-60B interfaces and operations. As 
with all IMD HUMS applications, the BFG MPU 
and DTU were installed on the SH-60B. The 
SH-60B required only a single RDC (owing to 
the need to collect data from 2 engines on the 
SH-GOB versus 3 engines on the CH-53E). 22 
accelerometers / index sensors were distributed 
throughout the drivetrain to collect vibration 
data. A total of 4 engine accelerometers and 3 
cabin accelerometer packages were also 
installed. The SH-60B IMD HUMS was 
configured to act as a MIL STD 1553 Bus 
Monitor to collect requisite flight parameters. 
Unlike the CH-53E, crew display functions were 
handled with a dedicated display provided by the 
BFG Avionics CDU. The locations of the BFG 
IMD HUMS on the SH-60B are illustrated in 
Figure 4. 
The DT phase of the SH-60B IMD HUMS is 
expected to be complete by Q1 2001. The OT 
testing for the SH-GOB IMD HUMS will occur 
between 43 and Q4 2001. An additional 2 SH- 
60B aircraft and 1 SH-6OF aircraft will be fitted 
with the IMD HUMS for the OT program. 
Figure 4. Location of the IMD HUMS LRUs on 
the SH-BOB 
Army UH-60A and HH-60L - In 1999, BFG was 
awarded a contract to reapply the SH-60B IMD 
HUMS product to the Army UH-60A and HH- 
60L Blackhawk aircraft. The IMD HUMS LRU 
complement used on the Army Blackhawk is 
similar to that used on the SH-6OB. There are 
two main differences in the Army and Navy 
applications: 
Differing avionics components, engine- 
variants, and transmissions. 
0 Differing business-rules of each service. 
One of the key points of the IMD HUMS to be 
evaluated is the interchangeability of the system 
components regardless of the model rotorcraft on 
which they are installed. This interchangeability 
/ interoperability will be demonstrated across the 
UH-60A and HH-6OL platforms, with further 
supporting analysis from the Navy IMD HUMS 
programs. The sensors and the LRU's are 
identical, although each IMD HUMS installation 
generally consists of different numbers of the 
sensors. This is also true of the basic software. 
The only differences between software loaded 
into specific helicopter models are the platform- 
specific confguration tables. Therefore, if the 
services use the IMD-HUMS, the government's 
cost of ownership will be reduced because of the 
interchangeability of components. 
The first flight for the UH-60A IMD HUMS is 
planned for late-March 2001. Flight testing for 
the UH-60A IMD HUMS is to be completed by 
4 3  2001. Operational checks of the HH-60L 
IMD HUMS will start May 2001. Unlike the 
Navy programs, there will not be any dedicated 
OT program for the Army IMD HUMS. The 
Army anticipates leveraging the OT results from 
the Navy SH-60B tests in support of its 
evaluation of the operational performance of the 
IMD HUMS. 
- -  
Y 
Figure 5. Location of the IMD EIUMS on the 
Army UH-60A 
Marines AH-12 and UH-IY - 1999 also saw the 
introduction of the IMD HUMS to the AH-1Z 
Cobra and UH-1Y Huey platforms. This 
6-3047 
introduction is occurring concurrent with the 
introduction of the H-1 avionics upgrade 
program. The H-1 IMD HUMS represents the 
first introduction of the IMD on a fully bussed 
aircraft. An RDC is not utilized all aircraft data 
is available via the existing H-1 MIL-STD-1553 
databus. Owing to the commonality in the 
avionics design by the Bell / Litton team, the 
IMD system for both the AH-1Z and UH-1Y are 
nearly identical, except for some minor 
parameters differences. 
The current IMD HUMS program on the H-1 
platforms will demonstrate the ability of the 
system to operate autonomously. Sets of 
accelerometers and index sensors are mounted 
on the drivetrain and in the cabin to collect 
vibration signals. In the initial program phase, 
the IMD HUMS will not interface with any of 
the displays in the H-1 cockpits. Rather, all 
operations will be implemented as automatic 
procedures, not requiring any pilot interaction. 
As with the other systems, the resulting data will 
be collected and written to the DTU memory 
card for processing on the ground. An 
important aspect of the H-1 program is to collect 
vibration data to support the development of 
mechanical diagnostics limits and health 
indicators. 
The first flight of the H-1 M D  HUMS will 
occur August 2001. Flight-testing is to be 
finished by July 2002. Following a successful 
evaluation of the IMD HUMS, it is hoped that 
the system will be fully integrated with the 
aircraft cockpit displays, allowing the system to 
also perform prompted procedures, such as on- 
demand engine power assurance checks. 
Figure 6. Location of the IMD HUMS on the 
Marines AH-1Z 
Sikorsky 5 9 2  - The fvst commercial application 
of the IMD HUMS has been to the Sikorsky S- 
92. AS with the H-1 application, the S-92 IMD 
HUMS will operate on a fully bussed aircraft. 
Again, the MPU and IMD sensors will be 
installed. Unlike the H-1 program, the IMD 
HUMS will interface with the S-92 multi- 
function display (MFD), providing both 
automated and prompted operations. Though the 
S-92 IMD HUMS provides the same types of 
functionality as that on the military platforms, it 
has some significant differences in its 
implementation. As the Full Authority Digital 
Engine Controller (FADEC) in the S-92 engines 
provides a comprehensive set of engine 
performance assessments, such functionality is 
not configured into the S-92 IMD HUMS. The 
biggest difference between the S-92 HUMS and 
the military IMD HUMS applications driven by 
commercial certification. Whereas the military 
HUMS programs are certified to military air- 
worthiness standard, the s-92 is to be certified to 
FAA certification standards. This drives 
additional testing and documentation. The need 
for commercial certification also drives some 
differences in the application. The GS has been 
developed to DO-178B Level B standards, but is 
tested to DO-178B Level D. As such, critical 
processing related to application of structural 
usage measures to serialized parts has been 
moved from the GS in the OBS, which is tested 
to DO-178B Level B standards. 
Flight testing of the S-92 IMD HUMS will occur 
between March 2001 and September 2001. This 
will be followed by fiial FAA certification 
testing which is to be completed by March 2002. 
Figure 7. Location of the IMD HUMS on the 
Sikorsky S-92 
6-3048 
6.  EXAMPLES 
Rotor Track and Balance - The ability of the 
IMD HUMS to automatically recognize and 
collect rotor track and balance (RTB) data during 
normal flight provides one of the most beneficial 
cost savings /avoidance mechanisms of the entire 
IMD HUMS system. The system has 
demonstrated both tracker-based RTB and 
trackerless[5] rotor tuning functions on both the 
H-53 and H-60 platforms. 
Data from fault tests were used to evaluate RTB 
and rotor tuning operations. Tests were 
performed with a variety of fault inputs. These 
include: 
0 Weight faults 
0 
0 PCR and tab faults 
0 Complex faults (weights, PCR and tab 
Single / Multiple PCR faults 
changes) 
The generic requirement for the IMD HUMS to 
correct the rotor fault within two attempts. In 
general, this means that the IMD HUMS will be 
able to provide an RTB solution from data 
automatically collected onboard the aircraft and 
arrive at a solution with at most a single check 
flight. This eliminates the need to fly specialized 
RTB data collection flights. 
The RTB solution computed from the IMD 
HUMS is the solution that optimally minimizes 
the mean square error across all flight conditions. 
One aspect of the IMD HUMS that differentiates 
it from conventional RTB tools is its ability to 
generate RTB solutions using higher shaft order 
information. This approach allows the IMD 
HUMS to achieve excellent RTB and rotor 
tuning solutions within a single attempt. 
Table 3 presents a series of rotor system faults 
and the IMD computed solutions. A variety of 
test conditions are presented, for both tracker- 
based and trackerless operations. In general, the 
IMD HUMS was able to correct the inserted 
faults. It is interesting to note that the optimal 
solution recommended by the IMD HUMS, 
though within the same order / magnitude of the 
inserted faulted, may also include adjustments to 
PCR / trim tabs I weights which were not 
initially entered. This is due to the fact that 
system always attempts to provide a solution that 
is globally optimal. In all cases, the IMD HUMS 
system was able to reduce vibrations to within 
0.3 ips limits (inserted faults drove the single 
axis vibration levels up between 0.309 ips and 
0.69s ips). 
Table 3. IMD HUMS Rotor Track and Balance 
Solutions 
TEST FAULT IMD HUMS 
SOLUTION 
PCR / TAB Fault (w/ Tracker) 
PCR BlackUp7 Red Up 2 
Blue Up 5 
Black Down 5 
TAB BlueDown8 Blue Up 6 
WEIGHT Red Remove 12 
Black Remove 5 
Double Tab Fault fw/ Tracker) 
PCR Yellow Down 3 
Black Down 4 
TAB RedDown 14 Red Up 7 
Blue Up 11 Blue Down 15 
WEIGHT 
Complex Fault (w/ Tracker) 
PCR Blue Down 10 Blue Up 6 
Yellow Up 12 Yellow Down 10 
Black Up4 Black Down 9 
TAB BlueUp 7 Red Down 9 
Blue Down 17 
WEIGHT Yellow Rem. 30 Blue Remove 5 
Yellow Add 5 
Yellow Down 12 
Double PCR Fault (w/o Tracker) 
PCR Yellow Up 5 Red Up 5 
Black Down 10 Yellow Down 6 
Black Up 10 
TAB Blue Down 3 
Yellow Up 11 
WEIGHT Blue Add 13 
Yellow Rem. 18 
Weight Fault (w/o Tracker) 
PCR RedUp 1 
Blue Up 2 
Yellow Up 3 
TAB Red Down 6 
Blue Down 7 
WEIGHT Red Add 20 Red Remove 26 
Blue Remove 47 Blue Add 45 - 
The polar plots in Figures Sa and Sb illustrate 
actual vibration level reductions across flight 
regimes realized by the IMD HUMS. Again, a 
series of faults were inserted into the rotor 
system. Vibration levels were measured before 
and after the IMD HUMS solution was 
implemented. In all cases, the IMD HUMS was 
able to successfully reduce the vibration levels to 
within specified limits. 
6-3049 
- Hover 
120 Kts 
(.- - -+ WKts 
BH -“U* 150 Kts 
L 
( a \ Corrected 
ips 
Figure Sa - Comparison of faulted and IMD- 
corrected rotor lateral vibration levels. - Hover 
120 Kis 
- -* 90Kk 
&- 1 --e 150 Kts 
a Faulted 
r )  Corrected 
0.8 ips 
Figure Sb - Comparison of faulted and IMD- 
corrected rotor vertical vibration levels. 
Mechanical Diagnostics - Onboard monitoring 
of aircraft drivetrain vibrations requires analysis 
of both faulted and unfaulted drivetrain data. 
This collection and analysis has been initiated on 
the CH-53E7 SH-60B7 UH-GOA and H-1 
programs. 
Figure 9a illustrates a normal (unfaulted) 
enveloped RMS histogram ftom a CH-53E 
swashplate bearing. Its distribution, being 
Gaussian, is indicative of a non-faulted 
condition. This contrasts with the enveloped 
RMS histogram from a faulted H-1 main 
gearbox (Figure 9b), which does not display a 
Gaussian RMS distribution. Figure 9c shows the 
enveloped RMS level of the gearbox. The test 
consisted of endurance runs, low lube conditions 
and complete loss of lubrication conditions. 
The detection of faults is clearly identifiable by 
taking measurements of these vibration 
signatures. Starting with the low lubrication 
runs, the overall level of Enveloped RMS (15k - 
20k Hz) has increased. Starting with data point 
31, beginning of eminent failure (not complete 
destruction), the indicator value (as well as the 
rate of change) has increased dramatically. The 
failure case is obviously detectable, but the first 
indication of a problem starts with the low 
lubrication case. Such knowledge is being 
incorporated into the IMD HUMS to support the 
development of advanced mechanical 
diagnostics of rotorcraft drivetrains. 
Main Rtr Shi? Swash 64951-11563-043 
Occurence Values 
Figure 9a - Enveloped RMS histogram from an 
unfaulted CH-53E swashplate bearing. 
Lower Planetary S h a h  Cy1 1 449-340-21 1-101 
121, , I 
0.4 
Occurence Values 
Figure 9b - Enveloped RMS histogram from an 
H- 1 main gearbox allowed to run without 
lubrication 
6-3050 
y & ::ry__--, 
0 .1  
0 -  
0 2 0  4 0  
R U N  N U M B E R  
Figure 9c - Enveloped RMS levels from the 
faulted H-1 main gearbox versus run number 
Engine Power Assurance - Another aspect of the 
IMD HUMS is its ability to extend engine power 
assurance testing. The processing power of the 
MPU and the variety of signals made available to 
the IMD HUMS allows the IMD HUMS to 
automate many traditional power assurance 
checks. In addition, the system can also support 
determination of many power indices. An 
example of the ability to automate engine 
performance checks is presented in Figures 10a 
thru 1Oc. This example illustrates the ability of 
the IMD HUMS to automate four-point engine 
checks [6] supported on the CH-53E. The four- 
point check consists of collecting and recording 
various engine parameters at a series of engine 
temperature conditions. This information is 
traditionally recorded into the aircraft logbook 
for later analysis by the aircraft maintainer. The 
IMD HUMS automates the process by guiding 
the operator through the test procedure, 
automatically collecting and recording the 
requisite data, and performing the data analysis 
onboard. With the system, the results of the 
four-point check can be displayed to the 
operator. Generation of any engine-related 
maintenance actions associated with the testing 
is also automated within the IMD HUMS 
groundstation. 
Groundstation Operations - The ability of the 
WID HUMS to support maintainer operations is 
primarily managed within the IMD HUMS 
groundstation. A wide variety of data is 
downloaded to the ZMD HUMS groundstation. 
This includes: 
Exceedances 
Events 
Operation Usage 
Structural Usage 
Operational Regimes 
Onboard System Faults 
Signal Data 
Computed Data 
Condition & Health Indicators 
Rotor Track and Balance Data 
Absorber Tuning Data 
Shaft Balancing Data 
Figure 10a - Main CH-53E IMD HUMS Display 
Figure 10b - CH-53E IMD HUMS four-point 
check procedure screen. 
6-3051 
Figure 1Oc - CH-53E IMD HUMS four-point 
results display. 
The groundstation automates the transfer of this 
information from the PCMCIA datacard. During 
this download operation, the data is analyzed and 
is used to support pilot debrief operations (see 
Figure lla). The maintainer can get an 
immediate view of the status of the aircraft and 
whether something occurred which requires 
attention. Normally, the maintainer would not 
be exposed to detailed flight information. 
However, the groundstation user interface has 
been designed to support more detailed analyses. 
The maintainer and engineering analysts can drill 
down through the data to get more detailed 
information, such as those provided in time 
histories (see Figure l lb) or as trend plots. Not 
only does the groundstation support status and 
overview operations, it provides diagnostic 
capabilities to compute RTB solutions (Figure 
1 IC) and analyze mechanical systems problems 
(such as the vibration analysis screen presented 
in Figure 1 Id). 
The groundstation also supports administrative 
operations (card initialization, data archiving, 
report generation) and configuration 
management (parts tracking) and maintenance 
management tasks. 
12 35 46 MGB Oil Cooler 97 
2nd stage hydraulic pressure below 2 
Utility hydraulic pressure below 2600 
Utility hydraulic pre$$uie below 2600 
ty hydraulic pressure below 2600 
125854  RTBl20KtsStail 
Figure 1 l a  - IMD HUMS groundstation flight briefing screen. 
6-3052 
7S286.CH-53E. 163086.~000O811T1 239S6,OS 1Z.ADF 8~11noon 1147 m n w  
12M 1235 1240 1245 1250 1255 1300 1505 1310 1315 
Time 
Figure 1 lb  - Sample time history plotting screen on the IMD HUMS groundstation 
Weight (ib) PCR (cltcks) Tab (mils) 
Blade Adjustment Blade Adjurlmnt Blade Adjustment 
Red __. Red down 1 0 Red down 2 0 
Blue ... Blue up 1 0 Blue u p 3 0  
Yellow --- Yellow up 1 0 Yellow up 2 0 
Orange --- Orange down 3 0 Orange down 5 0 
Figure 1 IC - Sample RTB solution screen on the IMD HUMS groundstation 
6-3053 
Figure 1 Id - Representative diagnostics results screen on the IMD HUMS groundstation 
7. LESSONS LEARNED 
System Architecture - It is important to always 
maintain constant focus on the overall goal of 
lowering the platform user’s maintenance cost 
while improving operational readiness and 
safety. Lower operational cost benefits the user 
in obvious ways and keeps the manufacturer 
competitive. Each participant “wins”. 
Strive to distinguish between what the system is 
required to do and how the system is to 
accomplish the goal. What the system does is 
correlate data from diverse sources (Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) sensors, pilot 
input, aircraft “state” parameters, HUMS- 
specific accelerometers and sensors, aircraft 
configuration data, maintenance histories, etc.) in 
order to allow platform maintainers and 
designers to optimize operational costs given 
various constraints. The “how” part is 
accomplished by efficiently acquiring and 
manipulating that diverse data for use in 
advanced algorithms (functions). Indeed, the 
results of many of the calculations serve only as 
input for subsequent calculations or “higher- 
level” functions. 
Develop and execute the data acquisition and 
reduction functions as efficiently as possible. 
This will provide the best chance of delivering 
the HUMS to the customer(s) who developed the 
original requirements. HUMS applications are 
sometimes so complex that turnover in the 
personnel who are developing the system 
(customer and HUMS provider alike) hinders 
progress. 
Providing the HUMS only signals the start of 
maintenance practice optimization. The ease 
with which the HUMS provides the data needed 
by the maintainers and operators to optimize 
their processes is only an enabler - not an end 
goal. 
Usage Monitoring - Automated Usage 
Monitoring frees the pilot fiom administrative 
cockpit tasks and promises more accurate 
recording of the time spent in damaging regimes. 
Accurate reporting of the distribution and 
6-3054 
duration of regimes flown is important in order 
to determine the amount of “life” time to 
decrement from life-limited parts. 
Reprocessing regime data with more accurate 
regime definitions offers the potential to reclaim 
spent life while maintaining high flight safety 
standards and extending the time period between 
maintenance actions for life-limited parts subject 
to low frequency vibration. This is because high 
usage factors are usually assigned to all regimes 
within the flight sequence that are denoted as 
“unrecognized”. 
The transition fiom a fleet of non-HUMS 
equipped aircraft to fleet-wide implementation 
will require the aircraft operators to determine 
the life already decremented fiom a component 
based on previous operations. This will become 
the starting point from which subsequent life will 
be decremented fiom the component as 
determined by the HUMS. Advanced condition 
assessment techniques (direct physical 
observation) coupled with HUMS-derived 
component degradation data will permit spent 
life to be accurately determined through physical 
inspection. Test cell data or laboratory 
determinations will validate degradation rates. 
Insight gained from tracking the actual usage of 
individual helicopters will permit maintainers 
and operators alike to schedule the aircraft for 
maintenance activities and certain missions 
based on the known condition of the helicopter’s 
components. 
Mechanical Diagnostics - The key to enabling 
advanced mechanical diagnostic and prognostic 
functions is a data analysis and reduction system 
that is automated to the greatest degree 
attainable. This is true even for modestly sized 
fleets (small fixed-base operators). The 
automated system must permit an analyst to 
introduce new algorithms and thresholds 
(warning or alarm). It must also provide the 
ability to reprocess historical data using those 
new algorithms and thresholds. Short of this, the 
analysts will be overwhelmed by the amount of 
data to be processed and will not even be able to 
establish a baseline set of diagnostic and 
prognostic functions to improve upon. 
The aircraft operator and equipment 
manufacturer must work closely to set the 
warning and alarm thresholds such that the 
operator can maintain the desired safety of flight 
within the maintenance expense constraint. The 
historical condition indicator (CI) and health 
indicator (HI) data provided by the diagnostic 
and prognostic functions, associated with the 
observed physical condition of flight critical 
components (as documented during maintenance 
actions) are the critical pieces of data needed to 
advance to condition-based and subsequently, 
just-in-time maintenance. 
The transition to condition based maintenance 
can be enabled by using data acquired by 
destructive component testing. This is because 
faulted parts are usually (conservatively) 
removed from an aircraft before a statistically 
significant amount of data can or will be 
acquired. Data-intensive destructive testing 
correlated with scientific observation of the 
component’s deteriorating condition will provide 
the additional insight needed to enable on-board 
prognostic functions with confidence. 
Destructive testing of “spent’’ components in a 
test cell environment is a viable source of data to 
validate prognostic algorithms. This data will 
enable the tradeoff studies that will relate 
component condition with safety of flight and 
required maintenance. A reasonable number of 
tests-to-failure are needed to guarantee 
statistically significant results or to permit the 
training of neural network algorithms to 
recognize developing trends. 
Rotor Track and Balance - A resident (full time) 
rotor balancing system is currently considered to 
be the function that has the greatest potential for 
reducing helicopter operating cost. The ability to 
acquire rotor tuning related vibration data at any 
time (within the bounds of pre-defined flight 
events) precludes the need for mounting special 
balancing equipment and balance-specific 
flights. However, the cost savings can easily be 
diluted in many ways. First, by pursuing the best 
overall balance attainable (over-maintaining the 
rotor hub). Second, by frequently changing the 
location at which you want to achieve low 
vibration levels. Third by frequently changing 
the regime in which you want to experience the 
least vibration. Fourth, by allowing maintainers 
(with different preferences for how to achieve 
proper balance) to chose the manner in which 
they will balance the rotor. Thus, the ability to 
attain low vibration levels (proper balance) can 
lead to increased maintenance effort unless the 
system operators (owners maintainers and 
HUMS-provider) determine how best to act upon 
6-3055 
the information provided by the rotor tuning 
function. 
Intelligence vs. Information - The BFG IMD 
HUMS design resulted from many years of work 
in the area of helicopter health and usage 
analysis, test and development. One area where 
the design was optimized to concentrate 
information down into useable intelligence was 
in VPU processing. The VPU software was 
designed to collect raw vibration data and to 
perform spectral analysis. The resulting spectral 
data (representing a small amount of information 
compared to the raw time history data) is easily 
transferred to the PPU via the dedicated RS-422 
line. However, as new concepts data processing 
occur, the design might need to accommodate 
the transfer of the full 32 MB VPU acquisition 
memory across the 115 Kbaud RS-422 link 
through the VME bus to a third party board in 
the MPU. An obvious way mediate the thruput 
problem would be to change the speed of the RS- 
422 link between the PPU and VPU. However, 
this proves impractical as both PPU and VPU 
hardware designs are very mature and not 
amenable to redesign. Fortunately, BFG has 
allowed the additional processing to be inserted 
into the VPU to support new processing needs. 
Another area where the need to deal with 
information was contrary to the need to deal with 
intelligence is in data logging. A simple view of 
the IMD HUMS is one of a basic data 
acquisition system, like a flight data recorder. 
Data is collected periodically by the HUMS, 
tagged, and periodically output for later 
consumption. In reality, the HUMS does not 
perform processing in this manner. Though data 
is periodically collected, storage of information 
to the memory card is more aperiodic. Select 
signals are only written when they change (such 
as an exceedance indication), different data are 
recorded at different rates, and the same data 
may be output at different rates based on event- 
processing logic. This is most apparent in the 
area of structural usage regime monitoring, 
whereby the HUMS may only log time in flight 
regime buckets instead of logging all relevant 
aircraft state information. All this is done so as 
to minimize the amount of data written to the 
memory card resulting in minimizing card 
change operations and GS processing. The 
requirements to store as much information to the 
card drives increased GS processing. This leads 
to the maintainer waiting for the GS to process 
data. 
Data Management - Time spent to correlate and 
make available data from diverse sources will 
reward the customer and HUMS developer alike. 
Incidentally, this speaks (again) to the need to 
automate data access and the data reduction 
processes. Access to a wider variety of data 
allows the analyst to develop solutions based on 
interpreting already-available information 
(sometimes precluding the need for any 
additional sensors). Likewise, using indicators 
that otherwise do not have a direct relationship 
with one another gives the analyst confidence 
that the combined indications truly represent a 
developing condition. 
Initial solutions to customer requirements will 
typically have to be “brute-forced” before an 
elegant solution becomes available. Access to 
disparate data allows the analyst to experiment 
using various data correlation techniques to 
determine the most effective indicator 
combination. In the same manner, knowing the 
critical indicators (and those that are normally 
unrelated) allows the analyst to build in safeties 
against false warnings and alarms. The elegant 
indicator set and algorithms usually become 
apparent only after many false starts and 
extensive reprocessing of the same data. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Achieved Product Objectives - BFGoodrich‘s 
objective to develop a dual-use HUMS product 
has been demonstrated on the Army, Navy, 
Marine and commercial programs. Common 
hardware platform and functionally modularized 
flight software, coupled with a modular 
groundstation, allows the system to be applied to 
new systems without the need for additional non- 
recurring hardware and software development. 
Customer-specific business rules and 
maintenance practices and platform-specific 
interface differences are managed through 
program-specific configuration data. 
Customer Information and Maintenance Needs - 
As BFG works with each customer, new needs 
for information processing and reporting are 
encountered. Each customer has parts 
management and maintenance management 
information needs that the system must 
accommodate. This has been achieved by 
defining crisp interfaces between IMD HUMS 
data processing needs and CM / MM functions 
6-3056 
unique to each customer. Though the intended 
end-user of the system is the airframe 
maintainer, the need for the customer’s 
engineering organization to be exposed to 
information has emerged as a requirement of the 
product. 
Ability to Achieve RTB Objectives - Automating 
RTB operations (tracker-based and trackerless) 
has been successfully demonstrated for the CH- 
53E and SH-60B platforms. The BFG RTB 
algorithms are able to provide excellent results, 
with solutions generally achieved in a single 
attempt. 
Advanced Health Process Maturation - The IMD 
HUMS has successfully demonstrated the 
capability to perform regime detection and 
acquire drivetrain vibration data. Unlike RTB 
operations, realizing the full advantage of the 
IMD HUMS will require analysis of flight and 
vibration data so as to mature structural usage 
and advanced mechanical diagnostics 
capabilities. 
Success Related to Early Programs - BFG’s 
success is meeting its product objectives and 
introducing the IMD HUMS is directly related to 
the experience achieved on its earlier HUMS 
programs. Early efforts by the COSSI team 
members (BFG, Government, airframers, and 
subcontractors) has greatly accelerated BFG’s 
understanding of the end-customer needs. This 
has directly led to the development of a full- 
capability HUMS system to support rotorcraft 
health and diagnostics activities. 
9. References 
[l] Hess, A., Hardman, J., Neubert, C., “SH-60 
Helicopter Integrated Diagnostics System 
(HIDS) Program Experience and Results of 
Seeded Fault Testing”, presented at the 
American Helicopter Society 54* Annual Forum, 
May 1998. 
[2] Hess, R, Chaffee, M., Page, R, Roseberry, 
K., “Realizing an Expandable Open HUMS 
Architecture”, presented at the American 
Helicopter Society 5 8  Annual Forum, May 
2000. 
[4] Organization Maintenance Vibration 
Manual, Navy Models SH-6OB, SH-60F, HH- 
60H, Naval Air Systems Command, Al-H60CA- 
VIB-000. 
[5] Ventres, S., Hayden, R., “Rotor Tuning 
Using Vibration Data Only”, resented at the 
American Helicopter Society 56 Annual Forum, 
May 2000. 
E 
[6] NATOPS Flight Manual, CH-53E Helicopter, 
Naval Air Systems Command, Al-H53BE- 
NFM-000. 
[ 3 ]  HUMS Open Systems Specijkation, 
BFGoodrich Aerospace, E-3424, August 30, 
1999. 
6-3057 
Bob Hess Dave Kogut 
Bob Hess is the Systems Engineering Manager 
for the IMD HUMS program. He has been at 
BFGoodrich for eight years, supporting system 
simulation, design and test. He has been at 
directly involved with system development and 
test of the IMD HUMS over the last three years. 
He holds a M.S. in Aeronautical Engineering and 
a B.S. Mechanical Engineering. 
Al Duke 
Al Duke is the Technical Director for 
BFGoodrich's Health and Usage Monitoring 
Systems business unit. During his 18 year career 
with BFG, Mr. Duke has worked in the areas of 
electronic packaging, vibration analysis and 
systems engineering. He has led HUMS 
engineering development teams for the past 5 
years beginning with the US Navy HIDS 
program and, most recently, the IMD HUMS. 
Dave Kogut is the Applications Engineering 
Manager for the IMD HUMS. He is responsible 
for diagnostics application development for the 
IMD HUMS product line. Since joining BFG in 
1998, he has worked in development and 
integration of the CH-53E and SH-GOB systems. 
He holds a B.S. Mechanical Engineering from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
6-3058 
