Multicasting with Advantaged Resources' 
Mary Jo Zukoski and Robert C. Durst 
The MITRE Corporation 
1820 Dolley Madison Blvd 
McLean Virginia 22 102 
mz 11 koshi <d!niitrc.org, durst @ mitre. orq 
703-883-7587,703-883-7535 
Abstract-Satellite links and other "advantaged" resources 
are increasingly becoming available in tactical networks. 
When such resources are used to multicast data, significant 
reductions in traffic and delay are possible, though not 
guaranteed. Furthermore, use of these resources is relatively 
expensive and should be efficiently allocated. This paper 
presents ARDUP, the Advantaged Resource Discovery and 
Use Protocol, which re-forms the existing terrestrial route to 
include the advantaged resource in an efficient manner. It 
addresses the cost-effectiveness of the advantaged resource 
by introducing a method of global cost assessment of the 
multicast paths. This assessment provides a measure of the 
relative benefit - if any -that using the advantaged resource 
will bring. The paper also describes the admission control 
mechanism by which access to the advantaged resource is 
managed. Results from an OPNET simulation study are then 
presented to illustrate the performance and benefits of the 
protocol. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. KEY AREAS of PROTOCOL 
3. 
4. ADVANTAGED NODE ANNOUNCEMENT 
ASSESSMENT OF TERRESTRIAL MULTICAST ROUTE 
5. ALTERNATE ROUTE FORMATION 
6. 
7. 
ASSESSMENT OF ADVANTAGED MULTICAST ROUTE 
RELATIVE COSTS OF TERRESTRIAL AND ADVANTAGED 
ROUTES 
8. ADMISSION 
9. SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
10. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
11. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Tactical networks are wireless and mobile communications 
environments in which timely delivery of information to 
units in the field is critical. Towards this end, airborne and 
spacebome nodes - here called advantaged resources 
(ARs) - are being incorporated into these networks. Such 
nodes can quickly deliver large amounts of data to mobile 
units, particularly if the data is multicast. This improves 
performance not only of the receivers directly involved but 
also benefits the terrestrial network by reducing overall 
traffic. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where the left side of 
the figure shows a multicast path through a simple network 
for Group A. Let the AR in this case be a satellite. The path 
that group data might take if it could transmit over the AR is 
shown on the right. Observe that most of Group A's 
receivers are within the AR's footprint and can be reached 
Receipt over TerrestrialNetwolk 
Figure 1. Efficient Use of an Advantaged Resource (Group A) 
' 0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
/ 
7 -3459  
by a single broadcast transmission from the satellite. This 
allows Group A’s data to bypass much of the terrestrial 
network, decreasing delay to the group receivers and 
reducing traffic to the terrestrial network. This is an efficient 
use of the AR since it benefits both the group and the 
network. 
It is not always in the best interest of either the sender or the 
network to use an AR, however. For example, in Figure 2, 
only one receiver (R5) in Group B is inside the satellite’s 
footprint while the rest of the group is near the sender. A 
possible alternate path using the AR - the advantaged path 
- is shown on the right side of Figure 2. In this situation, 
the terrestrial path may be preferred since it’s relatively 
expensive to use the satellite and may not be worth the cost 
to reduce delay to only one receiver. Further, using the 
terrestrial path reduces competition for satellite access by 
those who would benefit from its use (such as Group A). 
Suppose, however, that receiver R5 in Figure 2 becomes 
unreachable by the terrestrial network (say, it’s behind a 
mountain). If communicating with R5 is vital to group 
operation, then in this case the sender may prefer to use the 
advantaged path. 
Most situations, of course, may not be the extremes of 
Figures 1 and 2 - where the decision to use the AR or not 
was relatively simple. An evaluation process is needed that 
will determine the cost-effectiveness of using the terrestrial 
vs. the advantaged paths for both an individual group and 
for the overall network. Such a process is described in this 
paper. 
teceipt over Terrestrial Netwok 
.... 0 
0 
Before an evaluation can be made, of course, the advantaged 
path must first be formed and done so in a “reasonable” 
manner. Note the receivers RI, R2, R3 and R4 in Figure 1. 
In the terrestrial path, R1 forwards data to R2 and R3 
forwards to R4. RI continues to forward to R2 in the 
advantaged path since the latter is outside the satellite’s 
footprint. On the other hand, R3 no longer forwards data to 
R4 in the advantaged path since R4 can directly receive data 
from the AR. Additionally, both Figures 1 and 2 assume 
that any node within the footprint can communicate directly 
with the AR. This is typically not the case: a specialized 
node that acts as a gateway is usually needed and its 
existence known by receivers. The type of information 
described in this paragraph - which nodes are within the 
footprint, which nodes require forwarding and who should 
do the forwarding, the location of the gateways, the identity 
and availability of ARs, etc. - is necessary before an 
advantaged path is formed. Mechanisms to gather this type 
of information are introduced in later sections of this paper. 
It is important to keep in mind that many of the nodes in a 
tactical network will likely be battery-powered radios. 
Therefore, power is of great concern for protocols operating 
in this environment. This is especially true when a node will 
act not only as a senderheceiver of its own data, but also as 
a forwarding node for the network in general. ARDUP was 
designed to minimize processing throughout the network 
while at the same time functioning in an efficient manner. 
2. KEY AREAS OF THE PROTOCOL 
The Introduction described several actions that must be 
Receipt via Advantaged Resoun: 
Group sender Group receiver 0 Satellite Footprmt 
Figure 2. Inefficient Use of an Advantaged Resource (Group B) 
7-3460 
undertaken before the Advantaged Resource (AR) may be 
used. The network should first leam of the existence and 
capabilities of the AR, reroute the multicast path to the 
resource, determine if it is cost-effective to use, and then 
possibly contend for access. We term these actions, 
respectively: Announcement, Altemative, Assessment, and 
Admission. 
2.1 Announcement 
Advantaged Nodes (ANs) are the specialized routers that act 
as gateways between the AR and the rest of the network. 
(For example, an uplink to a satellite: the uplink is the AN 
while the satellite is the AR.) A node in the network that 
wishes to use the AR must first gain access through an AN 
associated with it. Note that a node may have multiple ANs 
through which it may gain access. It is important that nodes 
discover at least a subset of ANs and the ARs that they 
serve. This is accomplished through Advantaged Node 
Announcements (ANAs), a discussion of which can be 
found in Section 4. 
2.2 Altemative 
Before the AR can be accessed, the multicast path must be 
rerouted to the resource (or, rather, to its ANs). This newly 
formed route is the alternative, or advantaged, route and is 
the union of multiple “mini-meshes” rooted in the ANs. The 
AN at the root of each mini-mesh acts as a proxy source for 
the true sender. Section 5 provides an overview of this mini- 
mesh concept. 
2.3 Assessment 
Once the altemative route is formed, the relative costs of 
using the original terrestrial route vs. the new advantaged 
route must be computed to determine which is more cost 
effective. To illustrate, suppose we are concerned with a 
strict hop count in the simple group of Figure 1.  The 
terrestrial path costs 15 hops while the advantaged route 
costs 4 hops. The sender in this scenario would probably 
prefer to use the advantaged route. (In this simple example, 
we did not “weight“ the AR hop to count for more than a 
terrestrial hop, as would likely be the case in a real network. 
ARDUP can accommodate such weighting.) 
Generalizing, a sender must first choose a cost metric, and it 
must know the overall costs of both its terrestrial and 
advantaged routes. Multicast protocols, however, are often 
limited to local cost information. A method to globally cost 
the terrestrial multicast distribution route using this local 
information is introduced in Section 3. A modification for 
use with advantaged routes is given in Section 6. A brief 
discussion of what it means to be “cost effective” for both 
an individual group and for the overall network is given in 
Section 7. 
2.4 Admission 
The fourth major issue in the discovery and use of 
Advantaged Resources is discussed in Section 8. Admission 
arbitrates between user requests for access to the AR. 
It is assumed that all members of the multicast path be 
multicast-capable. We differentiate between those members 
that wish to receive data and those in the path that act 
simply as routers. The former are referred to as multicast (or 
group) receivers and must participate in both the terrestrial 
and altemative routes. 
While the discussions and examples given in this paper deal 
with one sender and with tree-based multicast routes, it 
should be noted that the methods described are also 
applicable when the sender within a group changes or if the 
path is a mesh. 
3. ASSESSMENT OF TERRESTRIAL MULTICAST 
ROUTE 
Cost measurements in routing protocols are often limited to 
local information when building and maintaining routes 
[1,2,3,4]. This section describes a method to compute the 
global terrestrial cost (GTC) of a multicast path, where the 
GTC is defined as the sum of the link costs of the terrestrial 
path where each link is counted exactly once. This 
computation is accomplished by first sending a probe that 
gives each receiver its cost from the source to itself along 
the terrestrial path. The acknowledgment of the probe 
allows for the computation of the GTC. The global cost 
function will use existing link costs calculated by the 
underlying protocols, reducing processing requirements of 
the assessment. 
3.1 Terrestrial Probe (TP) 
The purpose of a TP is threefold to provide cost 
information to each group receiver along the multicast path; 
to generate the Terrestrial Acknowledgment at the leaf 
routers (detailed in the following section); and to assist in 
the creation of the altemative route (Section 5). These 
probes will be relatively small in size and it is expected that 
they be sent fairly infrequently, say, on the order of a few 
minutes. Thus the burden on the network caused by the 
probes should be relatively light. 
The terrestrial probe (TP) is sent from the source to all 
receivers along the terrestrial multicast route. The probe 
includes two cost fields: Source Cost (SC) and Neighbor 
Cost (NC). The SC field gives the cost from the source to 
that router and is incremented at each router along the path. 
The NC field is operated on in the same manner as SC 
except ifthe router is a group receiver, in which case NC is 
reset to zero. NC effectively gives the cost from the nearest 
upstream receiver in the path to this router - i.e., the 
additional cost to the network to add this router to the path. 
Each router that receives the probe stores its SC and NC 
values, along with the source and multicast group addresses. 
Figure 3 shows the fields of a probe at each hop in a simple 
network in which the cost function is hop count. We see, for 
example, that R2 is four hops from the SRC (SC,,=4). 
However, since R1 is already in the multicast path, it costs 
7-3461 
S 
R4 
Figure 3. Illustration of Source and Neighbor Costs in a TP 
only one additional hop to add R2 to the path (NC,,=l). The 
NC field becomes significant when the alternative route is 
formed (described in Section 4).Either of two events may 
act as the trigger of a TP transmission: the receipt of an 
Advantaged Node Announcement (ANA) or the formation 
of the terrestrial multicast route. The former results in the 
costing of the terrestrial route only if it is known that at least 
one AN is reachable. This saves unnecessary processing and 
traffic if no AN/AR is available within the network. The 
latter method results in a terrestrial cost assessment being at 
the ready in case it is needed. Periodic probing is needed in 
this case as the distribution path - and hence its cost - 
changes due to the network's ad hoc nature. 
3.2 Terrestrial Probe Acknowledgment (TACK) 
The global cost of a multicast path is the sum of the costs of 
all the individual links used in the path, where each link is 
included exactly once. Consider a leaf router, which is a 
group receiver with no downstream nodes. Note that a 
probe's SC field at a leaf router is equal to the sum of the 
costs of all the individual links used in the subtree from the 
source to the leaf router. Therefore, if we sum the SC values 
of all the leaf routers, it would almost result in the global 
multicast cost. The discrepancy arises from including the 
costs of some of the links more than once, since some links 
are shared by more than one leaf router. However, if we sum 
the SC values and then remove the duplication over the 
shared links, the correct global cost results. 
Let SI, be the sum of the source costs of all the leaf routers 
in the multicast distribution path. At every branch point, B, 
in the path, shared links cease being shared for those leaf 
routers whose paths diverge at that point. That is, the shared 
links for these leaf routers are from the source to B. The cost 
of this subpath is the probe field SC, and must be included 
only once in the GTC. Therefore, if there are m branches at 
B, we wish to remove (m-1)" SC, from Sleaf' This subtraction 
of duplicated link costs must be done at every branch point 
of the downstream distribution path. This, in effect, is what 
the processing of the Terrestrial Probe Acknowledgment 
(TACK) does as it traverses back towards the source. 
To use our example in Figure 3, a visual examination of the 
network produces a GTC = 7. The leaf routers are R2, R3 
and R4. Simply adding the SC,, values, i=2,3,4, of the leaf 
routers results in a sum Sleaf = 13, which is incorrect. We 
must remove the duplication over any shared links. Observe 
that RI is the sole branch point, so that the shared links 
among the leaf routers are from SRCaRl .  There are m=3 
branches at this router. We know from the preceding 
paragraph that the cost of the shared links is included three 
times in Sleaf; whereas to obtain the correct GTC it should be 
included only once. The cost of the shared links S R C 3  R1 
is the probe field SC,,=3. Therefore, subtracting off the 
duplication (m-1)* SC,,, 
GTC = SI, - (m-1)" sc,, 
- 13 - (3-1)" 3 
7 - 
which is correct. 
3.2.1 Processing of the TACK-As explained in the above 
section, the TACK is used to compute the global cost of the 
terrestrial multicast route. It is sent from the leaf routers to 
the source. When a leaf router receives a TP, it creates the 
TACK and initializes its Terrestrial Cost (TC) field to the 
SC field from the router's TP. Recalling the definition of the 
SC, this initially sets the TC to be the cost from the source 
to this leaf router. The TACK is then forwarded along the 
reverse shortest path towards the source. A non-branch that 
receives a TACK simply forwards the TACK without 
modifying the TC field: 
outgoing TC = incoming TC (1) 
A branch router that receives a TACK waits a period of time 
to receive TACKS on all its downstream interfaces (15 i I 
m) along this route. The branch router then accumulates the 
incoming TC, costs from the received TACKS and removes 
7-3462 
the duplication incurred from shared upstream links. It 
accomplishes this by recalling that SC is its (cached) Source 
Cost - computed when it forwarded the TP downstream - 
and substituting Equation (1): 
out TC= [c( in  TC,)]-(m-I)*%, (11 i 5 m) (2) 
The forwarding of the TACK - and the possible 
modification of its TC - continues until the source is 
reached. If the source is a branch router it operates on its 
received TACKS in the same manner. Otherwise it accepts 
the TC in its received TACK as the global terrestrial cost, 
GTC, for this multicast route. 
Equation (2 ) ,  although used to illustrate the processing at 
branch routers, is also applicable for non-branch routers. At 
non-branch routers, m = 1. Substituting m = 1 into Equation 
(2):  
outgoing TC = C(in  TC)- (m-I)*SC (11 i I 1) 
= c ( i n  TC,)- (1-l)*SC (i=l) 
= incomingTC 
which is Equation (1). Therefore no special processing is 
needed to distinguish between branch and non-branch 
routers. 
If a router does not receive TACKS from all of its 
downstream routers, the router will retransmit the TP. If this 
does not result in the receipt of the TACK, the router shall 
assume that those downstream routers are no longer 
members of this subpath and will forward any TACKS that 
it did receive. 
3.3 Modifications to Assessment 
The procedure described in this section describes a cost that 
is incremented by the receiving side of an individual link. 
(For example, in the case of hop count, it is the node that is 
receiving the probe that increments the count.) The method 
- that of probing the multicast path for individual link 
costs and computing the overall cost through 
acknowledgements - is also valid for metrics that are 
determined by the sending side of a link. In those cases the 
processing of the probe and its acknowledgments would 
need to be modified, but the concept remains the same. 
It has been assumed thus far that forwarding at the branch 
points is accomplished through multiple link layer 
transmissions. However, this could also be done through a 
single link layer broadcast. This would affect the cost of that 
transmission as well as how the cost is determined. Cost 
metrics that are receiver-incremented may result in an 
erroneous value for that transmission since every 
downstream neighbor from the branch point would 
increment the probe fields - instead of the single increment 
that a broadcast calls for. The processing of the probe and 
its acknowledgments can be adapted to handle this, 
providing that the protocol knows that a broadcast is 
occurring. Communication between the protocol and the 
link layer would therefore be required. 
4. ADVANTAGED NODE ANNOUNCEMENT 
Advantaged Nodes (ANs) are specialized routers that act as 
gateways between the AR and the rest of the network. ANs 
and ARs are not necessarily distinct; some ARs may be 
directly accessible by any node in the network and in these 
cases act as their own AN. In general, however, routers 
wishing to transmit to or receive data from the AR must first 
go through an AN. Thus it is important that routers discover 
the existence, location and capabilities of their nearby ANs 
and the ARs they serve. This is accomplished through AN 
Announcements (ANAs), which are broadcast, with 
duplicate suppression, from each ANA. A time to live field 
(TTL) within the ANA limits the scope of the broadcast. 
ANAs, via ARDUP, allow the network to use the ANs and 
ARs but at the same time prevent them from being treated 
as regular Touters. If an AN instead advertised its 
connectivity to the AR in a routing update, two undesirable 
conditions would likely result. First, the AR would be 
included in unicast routing information and therefore would 
become enmeshed in unicast routes. Not only does this 
negate the "specialness" of the resource but also consumes 
power from the AN and AR. Second, if users were 
somehow able to recognize the functionality of the AR, they 
could inundate the AN with requests for service. This leads 
to congestion in the AN (and possibly in surrounding nodes) 
and consumption of its battery power. Further, without the 
costing fields of the ANA, the AN would have no method of 
distinguishing between user requests for the AR. First-come 
first-serve would prevail, again negating the uniqueness of 
the resource. 
Each ANA will have a SC cost field like that in a TP. The 
SC measures the cost from the AN to that router and is 
incremented at each router along the path. The ANA will 
also have NC fields, but instead of a single NC as in a 
probe, it will contain a list of them - one for every group 
that it encounters, Aggregating group NC information 
allows a single ANA for each AN, rather than one ANA per 
group for each AN. This seduces traffic and processing 
requirements of the routers (including the AN). The list 
shall be of the form {(g,, NC,), (g2, NCJ, ... ( g,, NCJI, 
where gi is a group address. Each (g, NC) pair is called a 
NC-struct. When the ANA is created, the list is empty. 
When a non-group router receives the ANA, it increments 
every NC, field in the list. If a router belonging to group gi 
receives the ANA, it increments every NC field in the list - 
including its own, if such an entry exits. It stores this new 
value in an internal table and then resets the associated NC 
field in the ANA to zero before forwarding. A router may 
belong to multiple groups; processing does not differ in this 
case. As the ANA encounters members of groups it hasn't 
"seen" before, a new NC-stsuct is added. The NC field is 
initialized to the incsemented SC from the ANA. This is 
done because the incremented SC gives the cost from the 
AN to this router. Since there was no existing NC-struct 
7-3463 
within the ANA for the group g, this means that no other 
member of g was reached so far by the ANA. Hence, the 
proxy source - i.e., the AN - is the nearest upstream “group 
neighbor“ for this router. 
For each (g, NC) pair, the NC effectively gives the 
additional cost to the network to add this router to the 
group’s mini-route. Each router that receives the 
announcement stores its SC value and source (AN) address, 
along with the NC values and multicast group addresses (if 
applicable). The SC and NC fields are used in the formation 
of the Advantaged Path. 
Both the cost fields and the manner on which they are 
operated are very similar to that of the Terrestrial Probe, 
where the probe is sent by the source. This makes sense 
since the A N s ,  as stated in Section 1.2, will act as proxy 
sources for the true source in the advantaged route. 
Additional fields in the ANA may contain such information 
as: 
PSrc - source address of the originating AN 
Sequence# 
Which ARs the AN can access 
Type (uplink, downlink, both) of each associated AR 
QoS classifications of each associated AR 
Time to live (TTL) - this field could be a hop count, 
max time to live, or GPS info that defines a bounding 
box around the originating AN. 
This information will be stored at each router receiving the 
ANA. 
In order to limit the propagation of the ANAs through the 
network, a TTL value is included and is examinedoperated 
on at each router. When the TTL limit is reached, the ANA 
is discarded. To ensure that all members of a group leam of 
the existence of at least one AN, a group ANA (GANA) is 
used. This is important because in some tactical networks, 
there may be a limited number of uplink-capable ANs for an 
entire network, but with downlink-capable ANs throughout. 
The nodes in these networks can be widespread 
geographically. Knowledge of the ANs (and of the uplink 
AN, in particular) can permit communication between nodes 
that would otherwise be prohibitive. 
Each GANA is group specific and is forwarded only along 
the multicast route that group. When a member of group gi 
receives an ANA, it creates a GANA using information 
from the ANA; it can be thought of as a subset of the ANA, 
containing all information except for those (g,,NC) pairs for 
which i # j. If the router belongs to multiple groups, it must 
create a different GANA for each group. Each GANA is 
forwarded only along the multicast route for gi. Duplicate 
GANAs will have the same (PSrc, Sequence#) pair and will 
be suppressed. 
An additional method of ANA dissemination is also being 
examined for use with ARDUF’. The protocol described in 
“Scalable Location Update-based Routing Protocol for ad 
hoc networks (SLURP)” is being studied as a scheme2 for 
locating ANs, possibly requesting ANA probes on a per- 
group basis [ 5 ] .  
5. &TEWATE ROUTE FORMATION 
The advantaged, or alternate, route is the multicast path that 
includes the AR. Because the AR can be accessed only 
through ANs (which in some cases may be the AR itself), 
the advantaged route is formed by the creation of multiple 
“mini-meshes” that are rooted in ANs. Each AN within a 
mini-mesh acts as a proxy for a remote source and 
distributes data to a subset of the entire multicast group. 
Nodes which are closer to the true source than to any AN 
receive data directly from the source. A source joins a mini- 
mesh at the closest AN to complete the advantaged route. 
One possibility currently being considered is to use the 
same multicast address for both the advantaged and 
terrestrial routes for a specific group but to distinguish 
between them by Differentiated Services code points [6 ] .  An 
example of an original terrestrial route and its alternate path 
are shown in Figure 4. 
As a router receives ANAs and TPs, it builds a proxy table 
containing, among other information: 
PSrc: proxy source ID 
s c :  cost to get from PSrc to router 
and a series of tuples: 
where 
g: group address 
NC: 
ts: 
cost to get from the nearest upstream 
group receiver to this router 
time of entry into table 
In this context, “PSrc” could be either the true source or one 
of the ANs acting as a proxy source. The router chooses 
which proxy source, P, to attach to by using the table 
entries. P is the associated PSrc for the minimum cost in the 
table, min[SC, NC]. Ties may be resolved by choosing 
newer entries before older ones. Another option to resolve 
ties may be to choose the true source before an AN. 
Mini-meshes will be formed by joining the group g 
(actually, g’: g with the Differentiated Service code point 
indicating use of an AN) rooted at P. Note that a router 
(including the source) may want to wait a period of time 
before joining g’ to see if ANAs from other ANs arrive, 
possibly with a lesser cost. If an ANA arrives after a mini- 
mesh forms and the new AN has lower cost, the router can 
quit the first mini-mesh and join the second. There should 
* SLURP is a scalable routing protocol for large ad hoc networks that 
maintains location information about nodes in the network. We are 
investigating its use for maintaining location information on Advantaged 
Nodes. A group that wishes to form an advantaged path would request that 
an AN announcement be sent to it. Only one group member is required to 
receive an announcement directly from the AN, the member may then 
propagate the announcement to the rest of the group. 
7 - 3 4 6 4  
Terrestrial Route 
Group sender Group receiver 
Alternate Route using 
Advantaged Nodes 
<:> Ad\ antaged Nodes c> Satellite Footprmt 
Figure 4. Terrestrial Path vs. Alternate Path with Advantaged Nodes 
be some minimum level of deviation -in time or cost- 
that must be met before the new AN is joined. Proxy table 
entries expire after a period of time and are deleted from the 
cache. Proxy table entries are also modified when updates 
occur due to the ad hoc nature of the network. 
The terms “joining the AN/group g’ /proxy source P” all 
refer to the process of a router associating itself with the 
mini-mesh rooted at the proxy source P and having the 
address g with the Differentiated Services code point 
indicating use of an AN. 
The NC field in the TP, ANA and Advantaged Probe 
(Section 6 )  messages indicates the cost from the nearest 
upstream group member to the router receiving the message. 
An example of the role it plays in forming the advantaged 
route is given in Figure 5, which uses hop count as the cost 
metric. The left diagram shows the advantaged route that 
might be formed if just the minimum source cost was 
considered. In that case, the true source SRC and both of 
the advantaged nodes have a minimum cost of 3. If the true 
source is chosen over advantaged nodes, then R2 would 
form its mini-mesh by joining to SRC. The GTC of this 
alternate route is 7. The right diagram shows the advantaged 
route that is formed if both minimum source and neighbor 
costs are considered. Here, the min {SC, NC} = 1 ,  which is 
associated with the proxy source AN2. The GTC of the right 
diagram is 5, which is less than that of the left diagram. If 
the goal is to form the lowest cost route, then including the 
neighbor cost is a useful practice. While it is true that the 
route on the right results in higher delay to R2, delay was 
not the cost function used in forming the route. 
6 .  ASSESSMENT OF ADVANTAGED MULTICAST 
ROUTE 
The cost assessment of the advantaged route is very similar 
to the assessment of the terrestrial route described in Section 
2. The major differences are the additions of the 
Advantaged Resource Probe and the Advantaged Probe 
Acknowledgment, and the use of proxy sources to send TPs 
to the mini-meshes. 
An Advantaged Resource Probe (AP) is sent from the true 
source over the advantaged route to the associated ANs (i.e., 
PSrcs). When an AN receives the AP, it transmits a TP - 
with itself as the source - to its attached mini-mesh. This 
gives the members of the mini-mesh their cost from the 
PSrc to themselves. The members then reply with a TACK 
back to the PSrc, providing the PSrc with the overall cost of 
that particular mini-mesh. The PSrc then forwards this cost 
in an Advantaged Resource Acknowledgment (AACK) back 
to the true source. It can be sent to the source over the 
terrestrial network if it’s unable or inefficient to use the AR 
uplink. The sum of the costs in the AACKs provides the 
original source with the terrestrial portion of the advantaged 
route cost, GAC. 
The cost of the AR hop remains to be determined and 
should be implementation-specific. For example, if the cost 
function is hop count, simply adding 1 seems somewhat 
inadequate due to the uniqueness of this particular hop. On 
the other hand, if the cost function is expected delay, its 
value over the AR link may be sufficient to reflect the true 
cost of this hop. In addition, it is possible that multiple ARs 
may exist for a network. Should each AR have its own 
unique cost value even if the cost functions are the same? 
Should ARs of the same type or QoS classification have the 
same cost? These remain open issues. 
Whatever cost is determined for the AR hop, the source will 
add that value to the terrestrial portion to obtain the total 
7 - 3 4 6 5  
cost, GAC, for the advantaged route. In Figure 1, if the cost 
function is hop count and the hop over the AR is taken to be 
2, then the terrestrial route cost is 15 while the cost for the 
advantaged route is 5. 
7. RELATIVE COSTS OF TERRESTRIAL 
AND ADVANTAGED ROUTES 
The terrestrial and advantaged route costs -- GTC and GAC, 
respectively -- provide a gauge to the source of which route 
is more cost effective to use. Because of some level of 
inaccuracy in the calculations (due to the ad hoc nature of 
the network), a strict comparison of GTC and GAC is an 
unwise test. The difference between the values should be 
large enough so that the decision is clear. Otherwise, every 
source with even a minor cost benefit would attempt to 
access the AR, possibly resulting in overloading of the ANs 
and/or ARs with requests for service. Thus, what is needed 
is a threshold value, A, such that: 
if IGAC-GTCI I A, use terrestrial route 
(comparison too close to call) 
elseif GAC-GTC > A, use terrestrial route 
(clear cost benefit) 
elseif GTC-GAC > A, attempt advantaged route 
(clear cost benefit) 
The value for A may fluctuate by taking into account current 
network conditions: increasing in times of congestion and 
decreasing when conditions are light. The process by which 
A is selected is outside the scope of ARDP and should be 
implementation- or operator-dependent. 
8. ADMISSION 
In the test conditions of Section 7, if a source determines its 
cost benefit to be “sufficient” to use the advantaged route, it 
can only request access to the AR. Reference [7] describes 
a set of extensions to the Resource Reservation Setup 
Protocol (RSVP) [SI to allow specification of a resource 
range, in order to support adaptive applications in a dynamic 
environment. We propose to extend this to add a figure of 
merit derived from GTC and GAC, above. This figure of 
merit may be used by the AN (and/or AR, depending on the 
situation) to decide whether a flow should gain access to the 
AR and what fraction of its resource request should be 
granted. Currently, this figure of merit is simply a tuple 
consisting of the GAC and the difference between the GTC 
and GAC. 
We have not yet fully explored the issues and opportunities 
that this technique presents. Clearly, resource reservation in 
a highly dynamic environment is a research topic in and of 
itself. However, the reservation scheme provides a 
mechanism to ensure that as many flows as possible are 
granted productive access to the resource, and ensures that 
resources are not over-reserved throughout the network. 
Remaining issues to be considered include classification of 
Advantaged Resources, and the varying suitability of these 
to different Quality of Service requirements, as well as 
issues related to merging the cost-effectiveness criteria for 
access to ARs with other access criteria such as priority. 
9. SIMULATION A D RESULTS 
The ARDUP protocol was incorporated into an existing 
simulation model in MIL3’s OPNET Radio Modeler. The 
model used the Wireless Internet Routing Protocol (WIRP) 
[9] and the Core-Assisted Mesh Protocol (CAMP) [l]  
mm(SC. NC} =>choose AN2 m ( S C )  =>choose SRC 
Group receiver Q Advantaged Node 0 Satellite Footpnut /‘ ! > Group sender 
Figure 5. Use of the Neighbor Cost field in Forming the Advantaged Route 
7-3466 
as its underlying unicast and multicast protocols, 
respectively. 
The physical layer model employed a set of tools in 
combination, MODSAF and TIREM. MODSAF simulates 
movement of military units relative to each other for each 
sampling instance. TIREM takes the output from MODSAF 
and calculates the RF characteristics between all pairs of 
nodes, considering such factors as terrain, distance, and 
transmission frequency. The result is a matrix that 
represents realistic RF path loss between all pairs of nodes. 
OPNET was modified to read in and utilize these matrices 
in its physical layer model. 
In this initial study, an infantry urban terrain scenario was 
used with five squads of five members each. Nodes moved 
at a rate of approximately 3 km/hr through flat, urban 
terrain. Two multicast groups were formed: one (GI) 
composed of the squad leaders and the second (G2) was one 
squad plus a single member of a second squad. All were 
arbitrarily chosen but fixed. 
Scenarios were run in a control network - i.e., a network 
without ARDUP - and again with the same network using 
ARDUP. The focus of the study was to provide proof of 
concept and to examine ARDUPs effect, if any, on 
performance. It was not an investigation of WIRP, CAMP 
or of the OPNET models of either of these protocols. Any 
potential deficiencies in the protocols or in their models 
were assumed to be present in both the control network and 
in the ARDUP network. 
9. I OPNET Modules 
The Node model consisted of several modules, with a 
process model associated with each module. Transport layer 
and application issues are currently not addressed. 
Modules[ 101 of particular relevance to this study are: 
EO (Engagement Operations): generates and receives 
high priority, user-specified traffic to a specified set of 
destinations or random destinations. 
SA (Situation Awareness): generates and receives user- 
specified traffic, either unicast or multicast destinations. 
Voice: generates voice traffic to a unicast or multicast 
destination. Call duration is assumed to be uniform with 
exponential interarrivals between calls. During a call, 
fixed sized packets are generated at a constant rate. 
Routing: contains a model of WIRF'. 
Mrouting: contains a model of CAMP. 
Ardup: contains a model of ARDUP. 
DLC (Data Link Control): supports multiple 
retransmissions of unicast MAC-layer packets. 
MAC: implements the MACA protocol. 
9.2 Key Assumptions 
Each terrestrial node included both user and routing 
capabilities. The AR in this simulation was an Airborne 
Communication Node (ACN) and had routing 
capabilities only. 
Each node had a single interface and a single address, 
so that a node could not receive and transmit packets at 
the same time. 
Each node learned during the initial phase of the run 
which multicast groupsladdresses it wanted to join. For 
this study, nodes did not quit a group once they joined. 
The AR was in was view during the entirety of the run. 
Cost was measured in hop count, with a weight of 2 
hops for the AR. That is, the hop over the AR counted 
for double in the GAC (Global Advantaged Cost). 
Three ANs were located within the network. 
The ANs could function as both uplink and downlink 
for the AR. 
Multicast transmissions were broadcast, as opposed to 
multiple unicast transmissions to neighbors. 
9.3 Results 
Performance factors examined showed improvement in 
most cases when the advantaged route was preferred. In 
those instances, global hop count was always reduced since 
that was our decision metric. Delay measured in time was 
not always significantly reduced. Because of the relative 
close proximity of some of the nodes and the fact that 
multicast transmissions were broadcast (and therefore, many 
neighbors could simultaneously receive them), the terrestrial 
route was often preferred. An unforeseen consequence of 
this close proximity was a high rate of collisions. 
In general, G1 showed better performance under ARDUP 
due to the wider geographic dispersion of its members. Use 
of the advantaged resource in this case allowed a greater 
consolidation of transmissions than that to G2, which was 
already fairly consolidated. Note, however, that G2 also 
potentially benefited under ARDUP since, without the 
protocol, it may have attempted to use the advantaged 
resource. Doing so would have resulted in worse 
performance than that along its terrestrial route (as in Figure 
2). 
Table 1 shows hop count (the decision metric) for both 
advantaged and terrestrial paths when SQ1 is the sender at a 
sampled moment in time. The individual hop counts do not 
add up to the Global Costs (GAC, GTC) since broadcasting 
was employed. In the Advantaged Path assessment, the total 
hop count is 4; this includes the "weighting" factor. 
The low number is due to the clustering of SQ2, SQ3 and 
SQ4 closely together and neighboring one of the ANs at that 
moment. In addition, SQ1 had been arbitrarily chosen as an 
AN, which allowed it to transmit directly to the AR. 
7 - 3 4 6 7  
Table 1. Ho Count for G1, S 1= sender. 
Advantaged Terrestrial 
sender sender 
SQ4 2 5 
SO5 2 
I Choose: I Advantaged Path I 
5 
Table 2 shows the hop count for the same relative 
configuration when SQ4 was the sender. Because of the 
positions of SQ4 and the AN relative to the other nodes, the 
GAC increased by one. In this run, A=3 and resulted in the 
Terrestrial Path being selected. If A=2, SQ4 would have 
chosen the Advantaged Path. 
Global Cost 
Table 2. Hop Count for G1, SQ4= sender. 
I Advantaged I Terrestrial 1 
43 7 
Path Path 
The Terrestrial Path was chosen in Table 2 even though 
some members saw reductions in their individual costs with 
the Advantaged Path. ARDUP performs global costing and 
therefore the needs of the many (i.e., the network) outweigh 
the needs of the few. 
so1 2 
In Table 3, a typical hop count is examined for G2. For the 
terrestrial path, all members of this group had a hop count of 
four, except for M03. MO3 was closest to the source, 
received the data, and broadcast it to the rest of the group. 
5 
SQ2 
SQ3 
SO4 
2 2 
2 2 
sender sender 
M12 
Advantaged Terrestrial 
Path Path 
sender sender 
MO1 
For the advantaged path, all members of the group had a 
hop count of four except for M05, which was an AN in this 
4 4 
configuration. It received the data directly from the AR and 
broadcast it to the rest of the group. The GAC in this case 
was actually greater than the GTC since the sender's closest 
AN was not along G2's terrestrial path. Getting to an uplink, 
therefore, required a detour that the terrestrial path did not. 
Even with the weighting factor considered, this is a clear 
case of ARDUP indicating when not to use the advantaged 
path. 
I MO3 
Hop count was used as our simulation costing function and 
as an example throughout this paper due to its simplicity in 
instrumentation and illustrative purposes. However, any 
metric could have been used. 
4 3 
An example of the effect of ARDUP on delay can be seen in 
Figure 6. It shows the measured delay for G1 as depicted in 
Table 1. Although hop count was our decision metric, delay 
was also reduced in this instance. This was due to the one- 
MO4 
0.009 
0.008 
A 0.007 
8 0.006 
$ 0.005 
Q) 0.004 
.E 0.003 
0.001 
0 
Y 
+ 0.002 
4 4 
2 3 4 5  
Squad Leaders I 
MO5 
Terrestrial Path 
Advantaged Path 
- -~ ~ 
3 4 
Figure 6. Delay for G1, SQl=sender. 
~~ 
Global Cost 
Choose: 
hop proximity of Gl's receivers to their ANs, as well as to 
the arbitrary selection of SQ1 as an AN. 
53 4 
Terrestrial Path 
Attempts to optimize one decision metric will not, of 
course, always result in improved performance of another. 
Figure 7 shows the delay for G2 as depicted in Table 3. 
Group Members 
I Terrestrial Path 
Advantaged Path 
- .~ 
Figure 7. Delay for G2, MlZ=sender. 
The Global Advantaged Cost (GAC) includes the "weighting factor" for 
the AR hop. 
7-3468 
10. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Satellites and other advantaged resources are becoming 
more common in tactical ad hoc networks. These resources 
can provide timely delivery of large amounts of information 
if used effectively. This improves performance not only of 
the receivers directly involved but also benefits the 
terrestrial network by reducing overall traffic. 
Complications arise due to the ad hoc nature of both the 
network and the advantaged resources, as well as from the 
requirement for specialized gateways. The Advantaged 
Resource Discovery Protocol (ARDUP) described in this 
paper addresses the issue of effectiveness in the face of 
these complications. ARDUP introduces: a method of 
global cost measurement of the multicast path; a mechanism 
to re-form the multicast path to include the advantaged 
resource; a modification of the global cost measurement to 
work with the advantaged route; a means to disseminate 
advantaged resource information and procedures to 
effectively use it; and preliminary work on an admission 
policy to arbitrate between user requests for access to the 
advantaged resource. This is done with minimal processing 
to reduce the power required from radio batteries. 
Simulation results show that the use of ARDUP generally 
improved performance when the advantaged route was 
preferred. Reductions in delay were not always observed 
since delay was not our decision metric. The alternate path 
formation and route assessment functioned as designed and 
with no undue effect on network performance. The 
advantaged path was not always the better choice due to the 
layout and close proximity of some of the nodes. However, 
ARDUP functioned as intended in these instances since it 
correctly chose the terrestrial path as the preferred route. It 
is important to remember that ARDUP is not simply the use 
of an AR; it is also the decision of whether or not to use that 
resource. 
There were several limitations of this initial study. A single 
AR was in view of the cluster area for the entire run. Thus, 
the effects of sporadic link connectivity to the AR or of 
multiple ARs were not examined. Due to a low level of 
loading at the ANs, contention for admission was not seen. 
A comparison in performance of a terrestrial network vs. an 
advantaged resource network may not be construed as 
entirely fair. However, there are currently no protocols that 
the authors are aware of that would provide the same 
automated functionality as ARDUP. Therefore, our goals 
were to first show proof of concept for the protocol and then 
to observe any effects on performance. 
implementation of ARDUP is planned that may make 
evident other areas of improvement. 
11. REFERENCES 
[I] Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J. and E. Madruga, “The Core- 
Assisted Mesh Protocol”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas 
in Communications, Special Issue on Ad-Hoc Networks, 
V01.17, NO. 8, pp. 1380-1394, August 1999. 
[ 2 ]  Lee, S-J, W. Su, and M. Gerla, “On-Demand Multicast 
Routing Protocol (ODMRP) for Ad Hoc Networks”, 
Internet Draft, draft-ietf-manet-odmrp-O2.txt, January 2000, 
Work-in-progress. 
[3] Wei, L., et. al., “Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse 
Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification”, Internet Draft, 
draft-ietf-pim-v2-sm-O1 .txt, November 1999. 
[4] Pusateri, T., “Distance Vector Multicast Routing ”, 
Internet Draft, draft-ietf-idmr-dvmrprp-v3-O9.txt, September 
1999. 
[5] Woo, S.-C. M. and S. Singh, “Scalable Routing in Ad 
Hoc Networks”, Technical Report TROO.OO1, Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR, March 2000. 
<www.ece.orst.edu/-singh> 
[6] Blake, S., D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, W. 
Weiss., “An Architecture for Differentiated Services”, 
IETF, RFC 2475, December 1998. 
[7] Thomson, D. S. ,  et al., “An Approach for Providing 
Quality of Service in a Dynamic Network Environment”, 
MP-W0000097, The MITRE Corporation, Reston, VA, July 
2000. 
[8] Braden, R., L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, S. Jamin, 
“Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 
Functional Specification”, IETF, RFC 2205, September 
1997. 
[9] Murthy, S. and J.J Garcia-Luna-Aceves, “An Efficient 
Routing Protocol for Wireless Networks“, Mobile Networks 
and Applications, 1(2):183--197, October 1996. 
[lo] Schult, N. L., “Overview of CAMP OPNET Model”, 
White paper, The MITRE Corporation, Reston, VA, 
September 2000. 
BIOGRAPHY 
Future studies will increase the number of ARs and 
incorporate dynamic link connectivity to them. Heavier 
loading will enable a thorough examination of admission 
control. Modifications will allow the network to recognize 
the ”advantages“ of the AR in a non-ARDUP environment, 
providing a more equal comparison. Another potential 
enhancement is the incorporation of different cost functions, 
such as delay or signal strength. In addition, an 
7-3469 
Technical Staff at the MITRE Corporation in Reston, VA. 
She has been involved in the modeling and simulation of 
military tactical networks, as well as protocol design and 
analysis, since 1993. Her research interests include queueing 
theory and multicasting in mobile networks. She received a 
B.S. in math and computer science from Wilkes College in 
1988 and a M.S. in math from Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
& State University in 1990. 
Robert C. Durst is a Principal Networking 
and Communications Engineer at the MITRE Corporation 
in Reston, VA. He has been involved in research and 
development of communication protocols for use in mobile 
environments since 1993. He has been active in developing 
protocols for use in military tactical networking 
environments and in spacecraft communication 
environments. His research interests include multicasting in 
mobile networks and congestion control algorithms for 
mixed-loss environments. Prior to joining MITRE in 1986, 
Mr. Durst was a Member of the Group Technical Staff at 
Texas Instruments, Inc. He received a B.S. in electrical 
engineering from the University of Missouri in 1978. 
l 
7 -3470  
