Word Semantics for Information Retrieval:
Moving One Step Closer to the Semantic Web
Rada F. Mihalcea
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas, 75275-0122
rada@seas.smu.edu
Silvana I. Mihalcea
Faculty of Economic Sciences
Cluj-Napoca, Romania
dmihalcea@email.ro
Abstract
The goal of the Semantic Web is to create a new form of
Web content meaningful to computers. The Semantic Web
aims to provide greater functionality, via intelligent tools
such as information extractors, brokers, reasoning services
or question answering systems. Semantics can be addressed
at several levels. In this paper, we focus on the lowest level
- word semantics on which other higher levels such as con-
cept, paragraph, or document levels can be based upon.
This model, which we call Word Semantics (WS), does not
include the rich set of tags proposed by the XML/RDF stan-
dards. Nevertheless, this simpler WS format comes with
a big advantage: it is possible with existing technologies
and resources. Practically, this new model relies on under-
standing word meanings, identifying important named en-
tities such as person, organization and others, and linking
all this information via an external general purpose ontol-
ogy, namely WordNet. With these features, we regard the
WS model as a short but strong step toward the long term
goal of a Semantic Web.
1 Introduction
With the huge and continuously increasing amount of in-
formation available on the Web, languages for representing
data and knowledge occupy a central place in managing this
tremendous quantity of data.
The current Web technology hinders further possible
applications such as information extraction, reasoning or
question answering. The main drawback of the original and
most commonly used Web language (HTML) stands in its
inability to encode the semantic information essential to a
large range of Web applications. This is the main reason
why new languages have been developed, such as the well
known XML [20] and RDF [11] and their corresponding
schemas, as well as extensions or applications of these lan-
guages including DAML [9], OIL [5], SHOE [7] and others.
The Web was initially designed for direct human pro-
cessing. With its current structure, machine-based ap-
proaches to Web applications are not possible unless its con-
tent is transformed into a machine-readable format encod-
ing semantic information. This is the main purpose of the
Semantic Web, as defined by Tim Berners-Lee [2]: to create
a new form of Web content meaningful to computers.
There are several layers to be addressed in data represen-
tation, to make possible the final goal of understanding the
Web content.
 Syntax. This layer defines the syntax of the data, i.e.
the format employed and allowed in data representa-
tions. It does not make any assumptions regarding the
meaning of the data, nor it defines the relations among
various objects on the web. This level is implemented
by the XML language. One of the most important re-
quirements for this level is the syntactic interoperabil-
ity, as defined in [4]: the way data is represented in this
layer should be as reusable as possible.
 Semantics. To actually gather the meaning of Web con-
tent, data should be understandable. Therefore, seman-
tics are required to provide the information needed to
understand and analyze data. RDF gives a framework
and schemas for the implementation of this layer.
A thorough description of the data made at this level
enables mappings among terms and objects, and com-
plicated information extraction and reasoning via an
ontology vocabulary.
 Ontology. Once the data on the Web is understandable
and represented in a machine-processible format, fur-
ther information, not necessarily explicit in text, can
be gathered via ontologies. Information such as feline
is an animal, or zip-code is part of an address, can be
encoded in general-purpose or domain-specific ontolo-
gies that would provide the basis for extracting infor-
mation, reasoning around the stored data, answering
questions, and other applications.
WS  DATA  REPRESENTATIONSYNTACTIC  LAYER
SEMANTIC  LAYER
ONTOLOGY WORDNET
SEMANTIC  WEB  LAYERS WS  MODEL  LAYERS
SEMANTIC TAGS INCLUDED IN
Figure 1. Layers in the Semantic Web and in the WS model
We propose in this paper a framework for transforming
documents into machine processible forms, doable with ex-
isting technologies. We call this model Word Semantics
(WS). As the name suggests, semantics are added at word
level, which constitutes the finest level in text understand-
ing, thereby enabling the use of semantic relations encoded
in existing general purpose ontologies.
WS is simpler than RDF; it satisfies the requirement of
“markup for free”, underlined by Hendler in [8]: users who
are not logic experts (and the majority of users are not)
should not even know that the web semantics exist. WS
automatically labels free text, with no extra knowledge or
markup required from the users. Practically, this new model
relies on understanding word meanings, identifying impor-
tant named entities such as person, organization and others,
and linking all this information via an external general pur-
pose ontology, namely WordNet. Figure 1 shows a layered
representation of the Semantic Web, and the corresponding
modules in our model.
The Semantic Web has to go beyond the simple bag of
words approach currently used by search engines and get
closer to the meaning of the texts. This need is exemplified
by questions like “What is the speed of ...” with an answer
in the form of “... runs at a velocity of ...”, or “Why did X
die?” and the answer “... committed suicide”. There is no
direct relation between these questions and their answers,
but a hidden one, that stands in the synonymy of speed with
velocity, or the more complex relation of suicide being a
cause of death which is the event of dying [17]. This re-
quires the understanding of both text and question, to be
able to infer this type of semantic relations. Identifying in-
formation such as: which is the closest hospital, or which
are the available appointment times for a particular doctor,
as in the example given by Berners-Lee in [2], it is not pos-
sible unless the data posted on the Web is understood and
manipulated meaningfully.
The use of semantics enables the extraction, from simple
texts, of facts that are not stated but implied. For example,
the sentence “Extensive reconstruction of the M1 viaduct
at Junction 34 is to be carried out for the Department of
Transportation” contains, even if not in an obvious repre-
sentation, information such as “M1 is a bridge”, “Junction
34 is a location”, “M1 is located closed to Junction 34”,
“M1 needs repairs, etc. This kind of implications can help
a great deal towards the task of finding relevant information
to given questions. Certainly, a question like “What type of
bridge is M1?” cannot be answered without knowing that a
viaduct is a bridge, and this information is readily encoded
in already available semantic hierarchies. One of the most
important things missing in current Web technologies is a
link between the texts and external lexical resources encod-
ing semantic information.
Several problems are arising here. First, it is not possible
to even think of finding a relation of type viaduct - bridge
without having the knowledge that bridge means here con-
struction and not cards game. Hence, we have the problem
of language ambiguity. Second, to answer a question like
“Where is M1 located?” one needs to know that Junction
34 is a location. Third, links between texts and an extensive
knowledge base are needed for inferences such as “recon-
struction of M1” ! “M1 needs repairs”.
We propose a methodology of moving closer to the
meaning of texts by enhancing the textual representations
with semantic tags, and thus providing possible solutions to
the problems described above.
As mentioned in [2], a large majority of the informa-
tion we need is encoded along the specific-general lines.
Among the multitude of lexical resources available today,
WordNet [15] was designed to cover the ISA relation, and
many other semantic relations such as is-part, has-part etc.
term  ! word; stem; pos; semtag;
length; position
word  ! STRING #word, as it appears in text
stem  ! STRING #word root
pos  ! NN jNNP jV BjJJ j::: #part of speech tag
PUNCT
semtag  ! WNoffset jNEtag
WNoffset  ! INTEGER #synset id (offset) in WordNet
NEtag  ! TPER j TLOC j TORG j #Named Entity classes
TDATE j TNUM j TMONEY j
TPCT j TSPEC
position  ! INTEGER #position within the text
length  ! INTEGER #one by default, larger than
#one for compound words
Figure 2. Representation of a document term. Formal definition.
Additionally, WordNet is in its course of being transformed
into a core knowledge base, by enhancing its word defini-
tions with semantic tags and logic forms, enabling textual
inferences [6]. Therefore, WordNet, with certain modifica-
tions, can play the role of the ontology needed for a form of
Semantic Web.
In the following, we present in detail the WS model,
which replaces the classic representation of texts with an
enhanced semantic representation, closer to the meaning of
texts. Next, we present the problems solved by the WS
model and identify the technical challenges arising from the
usage of this model; solutions for these difficulties are pre-
sented as well. We describe an implementation of the WS
prototype and the results obtained. Finally, we present our
conclusions and directions for further work.
2 Word Semantics model for enhanced text
representations
As mentioned before, the WS model provides the means
for enhancing simple texts with semantic information,
which will enable the connection to an external general pur-
pose ontology, as well as some forms of text understanding
and improved information retrieval and extraction.
The two main components of a system aiming to find in-
formation are a question, or query, and a set of documents
from which information is to be retrieved. The WS model
proposes an enhancement of both these components, by re-
placing each keyword from the input question, and each
term in the set of documents, with its semantic represen-
tation.
This section details on the formal definitions for a term,
keyword and query, as defined in the WS model. The prob-
lems solved with the help of this model, as well as the new
problems it raises are described in sections 3 and 4.
Figure 2 shows the formal definition of a document
term. Keywords are represented using a similar format,
but allowing for incomplete specifications. The keyword
contains merely the same fields, namely
keyword  ! word; stem; pos; semtag
but any of these fields can be set to “”, meaning “don’t
care”. There are combinations which are not valid, for ex-
ample it does not make sense to specify an NEtag and a pos.
Also, the position and length fields of the term definition
are not used within keywords. The valid combinations for
a keyword are presented in Figure 3, together with various
semantic operators that are now made possible.
One of the major improvements over classical retrieval
systems, brought by the WS model, is the ability to use se-
mantic operators, encoding relations such as isa, subsumes,
has-part and others. This is possible due to the semantic tag
added to each term, which practically solves the lexical and
semantic ambiguity of the word and enables the connection
to an external ontology. Some of these operators are shown
in Figure 3 (most of them implemented in the WS proto-
type).
Any question asked against the index created with the
documents will be transformed into a query that contains
one or more keywords. Figure 4 gives the formal specifi-
cation of a query. Notice that besides the classic operators,
AND, OR and NEAR currently accepted by retrieval sys-
tems or search engines, two new locality operators are de-
fined, PAR (paragraph) and SENT (sentence), encoding a
lexical distance rather than positional distance.
Using these representations for document terms and
question keywords, the matching at word level from the
classic keyword-based retrieval technique is replaced with
a matching between semantic forms.
keyword  ! word (1)
j stem (2)
j word; pos (3)
j stem; pos (4)
jWNoffset (5)
j SemOp(WNoffset) (6)
j netag (7)
SemOp  ! HY PERNYM jHY PONYM j
HY PE  HY PO j
SIBLING j RELATED
HY PERNYM(offset)  ! foffset
H
j ISA(offset; offset
H
)g
HY PONYM(offset)  ! foffset
h
j ISA(offset
h
; offset)g
HY PE  HY PO(offset)  ! HY PERNYM(offset)[
HY PONYM(offset)
SIBLING(offset)  ! foffset
s
j 9 offset
H
)
offset 2 HY PONYM(offset
H
)^
offset
1
2 HY PONYM(offset
H
)g
RELATED(offset)  ! HY PE  HY PO(offset)[
SIBLING(offset)
Figure 3. Representation of a keyword. Formal definition.
3 Problems solved by the WS model
The format presented above brings large flexibility to re-
trieval systems and search engines. The classic technique
of keyword indexing is now a sub-set of this new method-
ology: keyword-based matching can be obtained by using
the format (1) for keyword, as presented in Figure 3. With
the representation we propose, several other formats can be
used for a keyword, like word stem, word meaning, or sim-
ply an NE tag. Different keyword formats allow for dif-
ferent applications, proving the benefits of word semantics
over the simple keyword-based retrieval approach 1.
3.1 Keyword matching
Problem Identify documents based on exact keywords.
Solution As stated before, the classic technique of keyword
matching can be used with this new approach by simply
setting the keyword to be equal with word.
keyword  ! word; ; ;  (1)
Example Consider the problem of finding documents re-
lated to the query “children” AND “care”. From a set of
500 documents, 13 documents are found containing both
keywords, using the above keyword format.
1The examples reported in this section are extracted from an index of
500 files from the L.A. Times collection.
3.2 Word stems
Problem When using the keyword matching approach, it
might happen that relevant information is missed for the
simple reason that the term in the document uses a dif-
ferent morphological inflection. For example, searching
for “car” will not return documents containing “cars” and
vice-versa. A solution for this problem was brought through
the wildcard operator [1], used to replace one or more let-
ters. The wildcard solves cases like “cars” and “car” by
using “car*”, but this format allows for other words such
as “carrot” or “caress”, which are not at all related with
“car”. Another solution, currently used by many retrieval
systems is word stemming (e.g. [18]). The problem is
that irregular cases of morphological inflections, such as
“bring” and “brought” cannot be solved by the wildcard,
and usually by no other stemmers, but can be solved by a
morphological stemmer which knows that “brought” is the
past form of “bring”.
Solution The model proposed here gives a simple solution
to this problem by using word stems. The keywords in this
case will use the format:
keyword  ! ; stem; ;  (2)
Example Consider again the problem of finding documents
related to the query “children” AND “care”, but this time
we set the stem field in the keywords to “child”, respec-
tively “care”. We now have increased recall, namely 16
documents are found containing both keywords.
query  ! keyword
j LexicalOp(keyword; [keyword]; [query])
LexicalOp  ! AND jNEAR jOR j
PAR j SENT
AND(x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
)  ! x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
belong to the same document
NEAR(x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
)  ! x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
are at a distance of max. N
OR(x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
)  ! at least one of x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
is in the document
PAR(x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
)  ! x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
belong to the same paragraph
SENT (x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
)  ! x
1
; x
2
; :::; x
n
belong to the same sentence
Figure 4. Representation of a query. Formal definition.
3.3 Word and part of speech
Problem There are cases when words are morphologically
ambiguous, like “match” which could mean “contest” as
a noun, or “to be compatible” as a verb. For the query
“team” AND “match”, a search returns 17 documents.
From these, 13 documents contain “match” as a verb, and
only 4 documents contain the noun “match”.
Solution This simple example shows that it is sometime
useful to be able to specify the part of speech. This is made
possible by the WS representation, with the following two
keyword formats:
keyword  ! word; ; pos;  (3)
keyword  ! ; stem; pos;  (4)
We are able to specify the keywords part of speech, and
therefore select from the very beginning the information we
are interested in: either documents containing “match” as a
verb, or documents referring to the noun “match”.
Example Consider a user interested in finding information
related to “team” and “match”, where “match” is intended
as the noun “contest”, and not the verb “to be compatible”.
The search returns 4 documents for the noun “match”,
much less with respect to the number of documents returned
when the keyword is set to match only. Fragments from
documents returned by this search are presented below.
Fragment from relevant document: Thirteen French junior
golfers, 8 boys and 5 girls, will play a match against a
Southern California team Jan. 29-30 at Industry Hills.
Fragment from irrelevant document: When you have two
teams as evenly matched as we are, the game is going to be
decided by turnovers and big plays.
3.4 Semantic Indexing
Problem It is well known that words can exhibit different
meanings, depending on the context where they are used.
One classic example in this sense is a search for “plant”,
which returns documents containing the word “plant” with
its “factory” meaning, as well as documents referring to
“plant” as a “living organism”. In these cases it is impor-
tant to know the keywords meaning in the input query, as
well as the meaning of the terms in the collection of docu-
ments. At this stage, we consider the morphological ambi-
guity eliminated, with the procedure described previously.
Therefore verb forms of the word “plant” are not consid-
ered.
Solution The ambiguity problem is solved with the follow-
ing formats for a keyword.
keyword  ! word; ; ; WNoffset (5)
keyword  ! ; ; ; ;WNoffset
Either one of these formats can be used to specify the
meaning of keywords. This way, a search for “plant” mean-
ing “living organism” should not return documents which
refer to “plant” as “factory”.
Example Suppose the meaning of “plant” in the input query
is meant to be “living organism”. Still, a basic search re-
turns both senses, due to the inability of a classic retrieval
system to select based on word meanings. There are 37 doc-
uments returned containing the noun “plant”.
Fragment from irrelevant document: A Nuclear Regula-
tory Commission panel has conditionally approved the New
Hampshire part of the emergency plan for the Seabrook nu-
clear power plant.
Fragment from relevant document: Cockleburs, a common
plant in fields and riverbeds, along roadsides and near
reservoirs, is easily recognized by its prickly burs.
With the representation shown above, the search changes
to “plant,*,*,8864” or simply “8864” (8864 is the offset
number of the WordNet synset including “plant#2”). The
first format proposed here identifies only documents con-
taining the word with a given sense. Thus the number of
documents returned is dramatically decreased: there are
only 7 documents found by this search. On the other hand,
the second format allows for the retrieval of documents in-
cluding “plant” with its meaning of “living organism”, as
well as its synonyms, such as “flora” or “plant life”.
3.5 Semantic Indexing with semantic operators
Problem Consider another application very common in this
field: a user who wants to identify information related to a
given topic, as for example “field games”. With the existing
retrieval techniques, a search for “field game” will return a
certain number of documents, but a lot of useful information
might be missing, just because other related keywords such
as “football”, “soccer” etc. were not specified.
Solution There are keywords formats, as described in
Figure 3, designed for this type of problems. The new
semantic operators defined in our model allow the retrieval
of documents containing semantically related terms.
keyword  ! ; ; SemOp(WNoffset);  (6)
SemOp  ! HY PERNYM jHY PONYM j
HY PE  HY PO j SIBLING j
RELATED
Example A search for “field game” is now reformulated as a
search for HYPO(298803) (298803 is the offset of the “field
game” synset). It retrieves documents containing also field
hockey, hockey, football, hurling, baseball, baseball game,
ball game, cricket, lacrosse, polo, pushball, thus more in-
formation related to the “field game” topic of interest.
3.6 Searching for answers
Problem In many cases, users are interested in finding an-
swers to specific questions, such as “Who was the first pres-
ident of USA?” or “Which is the capital of Romania?”.
With current retrieval systems or search engines, these ques-
tions do not constitute a special case for the search: users
have to create a query and then search for the information
they need. Even if one knows that the expected answer is
a person name, or a location, there is no way to specify
this within a query. Being able to add a keyword such as
“Person name”, meaning that the documents, or pieces of
documents returned, should contain the name of a person,
would drastically decrease the number of documents and it
would return more meaningful information.
Solution It is possible to indicate a Named Entity (such as
person name, location, etc) as one of the keywords, with
the following keyword format:
keyword  ! ; ; NEtag;  (7)
where NEtag can be one of the following NE tags:
TPER, TLOC, TORG, TDATE, TNUM, TMONEY, TPCT,
TSPEC.
Example Suppose that a user wants to find an answer to the
following question “How much does it cost to go from New
York to London?”. A basic query would be “New York”
AND “London” and it returns 9 documents. Within the WS
model, it is possible to indicate MONEY as a keyword, as
we expect the answer to be expressed as a money value. In
this way, the number of documents is reduced to 5, thus a
significant improvement. More details and experiments are
presented in section 4.
Two other relevant examples are constituted by the fol-
lowing questions posed during the TREC-9 Q&A compe-
tition, which had no answer found by the best performing
system. One such question was Question 204 “What type
of bridge is the Golden Gate Bridge?”. In the WS model, an
answer is easily found in the paragraph “The Golden Gate
Bridge may soon undergo modern wind stress tests, [...]
to study how much wind it would take to damage the sus-
pension bridge”, as suspension bridge is found in Word-
Net to be a type of bridge. A possible representation in
our model is HYPO(02336596) AND Golden Gate Bridge,
where 02336596 is the synset identifier for bridge in Word-
Net 1.7.
Another unsolved question was Question 377 “At what
speed does the Earth revolve around the sun?”, which now
finds an answer due to the semantic relations determined
between revolve and motion (in WordNet, to revolve ISA to
move, and the nominalization of move is motion): “... it has
to cancel Earth’s motion around the Sun of 30 km/sec”.
3.7 Searching for specific information
Problem Often, users need to find specific information,
rather than entire documents, such as an answer to a ques-
tion or a definition.
Solution It was previously shown that retrieving pieces of
texts rather than entire documents increases the precision
of the search [16]. The model proposed here enables the
retrieval of pieces of documents by using lexical operators,
as presented in Figure 4. PAR and SENT are operators
designed to retrieve paragraphs or sentences containing the
input keywords.
Adding semantic information to both query and docu-
ments improves the quality of the search, and offers a novel
solution for some other problems, such as finding informa-
tion related to a topic, or retrieving answer types in a text.
We have shown the formats to be used for a term, keyword
and query within the WS model and we showed how these
formats can improve a classic search.
4 Technical challenges
Several problems are arising at this point. Looking at
the representation of a term, as shown in Figure 2, one can
see that a significant amount of semantic information is re-
quired to make this model possible:
1. Part of speech tag. In the NLP community, part of
speech tagging is considered an almost solved prob-
lems, as several taggers are available with accuracies
over 95%. In the current implementation, we use
Brill’s part of speech tagger [3]; the reasons for choos-
ing this tagger are its state-of-the-art precision and the
fact that is publicly available.
2. Word stem. Once we know the word and the part of
speech, it is easy to determine the word stem with the
help of WordNet stemming functions2.
3. WordNet offset. Finding the corresponding WordNet
offset for a word means practically to identify its se-
mantic sense. The disambiguation of word senses is
one of the hardest problem in NLP. Previous results
have shown that it is possible to disambiguate with
92% precision about 60% of the words in a text [13].
We have used this algorithm, briefly described below,
in building the WS prototype.
4. Named Entity tags. There are several taggers designed
for the recognition of named entities; we are using the
tagger implemented by Dekang Lin, at University of
Manitoba, with a precision closed to 90% [12].
We will detail below on the last two problems, namely
word sense disambiguation and named entity recognition,
as they pose complex issues.
4.1 A Word Sense Disambiguation algorithm
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is a hard problem
by itself and constitutes one of the central tasks in NLP.
As mentioned before, language ambiguity represents a bar-
rier in the way of building semantic representations of texts.
Several approaches have been considered so far, including
the Senseval effort [10], that aims at evaluating word sense
disambiguation systems. The performance of the systems
participating in this competition was in the range 70%-80%.
Out of the large range of existing WSD algorithms, we
have decided to use a partial and highly accurate system
which disambiguates about 60% of the nouns and verbs
with over 90% precision [13]. The algorithm starts by iden-
tifying unambiguous words in text (such as proper nouns,
words with only one sense) and based on these it incremen-
tally builds a set of disambiguated words, using the seman-
tic relations derived from WordNet, as well as information
extracted from existing sense tagged corpora. This system
was used and found useful in an information retrieval ex-
periment, reported in [14].
2Specifically, the morphstr function from the WordNet 1.7 software
package
4.2 Named Entity recognition
There are several approaches used for Named Entity
(NE) recognition. The performance for this problem is sig-
nificantly higher than for WSD, and usually NE systems
have precisions of over 90%. We are using the tagger im-
plemented by Dekang Lin, at University of Manitoba [12].
A series of experiments were conducted to verify the im-
pact of using NE tags in a retrieval system. We have iden-
tified the named entities in 125,000 documents (again from
the L.A.Times collection), and then index these documents
including the NE tags. Next, a test benchmark was created
with 75 questions known to have an answer in the given set
of documents (this information was only required for the
purpose of measuring the system recall). Comparative ex-
periments have shown that indexing named entities almost
doubles the precision of the system, while the recall remains
the same (basically, a large reduction in the number of re-
turned documents is obtained).
5 Implementation of a WS prototype
We have implemented a system which encodes part of
the WS representation format. It employs (a) part of speech
tagger, (b) stemmer and (c) a word sense disambiguation
algorithm to create a rich semantic representation for both
document terms and question keywords.
The prototype was tested using the Cranfield collection,
containing 1400 documents, and a set of 50 questions asso-
ciated with this collection.
To measure the impact of the WS model over the clas-
sic retrieval model, three measures are used to evaluate the
system performance: (1) precision, defined as the number
of relevant documents retrieved over the total number of
documents retrieved; (2) recall, defined as the number of
relevant documents retrieved over the total number of rele-
vant documents found in the collection and (3) F-measure,
which combines both precision and recall into a single for-
mula [19]:
F
measure
=
(
2
+ 1:0)  P R
(
2
 P ) +R
where P is the precision, R is the recall and  is the relative
importance given to recall over precision. We consider both
precision and recall of equal importance, and therefore this
factor  is set to 1.
Every document term is replaced with the format shown
in Figure 2, and every question keyword is replaced with
the format (5) from Figure 3. Documents are indexed, and
queries are formed and run against this index.
Tests over the entire set of 50 questions led to 0.20 preci-
sion and 0.22 recall using the classic retrieval methodology,
respectively 0.23 precision and 0.29 recall when a meaning-
based (WNoffset based) indexing is used. The relative gain
of the meaning-based indexing respect to the word-based
indexing is 31% increase in recall and 15% increase in pre-
cision.
The conclusion of these experiments is that indexing by
meanings actually improves effectiveness. Moreover, this is
the first time to our knowledge when a WSD algorithm for
open text is actually used to automatically disambiguate a
collection of texts prior to indexing, with a disambiguation
accuracy high enough to actually increase the performance
of the IR system.
An issue to be addressed here is the efficiency of such a
system: we have introduced a WSD stage into the classic
retrieval process and it is well known that WSD algorithms
are usually computationally intensive. On the other side,
the disambiguation of a text collection is a process which
can be highly parallelized, therefore this does not constitute
a real problem.
6 Conclusions
The full understanding of text is still an elusive goal.
The scope of the Semantic Web is to translate current Web
content into a format meaningful to computers. Several
languages have been developed for this purpose, including
XML, RDF, DAML, OIL, SHOE and others.
We proposed in this paper the Word Semantics model,
which is simpler than XML or RDF, but it comes with the
big advantage of being feasible with existing technologies
and resources. Practically, this new model relies on under-
standing word meanings, identifying important named enti-
ties such as person, organization and others, and linking all
this information via an external general purpose ontology,
namely WordNet. With these features, we regard the WS
model as a short but strong step toward the long term goal
of creating a Semantic Web.
References
[1] Altavista, 2000. Digital Equipment Corporation,
”http://www.altavista.com”.
[2] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila. The Semantic
Web. Scientific American, 1(501), May 2001.
[3] E. Brill. A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Applied Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Trento, Italy, 1992.
[4] S. Decker, S. Melnik, F. van Harmelen, D. Fensel, M. Klein,
J. Broekstra, M. Erdmann, and I. Horrocks. The Semantic
Web: the roles of XML and RDF. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
15(5):2–13, September/October 2000.
[5] D. Fensel, F. van Harmelen, I. Horrocks, D. McGuinness,
and P. Patel-Schneider. OIL: and ontology infrastructure for
the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 16(2):38–45,
March/April 2001.
[6] S. Harabagiu, G. Miller, and D. Moldovan. WordNet 2 -
a morphologically and semantically enhanced resource. In
Proceedings of SIGLEX-99, pages 1–8, Univ. of Maryland,
June 1999.
[7] J. Heflin and J. Hendler. A portrait of the Semantic Web in
action. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 16(2):54–59, March/April
2001.
[8] J. Hendler. Agents and the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 16(2):30–37, March/April 2001.
[9] J. Hendler and D. McGuinness. The DARPA agent markup
language. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 16(6):67–73, Jan-
uary/February 2000.
[10] A. Kilgarriff and M. Palmer, editors. Computer and the Hu-
manities. Special issue: SENSEVAL. Evaluating Word Sense
Disambiguation programs, volume 34, April 2000.
[11] O. Lassila and R. Swick. Resource description frame-
work (RDF) model and syntax specification. In W3C
Recommandation, February 1999. available online at
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/.
[12] D. Lin. Principar - an efficient, broad-coverage, principle-
based parser. In In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics COLING-
ACL ’94, pages 42–48, Kyoto, Japan, 1994.
[13] R. Mihalcea and D. Moldovan. An iterative approach to
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of FLAIRS-
2000, pages 219–223, Orlando, FL, May 2000.
[14] R. Mihalcea and D. Moldovan. Semantic indexing using
WordNet senses. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop on IR &
NLP, Hong Kong, October 2000.
[15] G. Miller. Wordnet: A lexical database. Communication of
the ACM, 38(11):39–41, 1995.
[16] D. Moldovan and R. Mihalcea. Using WordNet and lexical
operators to improve Internet searches. IEEE Internet Com-
puting, 4(1):34–43, 2000.
[17] D. Moldovan and V. Rus. Logic form transformations of
WordNet and its applicability to Question Answering. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Lingusitics (ACL-2001), pages 394–401,
Toulouse, France, July 2001.
[18] M. Porter. An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program,
14(3):130–137, 1980.
[19] C. Van Rijsbergen. Information Retrieval. London: Butter-
worths, 1979. avialbale on-line at http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/
Keith/Preface.html.
[20] XML language, 2000. Introduction to XML and XML
schemas available at www.xml.com.
