Seawinds: The QuikSCAT Wind Scatterometer 
James N. Huddleston & Michael W. Spencer 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91 109 
8 18.354.1748 
James.N.Huddleston @jpl.nasa.gov 
M/S 300-319 
Abstract-The QuikSCAT wind scatterometer, named 
SeaWinds, is a scanning, pencil-beam, microwave radar that 
was designed to measure global ocean surface winds from 
space. Originally planned for flight aboard the National 
Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA) Advanced 
Earth Observing Satellite I1 (ADEOS-11) spacecraft, 
SeaWinds was expected to continue the series of Ku-band 
scatterometer data initiated by the NASA Scatterometer 
(NSCAT). Unfortunately, the failure of NSCAT’s host 
spacecraft, ADEOS-I, prematurely ended NSCAT’s mission 
and created a data gap. The QuikSCAT mission was rapidly 
developed to fill in the data gap between NSCAT on 
ADEOS-I and SeaWinds on ADEOS-11. A scatterometer 
nearly identical to SeaWinds was quickly assembled and 
launched on June 19, 1999 aboard the QuikSCAT 
spacecraft. In this paper, we describe the QuikSCAT 
mission, outline the key design features of the SeaWinds 
scatterometer, and mention some of the current and 
emerging science applications. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THE QuIKSCAT MISSION 
3. THE SEAWINDS CATIEROMETER 
4. SCIENCE APPLICATIONS 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge of global ocean surface vector winds is critical 
developed in order to minimize the duration of the data gap 
between NSCAT on ADEOS-I and SeaWinds on ADEOS- 
11. Since the development and launch of the QuikSCAT 
mission, the SeaWinds on ADEOS-I1 mission has been 
delayed by over a year, making the QuikSCAT mission 
even more critical. In this paper, we give an overview of the 
QuikSCAT mission, describe the SeaWinds scatterometer 
and its key features, and mention some of the current and 
emerging science applications. 
for studying air-sea interaction, ocean circulation, and 
global climate. Also, the addition of ocean surface wind data Figure An artist,s rendition of Seawinds on QuiksCAT 
can improve the weather prediction capabilities of global 
atmospheric computer models. The QuikSCAT mission was 
developed to aid such science by providing daily 
measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the 
ice-free oceans using a spacebome Ku-band scatterometer 
called SeaWinds. Prior to the QuikSCAT mission, global 
ocean surface winds were measured by the NASA 
Scatterometer (NSCAT) aboard the ADEOS-I spacecraft. 
The failure of the ADEOS-I spacecraft created a gap in the 
global wind data set because the follow-on mission, 
SeaWinds on ADEOS-11, was not scheduled to be launched 
for several years. The QuikSCAT mission, containing a 
scatterometer nearly identical to Seawinds, was rapidly 
~ ~~ 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00  2001 IEEE 
2.  THE QuIKSCAT MISSION 
The QuikSCAT mission consists of a Seawinds-class 
scatterometer mounted to a variation of the Ball 
Commercial Platform (BCP) 2000 spacecraft (see Figure 1). 
The scatterometer was assembled from spare flight 
hardware developed for the SeaWinds on ADEOS-I1 
mission. The BCP 2000 spacecraft was obtained from Ball 
Aerospace via NASA‘s Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition (RSA) 
program and was the first spacecraft to be acquired using 
the RSA program. QuikSCAT was launched on June 19, 
1999 from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Titan I1 
booster. 
4-1825 
QuikSCAT was placed into a 803 km altitude, sun- 
synchronous orbit. Although QuikSCAT’s nominal mission 
life is two years, three years of consumables are available. 
The data collected by QuikSCAT are downlinked to ground 
stations in Alaska, Virginia, Norway, and Antarctica. The 
raw data are then transferred to the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory (JPL) where they are processed to calibrated 
values of normalized radar cross section and to sea surface 
winds. The processed data are distributed to the scientific 
community via the Physical Oceanography Distributed 
Active Archive Center (PODAAC) at JPL. Additionally, a 
near-real-time QuikSCAT wind product is produced by the 
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration 
( N O M )  within three hours of data collection [I]. 
During the first several months of the mission, the 
QuikSCAT system underwent an intense calibration and 
validation. This included examining the spacecraft attitude 
control and knowledge errors, verifying the instrument 
functionality, calibrating radiometric components of the 
instrument, and validating the ground data processing 
system. The instrument was determined to be functioning 
properly and several calibration and algorithm corrections 
were made to improve the data quality [2] .  
3. THE SEAWINDS CATTEROMETER 
The SeaWinds scatterometer was developed by NASNJPL 
to globally measure ocean surface winds in a fashion similar 
to its predecessors: the Seasat-A Satellite Scatterometer 
(SASS) and the NASA Scatterometer (NSCAT). Like all 
wind scalterometers, SeaWinds measures the normalized 
radar cros>s section (oo) of the ocean’s surface from multiple 
azimuth angles and uses a set of cro measurements at a single 
location to infer the wind speed and direction. The 
conversion of bo measurements to wind vectors is called 
“wind retrieval” and is performed via numerical inversion of 
an empirical model function relating wind speed and 
direction to oo, incidence angle, azimuth angle, and 
polarization. 
Compact antenna design 
SeaWinds is markedly different from previous 
scatterometers due to its compact antenna design. Previous 
scatterometers, including SASS, NSCAT, and the European 
Remote Sensing (ERS) Wind Scatterometers, have 
employed fixed stick antennas which produce long, narrow 
antenna patterns [3,4,5]. Several antennas are used to obtain 
measurements from the variety of azimuth angles required 
to invert the model function to wind vectors. Measurement 
resolution in the narrow-beam direction is achieved by the 
narrow beam width of the antenna. In the broad-beam 
direction, the measurement resolution is improved by using 
Doppler or range filtering. 
Due to their large size, stick antennas can be quite difficult 
to accommodate on spacecraft and typically need to be 
stowed during launch and deployed prior to operation. 
Furthermore, large antennas are more likely to interfere with 
the field-of-view of other instruments aboard the same 
spacecraft. In the case of NSCAT, a special tower was 
constructed so that the NSCAT antennas did not block the 
field of view of other instruments on ADEOS-I. For 
accommodation reasons, the stick antenna approach was not 
feasible for ADEOS-I1 and a new, sm.aller antenna design 
was needed. The scanning pencil-beam approach was 
chosen because it was compact and could provide the 
necessary measurement geometry. 
The SeaWinds pencil-beam antenna employs a 1 meter 
diameter parabolic dish (see Figure 2) with two offset feeds 
producing two antenna beams having different look (off- 
nadir) angles; the outer beam has a 46’ look angle and the 
inner beam has a 40” look angle. The antenna is 
mechanically spun about the nadir axis so that each beam 
generates a circular scan on the earth (see Figure 3). The 
motion of the spacecraft causes each beam to trace out a 
helical pattern on the surface of the earth; the antenna spin 
rate was chosen so that the measurements from each scan 
overlap the measurements from the previous scan. The outer 
beam generates a swath which is 1800 km across and the 
inner beam produces a 1400 km swath. Note that 
measurements are made across the entire swath and that all 
of the measurements from a given beam have the same look 
angle and differ only in azimuth [6,7]. 
SeaWind,s’ two beams are differently polarized; the inner 
beam is EI polarized and the outer beam is V polarized. As 
previously mentioned, the geophysical model function is a 
function of the measurement geometry and polarization. 
Using both V and H polarization improves Seawinds’ 
ability to determine the wind direction during wind retrieval. 
The different polarizations are also extremely useful for 
land and ice applications where differences in V and H 
polarized o, give indications of various surface attributes. 
Figure 2. SeaWinds antenna assembly 
A - I  R 3 C ;  
- _  - _  -. 
aosstrack ---. 
A,' 
Figure 3. SeaWinds scanning geometry 
Coverage 
One the benefits of the SeaWinds design is its very wide 
swath. Whereas previous fan-beam scatterometers did not 
measure 0, within a couple hundred kilometers of the 
ground track, the SeaWinds scanning pencil-beam design 
allows 0, measurements to be made across the entire 1800 
km swath. This provides excellent global coverage of 0,. 
Within 12 hours, 75% of the earth is covered and within 24 
hours, 92% of the earth is covered. Figure 4 shows example 
12 hour and 24 coverage plots. 
Near the ground track and at far swath, the geometric 
conditions for wind retrieval are less than ideal because the 
azimuth angles of the measurements are either near 0" apart 
or near 180" apart. This geometry provides less information 
for the inversion of the model function and the resulting 
wind solutions are less accurate. 
Instrument Subsystems 
The SeaWinds scatterometer consists of three subsystems: 
the Scatterometer Electronics Subsystem (SES), the 
Command and Data Subsystem (CDS), and the 
Scatterometer Antenna Subsystem (SAS). All three 
subsystems and their functions are outlined below. 
SES-The SES performs the radio frequency (RF) functions 
of Seawinds. It contains a frequency agile transmitter, 
receiver, and a digital signal processor (DSP) for processing 
echoes into higher resolution segments called slices. Most 
of the echo processing is performed digitally by the DSP. 
CDS-Essentially, the CDS is a computer which processes 
scatterometer commands from the spacecraft, sends timing 
and configuration parameters to the SES, collects 
measurement data from the SES, collects engineering and 
performance parameters from the subsystems, and transfers 
data to the spacecraft for downlink to the ground. 
(b) 
Figure 4. Earth coverage of QuikSCAT in (a) 12 hours, (b) 
24 hours. Colors are used to indicate the value of 0,. 
SAS-The SAS is the antenna subsystem consisting of a one 
meter diameter parabolic dish spun at approximately 18 
revolutions per minute (rpm's). An optical encoder is used 
to determine the angle of the antenna at the time of the 
transmit event. The azimuth angle of the antenna is 
important both for commanding the transmit frequency and 
for science data processing. There are two feed horns on the 
antenna producing two beams with different look angles and 
having essentially the same azimuth angle. A summary of 
the key antenna and geometric parameters is given in Table 
1. 
Pulse Timing 
For SeaWinds, the spin rate, pulse repetition frequency 
(PRF), and spacecraft ground velocity interact to produce 
the layout of measurement footprints on the earth's surface. 
Measurement spacing in the along-track direction is dictated 
by the spacecraft ground velocity and the antenna spin rate. 
In the along-scan direction, the spacing of measurements is 
determined by the PRF and the spin rate. In order to produce 
sufficient overlap in both the along-scan and along-track 
directions, a PRF of 92.5 Hz per beam and a spin rate of 18 
rpm's was chosen. 
4-1827 
Table 1. Key SAS and Geometric Parameters 
Antenna Parameter Inner Outer 
Beam Beam 
Elevation (look) angle I 40" 46" 
I Slantrange I llOOkm I 1245km I 
Along-track spacing 
3-dB beam width I 1 . 8 " ~  1.6" I 1.7" x 1.4" t- Two-wav 3-dB footmint I 24 x 31 km I 26 x 36 km 
22 km 
Peak giiiin I 38.5dBi I 39 dBi 
Along-scan spacing I 15km I 19 km 
Rotation rate 18 rpm 
Due to the required PRF, an interleaving pulse scheme with 
two pulses in flight was selected. After transmitting on a 
given beam, SeaWinds transmits on the other beam before 
receiving the echo from the first beam. Figure 5 shows the 
pulse timing scheme. 
Inner Beam Outer Beam Inner Beam Outer Beam 
I I 
5.4 ms 
I 
' 1 . 5 m s 1  ' 2111s 
Sample IntewaI 
Figure 5. Seawinds' pulse timing diagram 
Range Tracking 
The SES must start and stop sampling at appropriate times 
in order to capture all of the energy from echoes. As 
QuikSChT orbits, the range to the ground changes by 
approximately 40 km, and the receiver must shift its 
sampling window accordingly. Assuring that the echo is 
captured in time is accomplished by a process known as 
range tracking. On the ground, orbital parameters are used 
to precalculate the appropriate round trip flight time as a 
function of beam, orbit position, and antenna azimuth angle. 
For each beam and orbit position, a sinusoid as a function of 
azimuth angle is fit to the round trip flight times and the 
coefficients are uploaded to the CDS. On-orbit, the CDS 
calculates the round trip flight time and commands the SES 
with the appropriate receiver gate delay. Figure 6 shows the 
commanded receiver gate delay as a function of orbit steps 
(1/256* of an orbit) for the inner beam. 
Doppler Tracking 
As the antenna scans in azimuth, the Doppler shift of the 
echo varies by about +450 kHz. This Doppler shift is due to 
the motion of the spacecraft relative to the earth's surface. 
The SeaWinds instrument compensates for this frequency 
shift by using a frequency agile transmitter; the receiver 
frequency remains fixed, and the transmitter frequency is 
varied to compensate for the induced Doppler shift. In a 
~ 
4-1 828 
manner vcry similar to range tracking, the Doppler shifts are 
precalculated on the ground as a func:tion of beam, orbit 
position, and antenna azimuth angle, fit with a sinusoid as a 
function of azimuth angle, and uploaded to the CDS. Prior 
to each pulse, the CDS commands the SES with the 
approprixte transmitter frequency. 
Inner Beam 
- E 
6 
v 
2 7.60. j 
........ !... ........................... J ......................... - 
................................................. : l ' t  ......................... LT 
7.30 
01.0 64.0 128.0 192.0 256.0 
Orbit Step 
Figure 6. Receiver gate delay vs. orbit step for the inner 
beam 
Noise Subtraction 
After the transmitted energy has belcn scattered by the 
earth's surface, a portion of it returns, after several 
milliseconds, to the SeaWinds antennal and is routed to an 
analog to digital converter (AD) for sampling. Also present, 
is thermal noise from both the instrument itself and from the 
Earth. Tlhus, the SeaWinds instrument actually makes a 
measurement of the signal plus noise. For calculating bo, the 
backscattered signal energy needs to Ibe isolated from the 
thermal noise energy. In order to isolate the echo, SeaWinds 
makes two simultaneous measurjements. The first 
measurernent is made using a narrow, 175 kHz, filter. The 
second measurement is made using a wide, 1 MHz, filter. 
We refer to the narrow filter as the "echo filter" and the 
wide filter as the "noise filter." Given energy measurements 
within these two filters, and assuming that the noise power 
spectral density is constant over the filter bandwidths, one 
can solve for the noise power spectral density and subtract 
the appropriate noise energy from the signal plus noise 
measurements to determine the echo energy. 
The noise subtraction processes becomes more complicated 
given th,at we frequently have a low or even a negative 
signal to noise ratio (SNR), making it critical for the noise 
power spectral density to be estimated accurately. This 
means that the bandwidth and gain ra.tios of the echo and 
noise filters must be accurately calibrated. The o0 
calculation is not very sensitive to the gain ratio, and the 
gain rati'o value was determined during prelaunch testing. 
The o0 calculation is sensitive to the bimdwidth ratio and its 
value is calculated on-orbit by load measurements. 
Load Measurements 
Every half-scan of the antenna, two backscattered echoes 
are ignored and both the echo filter and the noise filter are 
used to measure the thermal noise of a load. These 
measurements are incorporated into the telemetry stream 
and downlinked. The ground processor uses these 
measurements along with the prelaunch gain ratio value to 
estimate the echo filter to noise filter bandwidth ratio as a 
function of time. This ratio is used in the noise subtraction 
calculation. 
Loop back Calibration 
In order to calculate G,, the combined effects (product) of 
the transmit power and the receiver gain must be known. 
The loop back calibration scheme leaks a small fraction of 
the transmitted signal back to the receiver through the 
calibration loop attenuator (see Figure 7). The losses in the 
loop back signal path were calibrated during prelaunch 
testing and the measured energy provides a means to 
calibrate the product of the transmit power and the receiver 
gain. This product is used in the calculation of a,. 
Figure 7. SeaWinds functional block diagram 
0, Range "Slices '' 
The size of Seawinds' G, measurement footprints can be as 
large as 26 km by 36 km. Both land and ocean science 
applications are enhanced by decreasing the size of the 
measurement footprints. To improve the resolution of 6, 
measurements in the elevation direction, range compression 
is employed [SI. 
During transmission, the transmit pulse is modulated with a 
250 kHz/ms frequency modulated (FM) linear downchirp. 
This causes the earth to be imaged with slightly different 
frequencies at slightly different times. The backscattered 
echo is first sampled and then digitally dechirped by mixing 
it with a replica of the transmitted chirp. This has the effect 
of translating range to the earth into baseband frequency. A 
fast Fourier transform (FFT) is performed on the resulting 
data, and ranges of periodogram bins are summed to 
produce measurements for smaller cells on the ground. The 
sub-footprint measurements are called slices. Figure 8 
shows a block diagram of the signal processing for slices. 
The SeaWinds footprint is divided into twelve slices; the 
innermost ten slices, called science slices, are narrow 
bandwidth and used predominantly for high resolution CY, 
science applications. The outermost two slices, one on each 
side, are larger bandwidth and are used to expand the echo 
filter so that it captures stray echo energy and prevents the 
noise filter measurement from being contaminated. The 
bandwidth of the science and guard slices are commandable; 
currently they are 6.9 and 46 kHz respectively. Figure 9 
shows how the center eight science slices look on the earth's 
surface. 
DeChirp 
Referem 
Figure 8. Block diagram of the slice signal processing. 
Inner Beam 
75.2 
75.3 
75.4 
75.5 
75.6 
D $ 75.7 
2 
75.8 
75.9 
76 
76.1 
7.3 1 
115 116 117 118 119 1ZI 121 122 
Lmgihlde 
I".- 
Figure 9. The center eight slices of the SeaWinds on 
QuikSCAT footprint. (Courtesy D. Long, Brigham Young 
University) 
4. SCIENCE APPLICATIONS 
The primary application of wind scatterometers is 
measuring global ocean surface vector winds. The 
SeaWinds on QuikSCAT IS, data from each orbit is gridded 
and processed to wind vectors at 25 x 25 km resolution. 
Multiple orbits of wind swath data can then be combined to 
produce a daily global wind product (see Figure 10). 
The global coverage and high revisit rate of SeaWinds on 
QuikSCAT, makes its data very attractive for land and ice 
applications as well. Backscatter measurements from the 
SeaWinds scatterometer are starting to be used for global 
flood detection, large scale soil moisture monitoring, global 
snow detection, and Greenland ice melt zone detection. As 
4-1829 
an example, Figure 1 1  shows the seasonal soil moisture 
effect on backscatter measurements over Africa. 
Figure 10. Snapshot of September 20,1999. Over ocean, 
wind speed is indicated by color. Wind streamlines are in 
white. Over land and ice, color indicates backscatter value. 
5 .  CONCLUSIONS 
The QuiliSCAT scatterometer has shown itself to be a 
valuable source of data, both for the estimation of global 
ocean surface vector winds and for studying land and ice 
processes. The instrument design outlined in this paper was 
driven by both science and accommodation constraints. 
Current and developing science applications have been 
mentioned. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work described in this paper was carried out by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 P. Chang, NOAAINESDISIORA, 
<http://manati.wwb.noaa.gov/quikscat/> 
[2] J. N. Huddleston, W. Tsai, M. W. Spencer, B. W. 
Stiles, & R. S. Dunbar, "Seawinds on QuikSCAT: 
Postlaunch Calibration and Validation," IGARSS 2000, 
Honolulu, Hawaii, 24-28 July 2000. 
[3] E. P. W. Attema, "The active microwave instrument on- 
board the ERS-1 satellite," Proc. IEEE, vol. 79, pp. 791- 
799, June: 1991. 
[4] W. I,. Grantham, E. M. Bracalente, W. L. Jones, & J. 
W. Johnson, "The Seasat-A satellite scatterometer," ZEEE J. 
Oceanic Eng., vol. OE-2, pp. 200-206, Apr. 1977. 
Figure 11 1. Seasonal variation of soil moisture pattern and 
wind field. (Courtesy S. Nghiem, Jet Propulsion Laboratory) 
[5] F. Naderi, M. H. Freilich, & D. G .  Long, "Spacebome 
radar measurement of wind velocity over the ocean: An 
overview of the NSCAT scatterometer :system," Proc. IEEE, 
vol. 79, pp. 850-866, June 1991. 
[6] M. W. Spencer, C. Wu, & D. G. Long, "Tradeoffs in 
the design of a spaceborne scanning pencil beam 
scatterometer: Application to Seawinds," IEEE Trans. 
Geosci. Remote Sensing, vol. 35, pp. 115-126, Jan. 1997. 
[7] C. PJu, J. Graf, M. Freilich, D. GI. Long, M. Spencer, 
W. Tsai, D. Lisman, & C. Winn, "The SeaWinds 
scatterometer instrument," Proc. Int. (Geosci. And Remote 
Sensing Syymp., Pasadena, CA, Aug. 8-12, 1994, pp. 15 11- 
1515. 
[8] M. W. Spencer, C. Wu, & D. (3. Long, "Improved 
Resolution Backscatter Measurements with the SeaWinds 
Pencil-B eam Scatterometer," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote 
Sensing, vol. 38, pp. 89-104, Jan. 2000. 
serves as the Sensor 
James N. Huddleston received the 
B.S and M.S. degrees in electrical 
engineering from the Illinois 
Institute of Technology in 1990 and 
1991 respectively. In 1991 he 
joined the Radar Science and 
Engineering Group at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 
California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena. There, he currently 
Verification Team Leader for the 
postlaunch calibration of the SeaWinds on QuikSCAT 
scatterometer. 
Michael W. Spencer received the B.S. degree in Physics 
from the College of William and Mary in 1985, and the 
M.S. degree in Planetary Science from The California 
Institute of Technology. Through an employer sponsored 
program, he received the M.S. degree in electrical 
engineering from the University of Southern California in 
1995, and is currently working towards a Ph.D. in electrical 
engineering at Brigham Young University. He is currently 
employed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the Radar 
Science and Engineering Section. 
4-1831 
