Imaging Geostationary Fourier Transform 
Spectrometer - Revolutionary Tool for 
Tropospheric Chemistry 
Nikita S. Pougatchev 
Christopher Newport University, MS 472, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681-0001, USA, 
n.s.pougatchev@larc.nasa.gov, (757) 864-7599 
William L. Smith, Fenton W. Harrison, Allen M. Larar, and Curtis P. Rinsland 
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, USA 
Daniel J. Jacob, Isabelle Bey, Brendan D. Field, Robert M. Yantosca 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 
Allen Huang 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI USA 
Scott R. Nolf 
Computer Science Corporation, Hampton, VA USA 
Stanislav V. Kireev 
Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA, USA 
Abstract-The Geostationary Imaging Fourier Transform 
Spectrometer (GIFTS) has been selected by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for its 2004 
New Millennium Program mission. The GIFTS geophysical 
data products are derived from measurements of 
atmospheric thermal emission in 2 spectral bands: 685-1 130 
cm-’ and 1650-2250 cm-’, at high spectral resolution (up to 
0.3 cm-1) on a 4-km spatial grid. Among key data products 
are vertically-resolved distributions of ozone and carbon 
monoxide. Vertical resolution attainable is in the range of 
3- to 1 1-km, depending on a target gas and altitude. 
To evaluate the GIFTS capability for atmospheric chemistry 
studies, e.g., sources, sinks, transport and transformation of 
trace gas, simulations of the GIFTS observations have been 
performed. Real aircraft in situ profiles and results of the 
Harvard 3-D model were used as inputs for the simulations. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. MEASUREMENT CONCEPT 
3. h4EASUREMENI CHARACTEIUZATION 
AND SENSITIVITY STUDY 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Geostationary Imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer 
geophysical measurements that will contribute to NASA’s 
Earth Science Enterprise (ESE) goals, as well as lead to 
revolutionary improvements in atmospheric chemistry and 
meteorological observations. Key data products are: 
1. Frequent, high vertical resolution (1-2 km) temperature 
and water vapor sounding, allowing the vertical profile 
of wind velocity to be obtained by tracing the horizontal 
displacement of water vapor and cloud features. 
2. Time-dependent ozone and carbon monoxide (CO) 
concentrations within several layers of the troposphere 
and stratosphere. 
3. High-resolution time measurements of radiative 
properties of evolving clouds 
These measurement objectives must be demonstrated from 
geostationary orbit because of the limited field-of-view, 
residence times, and footprint movement available from 
aircraft or lower orbits. 
GIFTS will provide unique measurements to enhance other 
new Earth Observing System (EOS) scientific investigations, 
especially chemistry and cloud missions. Ozone, carbon 
monoxide, and water vapor transport information from 
GIFTS will add significantly to the Earth Observing System- 
Chemistry (EOS-CHEM) mission that will operate from 
polar orbit during the same time period. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE 
measurements of atmospheric components of chemical 
interest. 
4-1713 
2. MEASUREMENT CONCEPT 
The GIFTS geophysical data products are derived from 
measurements of atmospheric thermal emission in 2 
spectral bands: 685-1 130 cm-' and 1650-2250 an-', at high 
spectral resolution (hlAh up to 7000), see Figure 1. The 
measurement concept uses a large area format focal plane 
detector array (128 x 128) in a Fourier Transform 
Spectrometer (FTS) mounted on a geostationary satellite to 
enable the simultaneous gathering of high spectral resolution 
(as great as 0.3 cm-') and high spatial resolution (4-km x 4- 
km pixel) A low visible light level camera provides quasi- 
continuous imaging of clouds at 1-km spatial resolution. 
Extended Earth coverage is achieved by step scanning the 
instrument field of view in a contiguous fashion across any 
desired portion of the visible Earth. 
Re io~nal Ima in 36 cm-' 6.000 
Soundling and 
Chemistr 
Self Validation4 1000 
Table 1 
3 
60 
Wavelength, microns 
Mb6.67 12.50 10.00 8.33 7.14 6.25 5.56 5.00 4.55 4.17 
]r.;si., ?,?:;o<!,, I 
,... .... , , ..... .... ..... .... ..... ... .. . . .. . . 
Figure 1. GIFTS spectral coverage by 2 detector arrays with 
spectral features of key atmospheric trace species. 
The imaging FTS produces the interferometric patterns for 
spectral separation of scene radiation reaching the detector 
arrays. To limit the background signal, the FTS is thermally 
controlled at a low temperature. The high data rates 
generated by the focal plane arrays (FPAs) are reduced to 
the required interferometric sampling rates and then passed 
to the telemetry system and the onboard data compression 
experiment by low-power and -volume next-generation 
electronic components. A reprogrammable, full stream 
compression experiment will prove the hardware and 
validate the algorithms required for these sensors to be used 
in operational programs. Both the raw and compressed data 
streams are telemetered to the ground station. 
GIFTS will view areas of the Earth with a linear dimension 
of about 5O0-km7 anywhere on the visible disk for a period 
between 0.125 and 25.0 sec, depending on the data 
application (i.e., imaging, sounding, or chemistry). GIFTS 
uses a Ntichelson interferometer to achieve a wide range of 
spectral resolutions (Table 1). These spectral characteristics 
achieve all scientific objectives of GIFTS, as well as the 
sounding accuracy desired for a future operational sounding 
system. 
The Michelson interferometer, or FTS, approach for 
geostationary satellite applications allows spectral resolution 
to be easily traded for greater area coverage or higher 
temporal resolution. Table 1 shows the areal coverage, 
measurement fiequency, spectral resolution, and geophysical 
I Mode 
a - 1  71 4 
measurement for example modes of operation for GIFTS. 
Quasi-continuous imagery of localized areas and minute- 
interval imagery of large scale areas can be achieved. Full 
disk sounding coverage can be obtained every 7 min at 
contemporary sounder spectral resolutions (e.g., 18 cm-I). 
High vi:rtical resolution sounding:; and atmospheric 
chemistry measurements of GIFTS reqiuire 0.6 cm-' spectral 
resolutioin and a longer stare time, thereby reducing the area 
coverage andor frequency of observation relative to the 
imagery mode of operation. Nevertheless, GIFTS can cover 
a major portion of the visible disk. with high vertical 
resolution soundings in less than 0.5 hour. This feature is 
important for obtaining wind profile!; from geostationary 
temperature and moisture sounding data. A relatively long 
dwell time and a more limited area coverage "self validation 
mode" of operation will enable 0.3-cm-' spectral resolution 
radiances to be achieved with very high radiometric 
precision. The self validation mode will be for radiance, 
sounding, and chemistry product validation of the routine 
larger area, higher frequency, spectra and geophysical 
products provided by the global and regional sounding and 
chemistry modes of operation. GIFTS can achieve good 
simultanleity with Earth orbiting satellite observations to 
enhance overall ESE science mission objectives. 
3. MEASUREMENT CHARACTIEREATION AND 
SENSITIVITY STUIDY 
In the present work we have evaluated the GIFTS ozone and 
CO retrieval capability with emphasis on carbon monoxide. 
For a set of CO and ozone vertical profiles, nadir spectral 
radiances (spectra) have been simulated with two GIFTS' 
spectral resolutions, i.e., 0.3 cm" and 0.6 cm-'. Then we 
have applied the maximum likelihood retrieval technique to 
directly retrieve CO and ozone vertical profiles. Vertical 
resolution and retrieval errors have beea characterized. 
3, I .  Foiward model 
The Line-By-Line Radiative Transfer Model (LBLRTM) 
[l]  has been used for spectra simulations and profile 
retrievals. For the current application LBLRTM has two 
important features: it has been extensively validated against 
real atmospheric radiance spectra, and it contains a full 
water vapor continuum model. The LBLRTM has the 
following important attributes: (i) Voigt line shape at all 
. atmospheric levels; (ii) all parameters on the HITRAN 96 
database are used, including pressure shift coefficient and 
half-width temperature dependence; and (iii) an algorithm is 
implemented to treat the variation of the Plank function 
within a vertically inhomogeneous atmospheric layer. To 
model a finite spectral resolution of the GIFTS 
interferometer, calculated monochromatic radiances are 
transformed to the Fourier domain, a rectangular 
apodization window is applied, and the result is transformed 
back to the spectral domain. 
3.2. Inversion technique 
Rodgers version of the maximum likelihood inversion 
technique [2] has been used for vertical profile retrievals. A 
retrieval of a vertical profile fiom a noisy spectrum is, 
essentially, an ill posed problem. In the Rodgers technique, a 
priori information about retrieved constituents is used to 
stabilize a solution. In this case a vector of retiieved 
parameters x is obtained by an iterative update of an initial 
guess following the equation (1) 
T -1 -1 -1 
X""'=X"+{KS, K + S a  1 
T -1 -1 a 
{K S, [R- F] + Sa (X - X")} (1) 
where x" and x"" are n-th and n+l -th iterations of the 
retrieval, xa is an a priori value of the retrieval with a 
covariance matrix Sa, K is a Jacobian matrix, F is a vector of 
measured radiances (spectrum), S ,  is covariance matrix for 
measurement errors, and F is a forward model vector. In the 
current study, Jacobians were calculated using the method of 
f ~ t e  differences. 
3.3. Spectral intervals selection 
Two broad spectral intervals have been selected for the 
current study, i.e., 2075.1 - 2170.2 cm-l for the CO retrieval 
and 985 -1075 cm-l for the ozone retrieval. Examples of a 
spectrum of upwelling radiance are presented in Figure 2. 
Both intervals overlap with a CO and ozone fundamental, 
i.e., the strongest, vibrational-rotational bands. The interval 
selected for CO retrieval also contains, some carbon 
dioxide, water vapor, ozone, and nitrous oxide interference. 
3.4. Vertical resolution and random errors 
To characterize a vertical resolution ,attainable, averaging 
kernels have been calculated for CO and ozone retrievals. 
According to Rodgers [2] in linear approximation a 
I I 
, . . .  . . . . .  
2070 2080 2090 2100 2110 2120 2130 2140 2150 21M) 2170 
Wavenumber ("1) 
Figure 2a. Spectral interval for CO retrieval. 
1wO 1020 1040 1 OM) 
Wavenumber (cm-' ) 
Figure 2b. Spectral interval for ozone retrieval. 
retrieved vertical profile of a target gas xre' can be related to 
a true profile x"' in the following form 
where A is a matrix whose rows are called averaging 
kernels, and E is the error term which accounts for retrieval 
errors due to errors in the measurements and model. In 
Figure 3, averaging kernels for CO and ozone retrievals are 
presented. Averaging kemels have been calculated for two 
GIFTS spectral resolutions, 0.3 cm" and 0.6 cm-', with 10 K 
surface - air thermal contrast (C), and signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) 500. A width at half maximum of an averaging kemel 
can be interpreted as a characteristic of vertical resolution. For 
this case vertical resolution is in a range 3 - 8 km for the CO 
and 6 - 11 km for the ozone. Decrease of the spectral resolution 
by a factor of two results in only a small degradation of a 
vertical resolution of the retrievals. Finite width of averaging 
kemel causes so-called smoothing errors and limits a number 
of independent elements in a retrieved profile. There are three 
elements for tropospheric CO and only one for tropospheric 
ozone. 
Retrieval errors E caused by random noise in a measured 
spectrum can be estimated by following formula 
4-1715 
GIFTS averaging kernels for CO retrieval 
I 
-0.05 0.03 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 
Averaging kernel 
(a) 
GIFTS averaging kernels for ozone retrieval 
45 
40 
36 
J) 
h 
E 
5 2 5  
(U 
L o  z 
15 
10 
5 
0 
)5 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 
Averaging Kemel 
(b) 
Figure 3a,b. GIFTS averaging kernels for two spectral 
resolutions: open symbols - 0.3 cm-l, and solid ones - 
0.6 cm-l. 
For lowest level CO and tropospheric ozone, this error 
depends on the magnitude of thermal contrast and for 
SNR=500 E is -20% at C=O, and -10% at C=lOo C. For 
higher layers, random noise errors are - 10%. 
3.5. Spatial and temporal variability 
As we mentioned above, a f i t e  vertical resolution, in 
principal, causes smoothing errors. .4s it is shown in 
Figure 3, retrieval sensitivity varies with altitude, which 
means that temporal variations of true profiles will also be 
smoothed. Actual magnitude of these errors depends on the 
widths of averaging kernels, shapes of true profiles, and 
temporal variability. To study those effects we simulated the 
GIFTS CO retrievals, using formula i(2) with E = 0. An 
ensemble of true profiles was calculated by a global, 
three-dimensional photochemical model at Harvard 
Universiqy. The model output consists of CO vertical 
profiles at 20 atmospheric levels over 2'x2.5" (latitude x 
longitude) bins. Profiles have been calculated with one-hour 
steps for a period from February 1 through April 30, 1994. 
For the ensembles of true and measured profiles, mean CO 
values and dispersion at every atmospheric level have been 
calculated for every bin. Figure 4 presents a plot of true and 
measured dispersions for a 45' N, 70' W bin. The time 
period (CO pollution seasonal maximum), and location 
(continental outflow fiom North America), cause very high 
CO vertical and temporal variability. We see that at all 
atmospheric levels, with exception of the lowest one, The 
true and the GIFTS measured dispersions are very close, i.e., 
statistically we have the same CO variability of the true and 
measured data. Low dispersion of a difference between true 
and retrieved profiles indicates that in each particular case 
the retrieval follows the true profile. 
loo ml 1 
True Ptufile (Harvard model) 
~~ GIFTS measurement simulation _ _  Difference 
Figure 4. CO dispersion as a function of altitude. Solid, 
long-dashed, and short-dashed lines represent dispersion of 
true profiles (Harvard model), GIFTS measurement 
simulations, and their difl7erence 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Retrievals of the vertical profile of CO and ozone fi-om the 
ground through the stratosphere have been performed fkom 
4-1716 
simulated cloud- and aerosol-free nadir viewing radiances 
calculated for the specifications of the GIFTS instrument. 
Maximum likelihood retrieval technique and linear error 
analysis have been used in combination with the accurate 
line-by-line radiative transfer model. The primary result of 
this work is that CO and ozone vertical profiles are 
retrievable with the vertical resolution attainable in a range 
of 3 - 8 km for the CO and 6 - 11 km for the ozone. Sensitivity 
of the retrievals at the boundary layer strongly depends on the 
thermal contrast between that layer and a surface. The 
presented study demonstrates that the GIFTS instrument can 
provide valuable data for tropospheric chemistry. Carbon 
monoxide and ozone time series of high temporal and spatial 
resolution can be used for validation of models, local air 
quality and long range transport studies. 
REFERENCES 
[l] S. A. Clough, C. P. Rinsland, and P. D. Brown, Retrieval of 
tropospheric ozone from simulations of nadir spectral radiances 
as observed from space, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 16,579 -16,593, 
1995. 
[2] C. D. Rodgers, Characterization and error analysis of 
profiles retrieved from remote sounding measurements, 
J. Geophys. Res., 95, 5587 -5595, 1990. 
Dr. Nikita S. Pougatchev Scientific research in atmospheric 
physics and atmospheric spectroscopy in application to 
remote sensing of atmospheric trace gases. Development of 
methods for remote sensing including s o h a r e  computer 
codes, spectroscopic apparatus design, laboratory and field 
measurements, and data analysis. He developed retrieval 
techniques for CO, ozone, methane, and CO2 total column 
and vertical distribution from solar infrared spectra. He led 
the work of the international spectroscopic team for 
validation of the MAPS 1994 flights, and he is a principal 
investigator for the validation of the MOPITT instrument 
on the NASA Terra satellite. He leads the work on the 
GIFTS chemistry retrieval algorithm development. He has a 
Ph. D. fiom the Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Russian 
Academy of Science. 
4-1717 
This page intentionally lest blank. 
4-1 71 8 
