IR Sounder Technology Trends' 
Carl F. Schueler 
Raytheon Santa Barbara Remote Sensing 
75 Coromar Drive 
Goleta CA 93 117 
cfschueler@,west.raytheon.com 
805-562-7155 
Abstract-Advanced IR sounding benefits partly from 
cloud-top parameter and surface emissivity estimates, using 
coincident imaging spectroradiometry. While a separate 
imager on the same spacecraft on which the sounder is 
located can provide closely coincident surface and cloud 
parameter estimates, an "imaging sounder'' that can deliver 
image and sounding data may reduce cost. Key technology 
trends enabling low-risk "imaging sounders" include better 
and lower cost optics, improved spectral-separation, low- 
noise wide bandwidth large area focal plane arrays, reliable 
active cooling, and low-power, higher density electronics for 
high-rate analog-to-digital conversion and on-board data 
processing. Trends over the last decade and efforts 
underway are identified with improvements anticipated in 
the next decade. Applications are described with reference 
to bistrumentation either in-orbit or under development. 
T-LE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION 
2. DATA REQU~REMENTS TRENDS 
3. SENSOR PERFORMANCE IMPLICATIONS 
4. TECHNOLOGY IMPLICATIONS AND TRENDS 
5. MISSION ILLUSTRATIONS 
6.  S ~ Y  
7. APPENDIX I: Amoms  
8. APPENDIX II: FTS vs. WIS S N R  
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
10. REFERENCES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Satellite atmospheric infkared sounding was predicted over 
forty years ago, with the basic principles published in 1959 
[l]. Forerunners of today's advanced sounders were flown 
on the Nimbus-3 satellite in 1969. These were the Satellite 
Infrared Spectrometer (SIRS), a diffraction grating 
instrument built by Hughes Santa Barbara Research Center 
(now Raytheon Santa Barbara Remote Sensing) [2], and the 
Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer (IRIS), a Michelson 
Fourier Transform Spectrometer [3]. Since then, the 
principles have been converted into operational algorithms 
[4], and operational sounding f?om both polar and 
geostationary orbit has been provided by conceptually and 
technologically simpler filter-wheel spectral separation [4]. 
With the development of the Cross-track IR Sounder (CrIS) 
for the National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental 
Satellite System (NPOESS) [5] and the In€rared 
Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer (IASI) for the 
European Meteorological Observational Platform (METOP) 
[6], the Michelson interferometer is being reintroduced for 
operational sounding. 
For some missions, advanced interferometric spectral 
separation is an optimal choice. For other missions, 
however, approaches falling between the filter-wheel and the 
interferometer in terms of complexity, technical risk, and 
performance may offer attractive alternatives from a cost 
and risk standpoint. 
Requirements are briefly summarized for a range of 
missions, and sensor performance implications are 
considered. The sensor technologies are reviewed, 
indicating [capabilities and trends. Several technologies (e.g., 
pointing/scanning, optics, focal plane arrays, cooling, and 
electronics) are common to all sounder designs, and the 
spectral separation approach selected is the primary 
conceptual differentiator. Yet, depending on the spectral 
separation approach used, the requirements on the other 
technologies differ significantly, impacting performance cost 
and risk for the various sounder configurations considered. 
Atmospheric profile retrieval quality is not only based on 
sounder data quality, but also on boundary conditions 
provided either by surface emissivity estimates under clear 
conditions, or cloud top parameters for above cloud IR 
soundings. Surface emissivity estimates depend on 
knowledge of surface type and condition fiom data bases 
derived from non-coincident surface remote sensing, as well 
as on coincident imagery [7, SI. 
For example, the Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental 
Satellite (POES) Advanced Very High Resolution 
Radiometer (AVHRR) provides coincident surface 
measurements that can be used to improve POES High- 
resolution InfraRed Sounder (HIRS) profile estimates [9]. 
Unlike surface estimates, however, cloud-top property 
estimates for above-cloud sounding cannot (due to relatively 
rapid cloud motion and evolution) be effectively made 
except by coincident imager measurements, typically fkom 
the same platform. 
0-7803-6599-2/01/$10.00 2001 IEEE 
4-1667 
Therefore, it is not surprising that significant efforts are 
planned to combine imaging and sounding into a single 
"imaging sounder" [9, 101. Technically, this means better 
radiometric correlation between the imaging and sounding 
data. Pro,gammatically, this reduces the number of sensors 
required, thus presumably reducing total mass, power, 
volume, and launch and operations cost compared to 
separate imagerhounder pairs as the POES system is 
configured. Two examples are compared to the mission 
requirements and technology capabilities and trends. 
GOES 
Sounder 
[43 PP. 
134-1361 
Geo 
2 
9km 
2 
1 
2. DATA REQUIREMENT TRENDS 
Table 1 lists key requirements for major current and planned 
sounding missions from both polar and geostationary orbit. 
Only a sampling of the planned systems is listed, omitting, 
for example, polar and geostationary sounders planned by 
China [12] and Russia [13]. One discriminator between 
polar and geostationary sounding is the combination of both 
IR and microwave sounding from polar orbit, but sole 
current reliance on IR sounding from geostationary orbit. 
GOES GLFTS Geo 
[FTi ABS ~ 5 1  
Geo GeO 
1 1 
1okm 4km 2km 
1 1 
1 1 
Tropospheric IR sounding is historically limited to very 
clear atmosphere, and typically only over the ocean (due in 
part to poor land surface emissivity estimates leading to 
inaccurate over-land atmospheric profile retrievals). 
Therefore, microwave sounding, capable of penetrating 
cloud-cover, has been a significant focus of polar satellite 
sounding data applications. 
Geostationary satellites do not include microwave sounding 
partly because of the technical barriers of scanning large 
antennas and sensor power requirements in an orbit 40 times 
further from the earth, and partly due to temporal sampling 
considerations. A geostationary IR sounder can stare at the 
globe and obtain frequent sounding data over any location 
visible Jkom the platform. Therefore, it has more 
opportunities to find clear atmosphere as clouds move 
across the globe than a polar orbiting sounder which 
samples any given atmospheric column once every several 
hours. Tlais temporal advantage from geostationary orbit 
compensates for the lack of microwave (capability. 
Sounding data is needed to derive global atmospheric 
vertical tlemperature and moisture profiles. What is ideally 
desired, but impossible to attain, is continuous knowledge of 
the three-dimensional temperature (and moisture) 
characteristics. Improvement contributes to better numerical 
weather ]prediction (NWP) models of the atmosphere and 
better weather forecasting. Compare the POES requirements 
for temperature and vertical spatial restohtion, for example, 
to the NI'OESS CrIS requirements: the latter are improved 
to 1K in temperature and 1 km vertical resolution. This 
improvement is directly correlated tal the benefits to be 
derived in NWP modeling for weather forecasting. 
Furthermore, the most important part of the atmosphere to 
assess on a continuous basis is the porl.ion that most affects 
our weatlher: the troposphere. While stratospheric weather 
(especially wind) is a factor, changes occur more slowly 
than in the troposphere. Therefore, it is not surprising that 
the World Meteorological Organization ( M O )  has 
published a requirement for hourly tropospheric soundings 
on a global basis, with stratospheric requirements being less 
frequent [ 1 61. 
4-1668 
On the other hand, while the stratosphere is visible from a 
satellite even in the presence of most cloud cover, the 
troposphere is hidden from view of an IR sensor over about 
70% of the globe at any moment due to either high cirrus or 
lower thick cloud cover [17]. So the portion of the 
atmosphere least visible is of most interest. This is a 
problem for IR sounding, and is one reason microwave 
sounding is important. Nevertheless, IR sounding is useful, 
and improvements in spatial resolution (both horizontal and 
vertical) as well as in temporal revisit, contribute to 
improvements in tropospheric sounding coverage, both 
spatially and temporally. 
3. SENSOR PERFORMANCE IMPLICATIONS 
Table 2 lists key sensor performance parameters established 
to meet the mission requirements listed in Table 1. 
Generally, improvements in horizontal and vertical spatial 
sampling and temperature uncertainty require more spectral 
bands with finer spectral resolution over a broader spectral 
range with fine radiometric precision in the form of low 
noise-equivalent temperature difference (NEdT). For 
practical reasons, however, tradeoffs among these 
parameters are required. 
Consider, for example, polar horizontal resolution and 
sampling. The smaller the horizontal spatial resolution 
element required from an IR sounder, the more likely it will 
fmd a clear spot, or “hole,” in cloud cover through which 
tropospheric sounding information can be most accurately 
collected. Therefore, efforts to improve horizontal spatial 
resolution from the current POES 18 km are of interest. The 
practical trade-off, however, is that the smaller the 
horizontal resolution, the less signal is obtained in a given 
sounding data collection. This leads, for example, to poorer 
sounder radiometric performance (larger NEdT), and poorer 
temperature retrieval precision. 
Therefore, while finer horizontal spatial resolution is 
desirable to attain more frequent clear soundings, the 
primary disadvantage of the current polar sounders (such as 
POES HIRS) is the lack of spectral discrimination leading to 
poor temperature profile retrieval performance. The result, 
as indicated in Table 2, is that improvements are being 
sought primarily in sensor spectral contiguity and resolution 
rather than in horizontal spatial resolution. 
CrIS, for example, does not offer significantly finer 
horizontal spatial resolution than HIRS. Finer horizontal 
spatial resolution would require a larger aperture sensor with 
more mass and volume than the spacecraft is able to 
accommodate unless the sensor noise were relaxed. SNR 
relaxation would, however, counter the benefit of finer 
spectral resolution by increasing the temperature profile 
retrieval uncertainty in Table 1. 
With improvements in sensor subsystem technologies, 
conceivably over time the horizontal resolution could be 
improved while maintaining spectral and radiometric 
performance. 
Alternatively, longer integration time during the sounding 
data collection process would enable improved performance. 
This is difficult in polar orbit without coarsening the 
horizontal sampling interval and therefore further reducing 
the likelihood of finding a “clear” spot in the atmosphere. 
Operating in geostationary orbit, however, offers the 
advantage over a polar orbit of providing the sensor with a 
stationary platform to “stare” for a longer period at a given 
portion of the atmosphere to build signal. By employing an 
“area” focal plane array (FPA) of 128 x 128 pixels, a 4km 
horizontal resolution sensor can “stare” at an area 512 km 
square. If the global area of interest is 8000 x 8000 km 
(actually larger), about 256 fiames provide coverage. 
Hourly global soundings could in principle be obtained if 
the sensor spent as many as 15 seconds staring at one 512 
km square spot on the globe. This is to be compared with 
the HIRS 100 msec per sample from polar orbit. This 150:l 
integration time advantage is, however, mitigated in terms of 
signal strength by the factor of about 40 (36,000/833) 
decrease in instantaneous field of view (IFOV) fkom 
geostationary orbit compared to polar orbit. This reduces the 
signal strength by a factor of about 1600 (the IFOV area 
ratio) at comparable horizontal spatial resolution. Therefore, 
the Geo sensor described suffers an order of magnitude 
signal disadvantage compared to HIRS. 
To compensate, one can employ any of a number of options, 
separately or in any combination: enlarge the optical 
aperture, coarsen the spectral or spatial resolution, improve 
FPA noise performance by cooling to a lower temperature, 
or use an even larger FPA. While the latter approach is 
practical today in terms of larger FPA availability, even the 
128 x 128 FPA cooling, readout and electronics processing 
are challenging. A larger FPA would make these challenges 
even more daunting, if not essentially impractical. 
The NMP GIFTS mission focuses on advanced technology 
to achieve improved spatial and spectral resolution 
compared to polar sounders from geostationary orbit. 
Indeed, demonstrating advanced technology is part of the 
purpose of any NASA New Millennium Program (NMP) 
proof-of-concept demonstration. The Geo Wedge Imaging 
Spectrometer (WIS) concept relaxes spectral resolution to 
achieve improved spatial resolution and radiometry from 
geostationary orbit with current low-risk technology. 
. 4-1 66;9 
Table 2. Current and Advanced Infrared Sounder Performance 
Refermce 
Spectral 
Separi~tion 
Range 
(AV tin-') 
Spectral 
LW < -1200 
Mw-,1200 
- 2000 
sw >:2000 
(AV=V~-V~)  
Spectral 
Resoliition 
(6v; LW, 
Mw, sw 
# Bands 
(FTS:Bv/ 6v 
LW, nm. 
sw 
NedT K 
Power(W) 
Mass (kg) 
[4, pp. 
Filter 
Wheel 
1030 
97-1001 
669- 
1225- 
1488 
2100- 
2660 
-15 cm-’ - 40 - 25 
20 total 
4 . 5  
20 
20.4 
EOS A I R S  
1650-2:!50 
1141 
1170-1760 
1820-2900 
Diffraction 
Grating 
649 -1 135 
12 17-1 6 13 
2169 - 2674 
- 0.08% 
(e.g., O.8cm-l 
@ 1OOOc”’) 
2378 total 
4 . 1 4  - 0.35 
225 
166 
METOP 
M I  
161 
FTS 
645-1210 
1210-2000 
2000-2760 
0.35 an-’ 
6042 
0.25 - 0.50 
200 
210 
NPOESS 
CrIS 
[51 
FTS 
650 -1095 
1210 -1750 
2155 -2550 
0.625 
1.25 
2.5 
712 
432 
158 
- 0.2 - 0.5 
86 
81 
-- 
GOES 
Sounder -- 
14, PP. 
134-1361 - 
Filter 
Wheel --
680-1030 
1345- 
1545 
2108- 
2671 
- 15 cm-’ 
- 60 - 25 
19 total 
-- 
- 1  
106 
126 
- 
-- 
GOES ABS 
FTS 
650-1150 
1210-1740 
2 150-272 1 
0.625 cm-’ 
1.25 
2.5 
800 
424 
228 
- 0.7 
TBD 
77 
FTS 
685-1130 710-1140 ---Y- 
1% (e.g., 
10 cm-’ @ 
1000 cm-’) 
0.3 cm*‘ 
1483 630 (210 
TBD per FPA in 
each range) 
- 0.05 
100 
4. TECHNOLOGY IMPLICATIONS AND TRENDS 
An ‘‘imaging sounder” is realizable because the imager and 
sounder are so similar in design. The functional block 
diagram of Figure 1 clarifies this. Radiation reflected or 
emitted from the earth and atmosphere into the aperture is 
separated into spectral “bands” by a spectral separation 
device, and detected at the focus of an optical assembly. 
Typically, long-wave emittance (with relatively low photon 
energy) must be detected by cryogenically cooled detectors 
because a photon detector material’s photo-electric effect 
work function must be lowered to match the low photon 
energy. Therefore, random thermal excitation in a photon 
detector material at nominal temperatures produces 
sufficient electrical noise current to mask the photon signals. 
Cooling is shown as the dotted “optional” functionality 
below the focal plane block in Figure 1. Cooling can be 
avoided for long-wave detection by using thermally sensitive 
detection, such as bolometry, but such detection has not yet 
achieved sufficient thermal sensitivity to meet many 
sounding requirements [18]. Finally, the detector output is 
processed and transmitted via the electronics function in the 
final block. 
Spectral band selection distinguishes whether such a sensor 
is an “imager” or a “sounder.” Imagers operate in the 
atmospheric %indow7’ regions of the electro-magnetic 
spectnun, while sounders operate on the edges of the 
atmospheric windows, illustrated in Figure 2. A sensor with 
spectral capability in both regions is an imaging sounder. 
The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) currently operating on NASA’s “Terra” Earth 
Observing System (EOS) platform is an example [19], with 
14 bands located on the CO2 window edges, and 
22 “imaging” bands located within the windows. 
When the sounder spectral requirements call for 
“hyperspectral” capability, demanding hundreds or 
thousands of spectral bands which few non-sounding 
applications (other than chemical, crop, or mineral 
identification) might find necessary, the driving 
differentiiators that push design beyond typical imagers are 
the spectral separation and sensor data processing 
requirements. 
In this section the end-to-end sensor technology 
requirements are considered and compared to technology 
capability available today or in the near-term (about five 
years) to identify the technology ‘“drivers” within the 
sounding requirements listed in Tables 1 and 2. These 
drivers are the cost and risk elements xhat drive selection of 
appropriate designs to meet the sounding requirements. 
Operational programs typically accept somewhat less 
performance than state-of-the-art technology can provide to 
maintain acceptably low cost and risk, leaving the higher 
cost, risk and performance challenges to proof-of-concept 
programs such as NASA’s M’. While subjective 
judgement is also required to identify the “break-point” 
between acceptable risk and desired performance, typically 
Typical Electro-Optical Sensor Functional Design 
Spectral Detector 
Separation Focal Plane 
r - - - - - - - - - - - I  
:Scanner I I i Optics Electron ics 
I- - - - - - - - - 
Spacecraft 
here 
Figure 1. Imagerhounder sensor functional block diagram. 
0 1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5  
Wavelength, pm 
Figure 2. Atmospheric transmittance vs. wavelength determines imaging or sounding 
applications of a passive electro-optical sensor. 
4-1671 
operational programs are conservative and demand flight 
demonstrated proof of cost, performance, risk, and 
reliability prior to implementation of a proposed design 
approach 
4.1 Optics 
For sounders, optics is typically driven to provide signal 
collection, rather than fine image quality. For the imaging 
sounder, however, image quality becomes a driver, so that 
the requirements that drive imagers also become important. 
The key optical performance considerations are alignment 
and stability, spatial image quality usually defined by the 
Modulation Transfer Function (MTF)2 and spectral 
. tran~mittance.~ 
A key design driver is the required optical field of view 
(FOV). This is directly related to the data acquisition 
options illustrated in Figure 3. If data acquisition is 
performed using a cross-track scanner for a polar-orbit 
application, for example, then the optical FOV is typically 
small (order of one degree), allowing simple conic section 
optical forms based on such common configurations as the 
Cassegrain telescope used in the POES AVHRR imager and 
the HlRS sounder. If, however, more signal is required due 
to finer spatial resolution requirements, then a parallel cross- 
track scanner may be needed, requiring a wider FOV and 
more complicated optical forms. 
Wide FOV (> 10 degrees) optics may be required by 
pushbroom sensors in polar orbit. While these are not used 
for sounding applications yet, this approach would allow 
about a 500:l improvement in time integration relative to 
current or planned polar orbiting sounders listed in Table 2. 
This would M e r  allow reduction of the horizontal 
IFOV to well under one km, comparable to the current 
MODIS resolution, and improve clear atmosphere sounding 
performance by increasing the likelihood of sounding 
between clouds. Notice that in this case, the optics must 
provide the widest FOV in the cross-track direction, and the 
FOV required in the along-track direction depends on the 
width of the linear detector arrays. While this is usually 
substantially smaller than the cross-track extent, some 
designs require many arrays down-track, and the in-track 
FOV can be comparable to the cross-track FOV. 
Finally, the area array approach (planned by GIFTS and 
proposed for the Geo WIS concept in Table 2) is shown on 
the far right of Figure 3. An area array design (primarily 
applicable to geostationary orbit) requires the same FOV in 
both directions. For geostationary applications, however, 
MTF-spatial frequency response, mathematically and conceptually 
equivalent to temporal fiequency response and for scanners, transforms 
directly into temporal frequency response in the electronics readout 
circuits. 
Not the same as etendue, or throughput, given by the apeme area solid 
angle product AQ although imaging designers often use the term 
“throughput” synonymously with “transmittance.” 
the FOV may be no broader than the typical polar-orbiting 
cross-track scanner because the orbit altitude is 40 times the 
polar orbit, so that a small field angle covers a very broad 
segment {of earth surface. For example., the GIFTS or WIS 
designs require only a one degree square FOV, comparable 
to the current AVHRR or HIRS optical designs. 
Moreover, today optical designs with -10 degree FOV can 
be built with aspheric figure to allow off-axis unobscured 
forms which eliminate signal robbing field obscuring 
structure found in the common Cassagrain-like telescope 
forms. These optics can be machined in aluminum or other 
common materials to excellent figure and smoothness using 
numerically controlled diamond-point turning techniques 
[20]. These optics can provide diffraction-limited 
performance in the visible and longer wavelengths. The 
mating surfaces can also be machined to the same 
tolerances, allowing literal “bolt-togethler” optical alignment 
of multiple optical elements, providing design flexibility and 
low cost unavailable just ten years ago. Therefore, optical 
scanning. alignment, and MTF issues are essentially “non- 
drivers” for the applications considered in Tables 1 and 2. 
Transmittance is primarily an issue for the beamsplitters and 
other spectral separation devices considered in the next sub- 
section. 
4.2 Spectral Separation 
Figure 4 shows spectral separation options relative to optical 
design. Multiple telescopes (one for each major spectral 
region) may be used to simplify the design of individual 
sensors for each spectral region if the :spectral requirements 
cover a wide enough range. This is typically not the case for 
sounding requirements spanning the MWm to LWIR 
spectral ranges indicated in Table 2. More commonly used 
are spectral separation mechanisms operating in the 
convergent path between a single telescope and the focal 
planes, usually employing either beamsiplitter or filter wheel 
techniques illustrated in FigureS. 
Both methods are employed in the POES HIRS and GOES 
sounder, for example. The beamsplitter offers the advantage 
of spatial and temporal simultaneity. This means that the 
spectral “zones” created at the output of the beamsplitter 
image the same location in the earth scene at the same time. 
The filter wheel offers the advantage of optical simplicity, 
but the disadvantage of sequential spectral acquisition. To 
use a filter wheel effectively, the image of the scene under 
the spacecraft must remain fixed relative to the sensor focal 
plane as the filter wheel is advanced for a single -’pixel” data 
collect. This spacecraft or cross-track scanning induced 
motion compensation is accomplished by current sensors 
such as ihe POES HIRS, but spectral !selection is limited to 
the order of ten bands or so per spectrail zone. Current NWF’ 
applications demand many more bands, as indicated in 
Table 3. 
4-1672 
“Whisk-Broom” Scanner No Scanner Needed 
Serial Cross-Track Parallel Cross-Track “Push broom” Staring 
(Geo Orbit) 
I Low Earth Orbit 
7 kmlsecond Ground Speed (Spacecraft Provides Down-Track Scan), 14 
Focal One Detector Several Detectors Line Array Cross- Two-Dimensional 
Plane per Band Downtrack per Band track per Band Array 
Cross-Track Fast 
Scan Speed 
Medium to Slow N/A NIA 
Example AVHRR, HlRS ETM, MODIS EO-I, SPOT Advanced GOES 
Sounder 
Figure 3. Scanning approach affects optical design choices. 
More spectral bands, along with near temporal simultaneity 
and reduced mechanical complexity, can be obtained by 
performing spectral separation at the focal plane using either 
discrete linear “stripe” filters placed over linear detector 
arrays, or by using the linear “wedge” filter illustrated in 
Figure 5. Both require the image to be scanned over the FPA 
to collect all spectral bands. The former technique is used in 
the MODIS instrument, and the latter approach has been 
demonstrated in laboratory and aircraft flight proof-of- 
concept experiments by Raytheon Santa Barbara Remote 
Sensing [21]. 
While the two approaches are conceptually identical, the 
wedge filter has the advantage of packing sequential spectral 
bands closely togetlier so that dozens can fit a narrow optical 
FOV. 
The principal difficulty with the Wedge filter approach is 
fine resolution and spectral selectivity. It is difficult to 
provide low out-of-band rejection comparable to standard 
uniform interference filters. Filters have been fabricated to 
offer spectral bandwidth of 1%, but improvements are 
limited by difficulties in blocking out-of-band energy. 1% 
spectral resolution, however, enables effective atmospheric 
sounding better than current GOES or POES performance if 
more spectral bands are made available. The Geo WIS 
concept of Table 2 takes advantage of this observation. 
Finally, spectral separation can be performed after the (first) 
focal plane in a reduced diameter collimated beam as 
illustrated at the bottom of Figure 4. Prism (dispersive), 
grating (diffractive), and interferometric spectral separation 
methods are illustrated in Figure 5. These techniques offer 
advantages of tunability and fine resolution coupled with the 
ability to provide large numbers of spectral bands. The 
AIRS instrument listed in Table 2 applies a diffractive 
technique, the Advanced Visible IR Imaging 
Spectrometer (AVIRIS) aircraft instrument built and 
upgraded by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory through the 
1980’s and 1990’s use prisms, and the CrIS and IASI 
instruments listed in Table 2 employ Fourier transform 
interferometry. 
CrIS and IASI will demonstrate the FTS approach within 
five years, and A I R S  will demonstrate the grating method in 
200 1. The principal technology difference between these 
two approaches for polar sounders is that the grating 
provides spectral separation onto an area detector array, and 
requires a large focal plane and active cryogenic cooling to 
meet the SNR requirement of Table 2. The FTS approach 
uses time multiplexing to avoid the need for a large FPA 
(unless imaging is also desired) and CrIS is cooled with a 
passive radiator. Additionally, the FTS approach is easier to 
calibrate because all spectral bands are derived from the 
same detectors. On the other hand, CrIS and IASI require 
numerical self-apodization correction for the various 
detectors on the FPA. The apodization is caused by the off- 
axis ray optical path difference shift for each detector [5 ] .  
A key advantage of the WIS spectral separation approach 
relative to dispersive, diffractive, or interferometric spectral 
separation is elimination of collimating and reimaging optics 
as illustrated in Figure 6, providing the simplest, lowest 
mass, volume, and power approach to hyperspectral imaging 
sounders available for either polar or geostationary 
application. 
4-1673 
Color Separation Ahead of Powered Optics 
Limits Registration Over Spectral Range 
e.g., multiple telescopes 
Simultaneity 
Spatialflemporal 
yesMS 
Approach 
Color Separation in the Convergent Path 
Beamsplitting Optics; Create Spectral Zones 
Preserves Spatial Registration Among Zones 
(Location in Pathl) 
Transmittance 
Medium-High (> 50% 
(Convergent) 
Color Separation at the Focal Plane 
Interference Filters on or close to FPA 
Registration Requires Spatio-Temporal Stability 
Sequential Filter Wheel 
Color Separation After the Focal Plane 
Allows Diffractive, Diispersive, or Interferjometry 
Requires Post-Separation Imaging Relay Optics 
(Convergent) Medium-Fin~e 
0.1 - 100 
Figure 4. Spectral separation vs. optical location 
Uniform Stripe 
Interference Filter 
+ constant h 
Medium-Fine (Convergent) 
NoNes 
N 
Diffraction Grating _ _ _  _ _ _ _  ?,,,T& Transmissive or Reflective 
Dispersive Prism& 
Interferometer 
eFabryPerot @ ** 
Fourier (Michelson) 
Linear (Wedge) 'e / 
Spectrometer + 
Yeslyes YeS 
YeSlYeS YeS 
(Or Sequential) Low-Medium (< 50%) (If Scanned) 
(Or Sequential) LOw-Medium (If Scanned) 
(Collimated) 
ICollimated) 
Medium 
(Collimated) 
Medium-High In post- 
Sequential 
*YeslYes 
NoIYes 
(Convergent) Processing 
Figure 5. Spectral separation options and peirformance advantages. 
WEDGE FILTER 
MOVING MIRROR, 
I COLLIMATOR 
I " I 
GRATlNG SPECTROMETER 
WEDGE SPECTROMETER 
FOURIER TRANSFORM SPECTROMEJER 
Figure 6. FTS and grating (or prism) spectrometers require collimating and re-&aging optics, whereas 
the WIS is more compact. 
4.3 Focal Planes 
Focal plane technology is the heart of advances in imagers 
and sounders over the past ten years, and significant 
improvements have been made in the following key areas: 
0 
Longer wavelength operation, higher temperatures, and 
lower noise 
Smaller "pixel" size , i.e. higher density linear and area 
arrays 
On-chip readouts and data processing 
The combination of these improvements along with wide 
FOV diamond-point turned optics has enabled compact 
staring area array imagers with visible to LWIR performance 
using common optics. 
Principal improvements in spectral coverage over the past 
ten years have been in the LWIR, with a key transition in the 
last few years from nearly exclusive reliance on photo- 
conductive (PC) HgCdTe detectors beyond 8 microns to 
more integrated photo-voltaic (PV) technology out to 14 
microns. As PC detectors require discrete wire bonds 
between each detector and a readout, PV technology 
simplifies system design by allowing hybridization of area 
array detectors with readout electronics in a smaller 
package. This is a particularly important advantage when 
time-delay-integration (TDI) must be used to improve SNR 
. performance. PC diodes in multiple line arrays require much 
more physical FPA space, and optical FOV can then become 
a design driver limiting TDI for PC applications. Efforts to 
push PV capability fixther out in wavelength are substantial, 
as there are a number of important applications in addition 
to atmospheric sounding. 
For example, the current MODIS instrument on EOS Terra, 
completed in 1998, uses PC HgCdTe LWIR detection. 
Because MODIS was designed and built in the early and 
mid-90's, it was not practical to transition the design to take 
advantage of mid to late '90's LWlR PV developments. For 
future programs being designed now, PV is replacing PC 
LWIR. Additionally, progressively higher operating 
temperatures at low noise levels are being achieved by PV 
detectors, easing focalplane cooling requirements. This is 
particularly important for large area array applications. 
Detector specific detectivity, or D*, is a normalized 
sensitivity figure of merit now less commonly used than the 
product of the zero-bias resistance (&) and the detector area 
(A). ROA is proportional to the square of the D* [18, p. 2521. 
Larger yields lower noise, more highly responsive, and 
therefore better detectors. Typically, for a given detector, 
performance significantly improves at lower temperature. 
Substantial efforts over the past 40 years to improve detector 
performance have brought D* (and therefore also R&) to 
nearly 90% of the theoretical performance limit [22], so that 
fundamental improvements in these parameters for 
individual detector diodes will not be substantial. On the 
other hand, detector array performance is strongly affected 
by other parameters, such as detector response and noise 
uniformity, pixel operability, and dynamic range. 
Additionally, detector array noise performance is affected by 
parameters such as l/f noise and readout circuit noise which 
increases with required detector dynamic range. 
Fabrication technology is fast approaching the limit in terms 
of small detector sizes, particularly in the MWIR and LWIR 
as detectors become comparable to the wavelength of light 
sensed [22]. Currently, detectors as small as 40 microns for 
LWIR applications are available, and 20 microns is 
probably the minimum pixel size to be expected in the near 
future. Such small detectors are expected to become 
available within the next few years for area FPAs. Large 
1. -- ~ 4-1675 
area FPAs, up to 2048 x 2048, are also becoming available. 
For sounding, the principal technology driver is therefore 
not FPA size, but readout, digital processing, and 
communications bandwidth. 
Readout is benefiting from advances in semiconductor 
electronics [23], as shown in Figure 7. While the ordinate in 
Figure 7 has no parameter demarcation, the quantitative 
improvements in each of four major parameters are 
indicated numerically next to key points in the chronology. 
The transition from Resistive to Capacitive Transimpedance 
Amplification (RTIA to CTIA) in the late 1980's was a 
major step forward in reducing unit cell size and allowing 
the detector array-to-readout integrated circuit (ROIC) 
sensor chip assembly (SCA) hybridization process to 
mature. Hybridization connects the electronic readout 
directly to the detector array via small conductive indium 
"bumps." Monolithic detector-readout integration is 
desirable, but not anticipated in the near term, especially for 
radiation-sensitive space applications. 
Substantial reductions in both bias nonuniformity and 
electron noise performance have enabled significant sensor 
improvements by lowering the "fixed" readout noise. This 
enables lower "photon limited'' signal performance and 
dramatically improves the optical designer's flexibility by 
allowing smaller optics to achieve a given SNR requirement. 
For sounding, in particular, this is important because the 
optics are not generally sized to achieve image quality 
(based on diffraction), but are usually sized for signal 
collection. Lowering signal independent noise means that a 
smaller aperture can often be used, reducing sensor volume 
and mass. 
Digital processing capabilities appear to be tracking FPA 
size increases shown in Figure 7. For example, dynamic 
random access memory (DRAM) is one parameter that must 
grow with increasing FPA size to handle the large parallel 
data outputs, particularly for FTS applications. Norton [22] 
notes that as FPA size has grown by a factor of about 1000 
since 19190, so has DRAM size, and the projected trends 
seem to match. 
Therefore, principal FPA technology drivers for imaging 
sounder applications remain extended wavelength operation 
beyond 14 microns at reasonable FPA temperatures and 
noise performance. This is true particularly for the Geo 
sounder application, which must contend with a substantial 
signal penalty compared to polar orbit, as discussed in the 
introduction. 
Figure 7. Readout advances include improved density, yield, uniformity, and lower noise performance. 
(Courtesy J.L. Vampola, Raytheon Infrared Operations, Goleta CA) 
4 - 1 6 7 6  
4.4 Cooling 
Passive and active cryogenic cooling technologies have 
advanced incrementally in recent years. The most 
significant advancements have been toward reliable space 
qualified active cooling. The efforts in the passive cooling 
area have been limited primarily to improving the efficiency 
and lowering the cost of passive coolers to maximize the 
cooling load for a given volume passive radiator. Passive 
electrical power and offering essentially infinite reliability. 
Development efforts have, however, been largely eclipsed 
by active cooler research and development efforts because 
the cooling loads created by high-density area FPAs cannot 
be handled by reasonably sized passive radiators. Astrium, 
Ball Aerospace, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, TRW, and 
others have developed space qualified coolers. 
ago, one might have avoided selecting an active cooler due 
to reliability concerns. Since then, a number of the 
technologies have been selected for satellite applications, 
and are either on-orbit or about to be launched. Of over 30 
coolers that have been developed using the various 
approaches listed h Table 3, there are several that are 
directly applicable to imager or sounder electro-optical 
sensors for space applications. 
has the principal advantages Of requiring no The classic Stirling cycle cooler has mechanical seals with % 
reliability concerns which are addressed in the Pulse tube 
variant, lowering efficiency but improving mechanical 
reliability. For relatively small heat loads, these would be 
obvious candidates for passive EO applications. Reverse 
Brayton coolers would be used for higher heat load 
applications, and the Joule Thomson cooler offers a 
significant vibration advantage, but this is offset by the 
Pulse-tube design and maturity [25]. Passive cooling technology has matured to the point where 
Principal technology drivers for advanced imaging sounders 
are cost, mass, power, and reliability of active coolers. The 
large FPAs required for will require active 
cooling, and mass, power, and reliability are still concerns 
even for a demonstration project requiring less than two 
years of on-orbit operation. 
very little development is being conducted, except in design 
for manufacturing and assembly efficiency. The passive 
radiative cooler will likely continue to be used for 
applications below 5 watts and above 65 K operating 
‘temperature. Although active cooling devices are becoming 
available for applications in this range, passive cooling will 
probably continue to be popular for for modest heat load 
requirements above 80K. 4.5 Signal Processing Electronics 
An example of a recent passive cooler development is Analog to digital conversion and digital data processing are 
shown in Figure 8. The scalable flat-panel passive radiative normally handled in post readout processing electronics. 
cooler offers significant advantages in development cost. Additionally, power conversion and regulation is normally 
Earlier coolers used on Landsat Thematic Mapper, MODIS, handled within the sensor, using spacecraft supplied power. 
and for Geo applications used dihedral radiators, were not Space qualified electronics must contend with high levels of 
scalable and were more expensive to manufacture. radiation that creates a need for shielding and radiation 
In the past decade, substantial progress has been made in “hardened)) materials. The latter issue has typically kept 
space qualified active cryocooler technology [24]. While space electronics a generation behind commercial 
well developed by 1990 based on extensive research and electronics in development. 
development, active refrigeration had not been used on any 
3-Stage Passive Radiative Cooler 
50% cost of previous coolers 
65 parts vs. 194 for MODIS cooler 
Aluminum construction 
Honeycomb radiators 
Polished aluminum reflectors 
Figure 8. Scalable low-cost flat panel passive radiative cooler. 
4-1677 
Space electronics development has focused not so much on 
electronics design itself, but more on bringing the current 
generation of commercial capability up to the radiation 
standards required for space application, either by 
improving the radiation shielding properties of the 
packaging’ materials or by hardening the components 
themselves. 
Cooler type Differentiator 
Stirling Low mass/volume 
Reverse Brayton Low vibration, high load 
capacity (> 5 w) 
Fewer moving parts than Pulse Tube (Stirling 
cycle cooler replacing classic Stirlingihigher 
expander with passive 
pulse tube) 
Joule Thomson 
reliability, lower efficiency 
Separate compressor lowers 
vibration, lower efficiency 
Ten years ago, sensor developers were forced to design 
much of the electronics on a custom basis for space 
applications, with space-qualified parts. One of the principal 
advancements since has been the development of common 
space-qualified modules enabling lower-cost digital 
processors and power supplies. 
Creare 
Matra 
As suggested by Figure 9, analog-to-digital (A/D) converters 
have been improved in the last ten years to the point where 
“breakthroughs” will be required over the next ten years to 
achieve significant progress. In the past ten years, an 
improvement in A/D converter performance of about 2 bits 
has been achieved [26], with gradual improvements 
expected in the next ten years. A perception that A/D 
converter performance is good enough for most applications 
may account for less intense effort in this area than others, 
such as high density packaging. This is a risk for any 
mission requiring A/D converter resolution and sampling 
rates beyond the current state of the art. 
4.6 Materials, Mechanisms and Thermal Management 
Imagers and sounders depend on structural materials to 
provide optical stability to maintain alignment and MTF 
performance under highly variable thermal loads that require 
low coefficient of thermal expansion materials as well as 
tight control of sensor temperature variation. Material 
choices alone cannot handle the entire burden, and control 
mechanisms as well as insulation materials are part of the 
thermal management design. Moreover, to lower launch 
costs, designers are pressed to lower sensor mass not only by 
reducing volume, but also by reducing density. So lighter 
and stronger materials are needed. Optical instruments also 
require scanning and pointing devices with reliable moving 
parts. B e i ~ g  reliability has been a life limiting factor for a 
number of operational instruments. While improvements in 
bearing lubrication mitigate this concem, development of 
frictionleiss bearings is progressing [27]. 
5 .  MISSION ILLUSTRATIONS 
Two mis:sions listed in Table 2 are particularly interesting 
from a te:chnology trend viewpoint: ge’ostationary FTS and 
WIS. Both place a premium on low mass, power, and 
volume, vihile at the same time requiring 40x finer angular 
spatial resolution than a polar orbiting sounder as well as 
comparable radiometric and spectral performance. 
Moreover, they require large numbers of pixels to be 
processed simultaneously, placing high demands on signal 
readout, processing, and downlink bandwidth. 
The most pressing concerns these missions pose are 
requirements for large FPA active cooling, LWIR sensitivity 
to 16 microns, low signal-independent noise, fme 
radiometric sampling requiring low-noise, 14 bit or higher 
A/D conversion at very high speed, t:xcellent mechanical 
pointing control and stability, as well as either frequent 
calibratiaa or excellent l/f noise perfimnance beyond the 
current capabilities of LWIR detection except at very low 
temperature. 
While both an FTS and WIS requirements in Table 2 pose 
these challenges, the FTS application requires the fastest 
signal sampling due to the larger numbjer of spectral bands. 
Additiondilly, the FTS has the unique clhallenge of requiring 
conversion of interferometric data to spectra. While the raw 
data can be compressed to lower bit-rate by performing the 
Fourier transform‘ (and other required numerical filtering) 
on-board and editing the spectral data prior to transmission, 
on-board processing and storage drives high performance 
digital el1:ctronics requirements. 
Table 3. Active Cooler Types, Key characttxistics, and Maturity 
4-1 678 
Figure 9. An improvement of about 15% in A/D converter performance since 1990 portends little further 
improvement to 20 10. (Courtesy R.H. Walden, Raytheon HlU Laboratories, Malibu CA). 
The Geo WIS concept relaxes these requirements. Because 
the number of spectral bands is limited to the number of 
lines in each MWIR and LWIR array, radiometry is also 
improved by the coarser spectral resolution compared to the 
FTS requirements. As shown in Appendix II, the Geo WIS 
obtains about a 20-fold LWIR SNR advantage. 
For applications not demanding fine spectral resolution, a 
WIS design approach offers the benefit of lower cost and 
risk implementation in a geostationary orbit. The 400 fold 
signal advantage can be traded off against warmer focal- 
plane operation (lowering cooling power and risk; allowing 
passive radiative cooling, for example) or used to provide 
finer spatial resolution by decreasing the optical f/#, for 
example, to provide more clear air soundings. Additionally, 
the reduction in the number of spectral bands relative to the 
FTS lessens the on-board data rate, improving the 
availability of A/D converters by lowering the sample-rate at 
a given quantization level, and reducing on-board digital 
signal processing and compression requirements. 
6. SUMMARY 
Passive electro-optical sounders are similar in design to 
imagers except that they emphasize radiometry at the edges 
of the atmospheric “Windows.” Therefore, it is possible to 
construct “imaging sounders” that combine the attributes of 
both missions in one sensor, improving coincident surface 
and cloud top parameter imaging and atmospheric sounding 
radiometry via same-sensor calibration. This approach also 
reduces the number of sensors required for imaging and 
sounding missions, as these missions have traditionally been 
handled using an imager/sounder pair such as the POES 
AVHRR/HIRS and the GOES ImagedSounder instrument 
pairs currently providing imaging and sounding data for 
NWP operations. 
Technical challenges for advanced imaging sounders 
required for significant progress are primarily driven by 
improved spectral and spatial resolution in geostationary 
orbit. This application primarily stresses detector LWIR 
cutoff and noise, low-temperature cryo-cooling, A D  
conversion and on-board digital processing. 
Two geostationary orbit imaging sounder design approaches 
offer improved spatial and temporal sampling. One is based 
on an imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS), and 
offers excellent spectral resolution using advanced 
technology to be demonstrated by an NMP mission. The 
other is based on the linear “Wedge” filter, and offers 
spectral resolution better than the current POES and GOES 
sounders using current technology. 
4-1679 
The Geostationary Imaging Fourier Transform Spectrometer 
(GETS) planned for NASA’s NMP EO-3 demonstration 
offers file spectral and spatial resolution, as well as 
temporal sampling to dramatically improve cloud-cleared 
sounding performance. Once demonstrated by NMP, GIFTS 
may pave the way for revolutionary tropospheric sounding 
fiom geostationary operational platforms. 
The Geostationary Wedge Imaging Spectrometer (Geo WIS) 
operates at a spectral resolution somewhat better than the 
current GOES sounder, but with hundreds of spectral bands. 
It also can offer better spatial resolution than the FTS with 
improved radiomehy at lower risk. 
7. APPENDIX 1 - ACRONYMS 
ABS -,Advanced Baseline Sounder 
A/D - Analog-to-Digital 
AIRS - Atmospheric Ma-Red Sounder 
AVHRR - Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer 
CrIS - Cross-track M a r e d  Sounder 
DRAM - Dynamic Random Access Memory 
D* - Normalized Detector Sensitivity 
EO - Electro-optical 
EO-3 - Earth Orbiter 3 
EOS - Earth Observing System 
EUMETSAT - European Meteorological Satellite 
FOV - Field of View 
FPA - Focal Plane Array 
FTS - Fourier Transform Spectrometer 
GEO (or Geo) - Geostationary Earth Orbit 
GIFTS - Geostationary Imaging Fourier Transform 
Spectrometer 
GOES - Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite 
HgCdTe - Mercury Cadmium Telluride 
HIRS - High-resolution InfraRed Sounder 
IASI - Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer 
IRIS - InfiaRed Interferometer Spectrometer 
IFOV - Instantaneous Field ofview 
IR - WaRed 
LEO (or Leo) - Low Earth Orbit (polar in this paper) 
LWIR - Long Wave InfraRed 
METOP - Meteorological Observational Platform 
MODIS -- Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
MTF - Modulation Transfer Function 
MWIR - Mid-Wave InfraRed 
NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
NEdT - Noise Equivalent differential Temperature 
NMP - New Millenium Program 
NPOESS - National Polar-orbiting Operational 
Environmental Satellite System 
N W P  - Numerical Weather Prediction 
PC - Photo-Conductive 
POES - Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite 
PV - Photo-Voltaic 
RJ - detector zero-bias Resistance Area product 
RIO - Raytheon Wared  Operations 
SBRS - Santa Barbara Remote Sensing 
SIRS - Satellite InfraRed Spectrometer 
SNR - Signal-to-Noise Ratio 
SWIR - Short-Wave MaRed  
TDI - Time Delay and Integration 
WIS - Wedge Imaging Spectrometer 
WMO - World Meteorological Organization 
8. APPENDIX II - FTS vS. WIS SNR 
A physical “filter” spectrometer (filter wheel, line filter, 
WIS or a dispersive or diffractive design) produces a 
spectral signal in photo-electrons per sample given to a close 
approximation by: 
Ne(~)filter ’- (L, 6v & R, 7, T~ q/hcv) electrons/sample (1) 
Where: 
L” 
6V == spectral resolution (cm-’) 
& I= detector area (cm2) 
Q, I= optical solid angle (-n/[f/#]’ sr) 
TO == optical transmittance (< 1) 
Ti == integration time (seconds/sarnple) 
rl := quantum efficiency (photo-el.ectrons/photon) 
h ?= Planck’s constant (6.38 x joule-sec) 
C 
== spectral radiance Cjoule/[sec cm’ sr cm-’1) 
:= speed of light (3 x lo8 &sec) 
V := band center wavenumber (cni’) 
As pointed out by Puschell and Tompkins [28], if z, is the 
time required to collect one frame of data from a WIS with 
B spectral bands, then the WIS (or a filler wheel or line filter 
design) will require Br, seconds to collect spectral data over 
the sensor spatial coverage. Therefore, to compare signal 
from a WIS to signal fiom a dispersive or Wac t ive  system, 
zl is replaced by Bzl in (1) for the latter devices. 
For an FTS system, T, would also be replaced by Bzl in (1) 
because EUI imaging FTS collects spatial data simultaneously 
with the interferogram. The FTS detector signal is, however, 
also sub-ject to a unique transmittance reduction, 0.5qs, 
where q!; = 4RT, and R and T are the reflectance and 
transmittimce, respectively, of the FTS beamsplitter. Ideally, 
R = T = 0.5, and the average signal at the detector is 50% of 
what would reach the detector if the beamsplitter were 
absent. So the FTS spectral output (post Fourier-transform) 
is given by: 
Ne(v)F~s .- O.5(Lv 8vms & Ro T~ qs BT! qlhcv) e/sample (2) 
Filter (fillter wheel, linear filter, or WIS) and dispersive or 
diffiactioa grating systems illuminate the detector within the 
6v narrow waveband. The photon-noise limited SNR for 
such a sensor is the square-root of (1). On the other hand, 
the FTS illuminates the detector across the entire waveband 
A v F T ~  = (v2 - vl) over which the FTS operates. So while the 
FTS signal is given by (2) because the Fourier transform 
computes the signal within the narrow waveband Fv, the 
interferogram noise is spread over the entire waveband. So 
the FTS photon-noise is the square-root of a similar 
expression, but with Fv replaced by AvFTs. The photon-noise 
limited FTS signal variance is therefore given approximately 
by: 
where LV,~ is the spectral radiance at v,,~ = [vl + ~ $ 2 .  
To compare the FTS, and WIS photon-noise limited 
performance, consider the ratio of their SNRs. 
Assuming qs = 1, the FTS SNR is given by: 
SNRws is the square-root of ( l ) ,  with FV replaced by Fvm. 
Assuming AvmS = Avm = AV, the SNR ratio is 
approximately (within a factor of two) (1)/(4) for (1) 
evaluated at v = v,,g: 
If Gvws = ~VFTS,  then Av/GvFTS = B, the WIS offers a modest 
SNR advantage, consistent with the FTS vs. WIS 
comparison of Puschell and Tompkins [28] and with Beer’s 
dif€raction grating vs. FTS comparison [29]. In the detector 
noise limited signal range, the FTS gains the advantage [29]. 
In this case, if the WIS spectral resolution matched the FTS, 
the FTS would have higher SNR. E the WIS, however, has 
coarser spectral resolution than an FTS with the same 
optical and focal plane parameters, then the WIS has a 
substantial SNR advantage in either case. Photon-noise 
limited performance is more commonly the case now and 
even more so in the future as cryo-cooling and FPAs 
improve. 
Wedge filters have been proven at 1% spectral resolution in 
MWIR and LWIR [ll], i.e, 10 cm-’ at 1000 cm-’ (10 
microns). For an LWIR range of 685-1130 cm-’, 
corresponding to the GIFTS LWlR spectral range, and with 
an FTS spectral resolution of 0.3 cm-’, the FTS would 
produce AV/FVFTS = 1483 spectral bands. 
For a WIS configured along ‘the lines of the one discussed 
by Puschell, et a1 [ll], with B = 210 and 1% spectral 
resolution, Fvm would range from 6.85 to 11.3 cm-’ over 
the spectral range, so that average FvW - 9 cm-’. 
Substituting these numbers in ( 5 )  yields an SNR ratio of [2 
(910.3) 1483/210]’/2 - 20 for photon-noise limited operation 
(degrading to -10 for detector-noise limited operation). 
With the same optics and focal-plane design, the WIS 27x 
coarser spectral resolution, compared to the FTS, is 
compensated by a nearly 400 fold signal advantage. 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to thank Greg Olson and Robert 
Walden of HRL Labs, Mike Jack, Ichiro Kasai, and John 
Vampola of RIO, Karl Blasius, Mitch Gamble, Todd Hurt, 
and Jeff Puschell of Raytheon SBRS for technical 
information and advice, and Lisa Tait of Raytheon Media 
Solutions for preparing the manuscript for publication. 
10. REFERENCES 
[l] Kaplan, L.D., “Inference of atmospheric structure fiom 
remote radiation measurement,” Journal of the Optical 
Society ofAmerica, 49,. 1004-1007, 1959. 
[2] Smith, W.L., H. Woolf and W. Jacob, “A regression 
method for obtaining real-time temperature and geopotential 
height profiles fiom satellite spectrometer measurements and 
its application to Nimbus 3 SIRS observations, ” Monthly 
Weather Review, 98, 582-603, 1970. 
[3] Hanel, RA. and Conrath, B., “Interferometer experiment 
on Nimbus 3: preliminary results,” Science, 165, 1258-1260, 
1969. 
[4] Kidder,. S.O. and Vonder Haar, T. H, Satellite 
Meteorology: An Introduction, Academic Press, 1995. 
[5] Predina, J. and R. Glumb, “Cross-track IR Sounder 
(CrIS),” Proceedings International TO VS Study 
Conference-XI, Budapest Hungary, Sept. 2 1-28 2000 
[6] Javelle, P. and F. Cayla, “US1 Instrument Overview,” 
Proceedings SPIE 2209, pp. 14-23, 1994. 
[7] Saunders, R., “A global comparison of AVHRR and 
HlRS 1D radiances to cloud-clear HlRS IFOVs,” 
International TOVS Study Conference-XI, Budapest 
Hungary, Sept. 21-28 2000 
[SI Bloom, H. and A. Hung, “NPOESS Preparatory Project 
(NPP): An opportunity for data fusion technology 
demonstration,” International TO VS Study Conference-XI, 
Budapest Hungary, Sept. 21-28 2000 
[9] Zhao and Wang, “Land surface temperature retrieval 
from satellite IR window channel measurements over non- 
uniform land surface, ’’ International TOVS Study 
Conference-XI, Budapest Hungary, Sept. 21-28 2000 
[lo] Le Marshall, J.L., Seecamp, Kuleshov: Kelly and 
Harris, “Regional sounding,” International TOVS Study 
Conference-XI, Budapest Hungav, Sept. 21-28 2000 
4-1681 
[l l]Puscliell, J.J., H-L Huang, and H.M. Woolf, “GWIS: 
Geostationary Wedge-filter Imager-Sounder,” SPIE 
Proceedings 3756, pp. 223-232, July 1999, Denver CO 
[12] Zhang and Dong, “Considerations on sounding 
instruments for future Chinese satellites, ” International 
TOVS Study Conference-XI, Budapest Hungary, Sept. 2 1-28 
2000 
[13] Uspensky, “Sounding instruments for future Russian 
meteorological satellites, ” International TO VS Study 
Conference-XI, Budapest Hungary, Sept. 21-28 2000 
[14] Pagano, T., Aumann, H., and Strowe, L., “Prelaunch 
Performance Characteristics of the Atmospheric Infrared 
Sounder,” Proceedings SPIE,Vol 4 169-4 1, September 28, 
2000. 
[15] Bicknell, W.E., J.P. Kerekes, and D.P. Ryan-Howard, 
“GOES advanced sounder design study,” Proceedings SPIE, 
Vol. 2812, 1996, pp. 409-425. 
[ 161 World Meteorological Organization, “The World 
Weather Watch Programme 1988-1997,” WMO No. 691, 
1987. 
[17] McNally, A., “Recent developments in the use of 
satellite data at ECMWF and preparations for Advanced 
Sounders,” International TO VS Study Conference-=, 
Budapest Hungary, Sept. 21-28 2000 
[18] Crowe, D.G., P.R.Norton, T. Limperis, and J. Mudar, 
“Detectors,” chapter 4, The Injared and Electro-optical 
Systems Handbook, vol. 3, William Rogatto, ed. 1996, SPIE 
Optical Engineering Press 
[19] Pagmo, T., M. Ballard, A.L. DeForrest, RM.  Hudyma, 
R.L. Julian, and A.L. Tessmer, “Development of the 
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) 
Protoflight Model,” Proceedings SPIE, July 1996 
[20] Cook, L.G., “Advances in reflective optics,” EOS 
Systems Journal, Hughes Aircraft Company Electro-Optical 
Systems, 1993, vol. 1, pp. 7-12. 
[21] Jeter, J. W., R Hartshorne, G.D. Gender, P. W. 
Lommen, M. Schienle and J. G. Thunen, “Hyperspectral 
data collections with the new wedge imaging 
spectrometers,” 2nd International Airbome Remote Sensing 
Conference and Exposition, San Francisco, CA, 1996. 
[22] Norton, Paul R, “Infrared Detectors in the next 
millenium,” Proceedings SPIE, Vol. 3698, p. 652-665, July 
1999 
[23] Vampola, J., “Readout Electronics for Infrared 
Sensors,” chapter 5 ,  The Infared and Electro-Optical 
Systems Handbook, vol. 3, William Rogatto, ed., 1996, 
SPIE Optical Engineering Press. 
[24] Glaister, D., M. Donabedian, D. Curran, and T.M. 
Davis, “Overview of Performance and Maturity of Long-life 
Cryocoolers for Space Applications,” Cryocoolers 10, 
R.G.Ross,, ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 1999, 
pp. 1-20. 
[25] Davis, T.M., J. Reilly, and First Lt. B.J. Tomlinson, 
USAF, “Air Force Research Laboratory Cryocooler 
Technology Development,” Cryocoolers 10, R.G.Ross, ed., 
Kluwer AcademidPlenum Publishers, 1999, pp. 21-32. 
[26] Walden, R.H., “Analog-to-digital (converter survey and 
analysis,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Commun,ications, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539-550, April 1999 
[27] Samuel, A. and B. Lechable, “An overview of 
Aerospatiale magnetic bearing products for spacecraft 
attitude control and for industry,” Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Symposium on Mignetic Suspension 
Technology, NASA publication 3336, Part 1, July 1996, pp. 
217-226. 
[28] Puschell, J.J. and P. Tompkins, “Imaging 
Spectrometers for future earth cibserving systems,” 
Proceedi.ngs SPIE, vol. 3 117, pp. 36-48;, 1997. 
[29] Beer, R, Remote Sensing by Fourier Transform 
Spectrometry, John- Wiley h Sons, 199;!, pp 66. 
4 - 1  6 R 3  
Dr. Carl F. Schueler is Director 
of Advanced Concepts for 
Raytheon Santa Barbara Remote 
Sensing, Goleta CA. He has 
worked in satellite remote 
sensing since 1981, when he 
joined Hughes Santa Barbara 
Research1 Center, now Raytheon 
Santa Barbara Remote Sensing. 
He leadr advanced technology 
initiatives in Earth sensing as 
well as planetary exploration. In 
the mid-I980’s, he spent two 
years at Stennis Space Center to start the Institute .for 
Technology Development Center for Commercial 
Development of Space, focusing on remote sensing. He 
current& serves on the National Research Council (NRC) 
Committee on Earth Studies (CES), the Advisory Committee 
for the UC Santa Barbara (UCSB) Institute for 
Computational Earth System Science, and on the Advisory 
committee to the ERIM Marine and Coastal Remote Sensing 
Conference series. He has taught nuiiverous graduate and 
undergraduate engineering courses at UCSB since he 
obtained MS and PhD degrees in Electrical and Computer 
Engineering there in the late 1970’s under a Howard 
Hughes .Doctoral Fellowship. He ha: published about 40 
technicai‘papers and is a senior member of the 1EEE. 
