A Report of Activities at the WIC-Spain Research Centre
Pilar Herrero, Marı´a S. Pe´rez, Ernestina Menasalvas, Javier Segovia
Universidad Polite´cnica de Madrid, Spain
1 What is the WIC-Spain Research Centre?
The WIC(Web Intelligence Consortium)-Spain Research
Centre is an interdisciplinary research initiative which
brings together people with the aim of covering all the as-
pects related to the discovery of hidden knowledge in big
volumes of data as long as exploring the practical impacts
of advanced Information Technology (IT) and Artificial In-
telligence (AI) on this volume of information
The group consist of seven researchers and five Ph.D.
students led by Dr. Javier Segovia and coordinated by
Dr. Ernestina Menasalvas. We are funded from a variety
of sources including the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Technology as well as national and international industry.
2 Who are the members of the WIC-Spain
Research Centre?
The group is led by Dr. Javier Segovia and coordinated
by Dr. Ernestina Menasalvas.
The other current members of the research group are:
• Researchers:
– Dr. Santiago Eibe
– Dr. Pilar Herrero
– Dr. ´Oscar Marba´n
– Dr. Jose´ M. Pen˜a
– Dr. Marı´a S. Pe´rez
– Dr. Vı´ctor Robles
– Dr. Marta del Socorro
• Phd Students:
–
´Oscar Cubo
– Pedro Gonza´lez
– Vanessa Herves
– Esther Hochsztain
– Alberto Sa´nchez
• Secretary:
– Coro Pe´rez
3 What is the origin of the WIC-Spain Re-
search Centre?
Our research group has been set up in 2002 in the Facul-
tad de Informa´tica at the Universidad Polite´cnica de Madrid
(Spain), mixing Dr. Javier’s background (in areas such as
Artificial Intelligence, System Modeling, Virtual Environ-
ments and Data Mining) with the background of the rest
of the people involved in the group (Data Mining, Data
Bases, Data Warehousing, Heuristic Optimization, Intelli-
gent Agents and Multi-Agents Systems and Grid Comput-
ing).
4 What are the WIC-Spain’s research lines?
Currently, we are focused on the development and appli-
cation of Data Mining to the following research lines:
4.1 Social Simulation
There is growing interest in using computer simulation to
explore issues in most parts of the social sciences, includ-
ing sociology, political science, economics, anthropology,
geography, archaeology and linguistics. It can also be the
inspiration for new, process-oriented theories of society.
Based mainly on Official Data Bases - such as Popula-
tion and Housing Censuses or Family Expenditure Surveys
(IPC) - this research line uses techniques of Artificial Life
(AL) to develop models of nonhuman life-forms, Cellular
Automatas (CA) to model on a grid with local interactions
between cells, Distributed Artificial Intelligence to intro-
duce intelligent interactions, Genetic Algorithms to learn
through evolution and selection, Microsimulation to model,
year by year, taxes, benefits and changing individual at-
tributes, Neural Networks to learn and System Dynamics
to introduce models of equations of macro-level differential
and difference.
We have already received national and international
funding for working on this research line, having developed
some applications for micromarketing that makes possible,
for example, to analyse the life cycle model of a customer,
demonstrating his tendency of purchasing.
1
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI’04) 
0-7695-2100-2/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
Currently, as a result of this research work, ICC+
( c©2003) have been obtained in collaboration with private
funding (Boole@).
Nowadays, we are working on an extension of the
method/technologies to European Level, studying the gen-
eral evolution of the society (geographical & behavioral).
4.2 Data Quality
The fundamental goal of this research line is to improve
the quality of customers data, by using appropriated pro-
cessing techniques - such as Cleaning, Normalization or
DeDuplication - or by trying new methods -such as Neu-
ral Networks or Genetic Programming.
At present, we have been working on projects, related to
this research area, with national and international funding.
4.3 Process for KD&DM
The WIC(Web Intelligence Consortium)-Spain Research
Centre has established a research line to explore some of the
problems found in the application of CRISP-DM, broach-
ing problems such as the lack of techniques for business
modelling, the deployment of data models (mining models),
software engineering for these applications, project estima-
tion or project organisation, and looking for the inspiration
source in important research areas such as software engi-
neering, knowledge engineering, DM process & method-
ologies and CRM methodologies [1]. The group is currently
applying its results in a project funded by a Malaysian com-
pany.
4.4 BioMining
Two projects are currently under development. One of
them has as main goal the Protein Secondary Structure Pre-
diction (PSSP). Different approaches and techniques can be
used depending on the data structure: a new method based
on Bayesian networks and multi-classifier [4]. We have al-
ready obtained excellent results with the multi-classifier ap-
proach. The second project is being performed in coopera-
tion with a local Hospital in Madrid.
4.5 WebMining
The main objective of this research line is to calculate
typologies of navigators according to factors such as navi-
gation, behavior, business goals and visited pages, estimat-
ing the value of ongoing sessions and integrating the web
mining with some business goals.
We are working in the research line in cooperation with
the University of ORT (Urugay) and the University del Valle
of Cali (Colombia).
4.6 Modelling Systems for Engineering
Starting for an international collaboration established in
1992 with the University of Tennessee College of Engineer-
ing, Knoxville , Tennessee, the Oak Ridge National Labo-
ratory and the WIC-Spain research group work together on
neural networks and genetic programming techniques.
4.7 Data Grid
Due to the necessity of increasing the computational res-
olution of complex applications, grid computing is becom-
ing a new emergent research area. The Grid Computing
challenge is the complete integration of heterogeneous com-
puting systems and data resources with the aim of providing
a global computing space with an efficient access to data
[3]. We are working in this area in cooperation with the
University of Nottingham (in UK) and the Decision System
Group (Harvard/MIT).
5 The WIC-Spain’s Activities
The WIC-Spain Research Centre is continuously or-
ganizing scientific activities. In this way, we have al-
ready been involved in the organization of AWIC’03
[2] and AWIC’04, and, currently, we are working in
the organization of the First International Workshop on
Grid Computing and its Application to Data Analy-
sis (http://laurel.datsi.fi.upm.es/GADA04/) to be held in
Cyprus and the International Symposium on Intelligent
Data Analysis (IDA’05), which will be held in Spain in
2005.
References
[1] C. Ferna´ndez, E. Menasalvas, A. Wasilewska, and J.M.
Pen˜a. The lattice structure of KDD process: Mathemat-
ical expresion of the KDD process. Journal of Interna-
tional Computer Science, 2001.
[2] E. Menasalvas, J. Segovia, and P.S. Szczepaniak. Web
intelligence, first international atlantic web intelligence
conference, AWIC 2003. Proceedings Springer, 2003.
[3] M.S. Pe´rez, J. Carretero, F. Garcı´a, J.M. Pen˜a, and
V. Robles. MAPFS-Grid: A flexible architecture
for data-intensive grid applications. Grid Computing,
pages 111–118, 2004.
[4] V. Robles, P. Larran˜aga, J.M. Pen˜a, E. Menasalvas, and
M.S. Pe´rez. Interval estimation naı¨ve bayes. Intelligent
Data Analysis 2003, pages 143–154, 2003.
2
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI’04) 
0-7695-2100-2/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
