Method of Using Th 
2004 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 
n Metallic Foils to Minimize Thermal 
Transients and Photoelectric effects in Pressure 
Measurements - I 
Joel P. Booth Robert W. Milton Mark W. Kirkham 
US. Army Aviation and Missile Command; Research, Development, & Engineering Center 
AMSRl-AMR-SG-RF 
Redstone Arsenal, AL. 35898-5000 
(256) 976-2424 
Joel.booth@rdec.redstone.army.mil 
Abstract- This paper will discuss the development of a 
method to reduce &e transient effects on piezoelectric 
pressure transducers used in the measurement of blast 
overpressure produced by non-conventional explosives. 
This method was developed during testing of high-energy 
and non-conventional explosives at the Aviation and 
Missile Research, Development and Engineering Center 
(AMRDEC) on the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, 
Alabama. There are two major contributors that 
negatively affect the quality of data gathered in the 
measurement of blast overpressures using piezoelectric 
pressure transducers. These undesirable effects are 
thermal and photoelectric transients generated in the 
explosive blast. These transients were found to obscure 
the data generated by causing a non-positive amplitude 
shift in the pressure-time curves when trying to measure 
the performance of non-conventional explosives. This 
paper will explore the phenomenon in detail, utilizing 
graphical data derived from laboratoly experiments to 
explain the problem and to illustrate how the use of this 
method may improve blast measurements 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
11. QUANTUM MECHANICS 
111. FINDINGS AND PROPOSED SOLUTION 
1V. CONCLUSION 
REFERENCES 
11. Introduction and Background 
While testing Thermobaric formulations, a problem has 
been encountered with using current pressure transducers. 
Most current pressure transducers were developed for 
the testing of conventional high-energy explosives. 
’ US.  Govemmcnt work not protcetcd by US.  copyright. 
Paper number 1240 ver 2 
2580 
Conventional high-energy explosives create a very large 
peak pressure spike with very little thermal output over a 
short time duration. The typical high-energy explosive 
reaction has a duration on the order of,a few milliseconds. 
The environment of a Thermobaric reaction (TBX) is 
very different from the environment of a traditional high 
energy explosive such as TNT. Figure I shows a typical 
Thermobaric Explosion. The environment of a TBX is 
characterized by a multistage event that produces a lower 
peak pressure, longer duration impulse, and a higher 
thermal output. The TBX can have durations on the order 
of tens of milliseconds with some formulations extending 
up to a few seconds. The TBX is also associated with a 
combustion sustained shock front that acts differently than 
normal explosive events. Thermobaric explosives are 
generally oxygen deficient. For a proper reaction, 
additional oxygen from the air is required. This means 
that only part of the energy is released during the initial 
detonation phase. In this phase there is a mixing of high 
levels of fuel rich particles in the surrounding atmosphere. 
This leads to an afterburning effect that is similar a fuel- 
air explosion [ 11. The thermal transients and photoelectric 
effects produced by these reactions are the leading causes 
for the problems encountered in measurements of the 
reaction. The following picture depicts the typical TBX 
and its measurement environment. 
Figure 1. Typical Thermobaric Explosion 
operate properly over 350'F [4]. 
Most high response rate transducers that are in use for 
explosive measurements are piezoelectric or 
piezoresistive. Piezoelectric transducers use quartz 
crystals. An applied force excites the crystal producing a 
voltage relative to the amount and rate of the application. 
The crystals are contained in a metallic housing - usually 
steel. The thermal expansion coefficient of steel is 11x10 
'PC. The thermal expansion coefficient of quartz is 
.7xIO~'/"C [2]. This creates a situation where the housing 
is displaced 15 times more than the crystal causing either 
compression or strain or both depending on the 
construction of the transducer. This external force has an 
adverse effect on the measurements obtained from the 
transducer. Several of these transducers also use P-N 
junctions to isolate some of the electrical components 
from the silicon SubstructWe. P-N junctions are 
semiconducton that have opposite doping types to form 
an insulator under certain conditions. These P-N 
junctions can he affected hy photoelectric radiation. The 
radiation causes the creation of hole-electron pairs, which 
will affect the function of the transducer [3]. 
Piezoresistive transducers have their own problems as 
well. They are not as robust as the piezoelectric, and the 
manufacturing processes involved with obtaining the 
necessary response rate are very difficult. In addition, 
piezoresistive sensors use P-N junctions to isolate the 
Wheatstone bridge from the rest of the transducer. These 
junctions are very susceptible to photoelectric radiation. 
Another consideration is that the P-N junctions will not 
111. Quantum Mechanics 
The physics behind the photoelectric effect are as follows. 
Quantum mechanics tells us that electrons in any material 
can he knocked out or displaced from the material by 
light. This photoelectric effect is present in many 
commonplace devices like televisions and night vision 
viewers. To clarify, the light must he of the proper 
wavelength or frequency to impart enough energy to the 
electron so it is capable of overcoming the work function 
of the material. The work function is a physical property 
of materials and states the minimum energy needed for the 
electrons to he displaced. There also exists a cut-off 
fkequency for each material that is the point at which no 
matter how intense the light, no electrons will he 
displaced. The following is the work function equation, 
where h is plank's constant, f is the frequency, Kmar is the 
maximum kinetic energy imparted to the electron, and Q is 
the work h c t i o n  of the material [ 5 ] .  
hf = Krn, +4 
Table 1 lists for certain different materials the work 
function value in electron volts (ev), the cutoff frequency 
of the material and where that cutoff fkequency is located 
in the spectrum. Note that most commonplace metallics 
will block the visible spectrum and do not begin to release 
electrons until hit with ultraviolet emissions [6]. 
2581 
Table 1. Work Functions uf Certain Materials 
Element 
Silver 
Aluminum 
Gold 
Cobalt 
Iron 
Germanium 
Iridium 
Nickel 
Lead 
Platinum 
Selenium 
Symbol 
As 
AL 
Au 
CO 
Fe 
Ge 
lr 
Ni 
Pb 
Pt 
Se 
Work function 
4.74 
4.41 
5.47 
5 
4.81 
5 
5.76 
5.35 
5.6 
5.7 
5.9 
(ev) 
cutoff 
frequency 
1.14€+15 
1.07E+15 
1.32E+15 
1.21E+15 
1 .I 6E+15 
1.21€+15 
1.39E+15 
1.29E+15 
1.35E+15 
1.38E+15 
1.43€+15 
Visible Ultraviolet 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
3. The metal film serves as a physical particulate barrier 
by preventing soot and other particulates from 
condensing on the sensor surface. 
IV. Findings and Proposed solution 
Following a series of in-depth testing, it was found that 
certain processes could improve the  performance of the 
transducer in this environment. It is recommended that 
the transducer be slightly recessed in the measurement 
adapter, and that a very thin layer of composite metal foil 
be applied to the surface of the adapter. This orients the 
transducer in such a way that it creates a cavity between 
the input stage of the transducer and the foil. The 
chamber is then filled with an incompressible fluid or 
other transfer medium. The thin composite foil mwt be 
composed of an outer layer of high-density reflective 
metal (gold) deposited upon a base layer of metal, which 
has a high coefficient of thermal conductivity (aluminum). 
The outer layer of high density metal serves as an initial 
protection from the explosive’s emissions by reflection. 
The inner layer of the foil, a thermally conductive 
material, the emission effects to the surface of the adapter. 
4. The metal film is extremely thin, and does not lead to 
5. The thermally conductive foil protects the sensor by 
dissipating and conducting any heat that passes 
through the first layer. The energy is dissipated to the 
surface of the adapter, and is not conducted to the 
face of the transducer. 
signal attenuation. 
Figures 2 and 3 show the response of a piezoelectric 
transducer to a broadband light source. The first trace 
(blue line) is without the thin film composite metallic 
shielding and the second (pink line) is with the shielding. 
The shield reduced the transient effect by up to ten times 
as compared with the unshielded transducer. As shown 
below, the unshielded transducer gives - 27 volts at the 
peak of the down swing equating to -550 psi absolute . -  
iSee figure below). This reading is out of r&ge for this 
gauge since it is only calibrated to - 400 psi. This is 
currently believed to be a combined effect of the thermal 
transients and photoelectric effect. 
It is believed that the composite foil accomplishes the 
following: 
1. The high density, reflective metal foil protects the 
sensor surface from radiant energy by acting as a 
mirror and reflects the emissions of the Thermobaric 
reaction. 
The high density, reflective metal foil protects the 
sensor surface from the direct energy of the explosive 
fireball by acting as a heat shield. 
2. 
2582 
Transducer Response to Broadband Light Source 
10 
5 
0 
-5 
E 
L -10 
8 
m - 
-15 
-20 
-25 
-30 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
Time (ms) 
Figure 2.  Transducer Response in Voltage 
Transducer response to Broadband Light Source 
200 
100 
0 
2 -100 
:: 2 -200 
- 
3 - 
.- 
-300 
-400 
-500 
-600 
-700 
e a 
a 
- unshielded 
--shielded 
0 2 4 6 8 
Time (mS) 
Figure 3. Transducer Response in Psi(Abs0lute) 
2583 
Figure 4 is a cross-sectional view of the proposed 
configuration and orientation of the transducer, foil and 
adapter. This diagram shows the two different layers and 
their positioning as well as the incompressible fluid 
placed under the foil to aide in the conveyance of the 
pressure wave to the diaphragm of the transducer. There 
is also a section view to aide in understanding. This 
sketch is based on our application and could easily be 
adapted to any type transducer or configuration. 
hcompressoble Fluid 
Gold Foil 
,- Aluminum Foil 
Fipre  4 Cross-sectional view ofProposedSolution 
2584 
V. Conclusion 
It is the current belief that the use of composite metallic foils 
could greatly improve the measurements of blast 
overpressure in a Thermobaric environment. This would be 
more of an aide - not necessarily a final solution. These 
results can out of an ongoing research project at the 
AMRDEC. At the present time. AMRDEC is directing 
several efforts to design and manufacture a transducer that 
will survive the reaction and collect data that is unaffected 
by the transients produced. There is a Small Business 
Innovative Research (SBIR) topic that is nearing award for 
the design and manufacture of transducer that will mean the 
requirements of the TBX. More than likely, the first cut at 
solving this problem will be using transducers that are 
piezoelectric or piezoresistive. However we are also 
currently investigating fiber optic options as well. 
References 
[I] Wildegger-Gaissmaier, Anna E. Dr., “ Aspects of 
tbermobaric weaponry” Adf health Vol4 April 2003 
www.defence.gov.auldpe1d hs/infocentrelpublicatio 
nsljournalsl 
NolDsIadfhealth-aprO3/ADFHealth-4-1-03- 
O6.pdf. 
[2] PCB Pieztronics tech support, “Thermal Shock”. 
www.ncb.com (accessed 17,September 2003) 
[3] Alexander A. Ned and Anthony D. Kurtz, ‘‘ High 
Temperature, Silicon on Insulator Silicon Pressure 
Sensors with Improved Performance Through Diffusion 
Enhanced Fusion Bonding.” Instrumentation In the 
Aerospace Industry : Proceedings of the 1988 44Ih 
International Instrumentation Symposium. ISSN 0227- 
7576 CODEN IZSIB7 
[4] Pierret, Robert F.,” Semiconductor Device 
Fundamentals”, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
1996. 
[ 5 ]  Halliday, David and Resnick, Robert and Walker, 
Jearl. “Fundamentals of Physics.” John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc. 1997. pg. 986-990. 
[6] Weast, Robert C. ed. “CRC Handbook of 
Chemistry and Physics”, CRC Press, INC. 1989 
Biography 
engineer with the Applied Sensors, Guidance and 
Electronics Directorate of the US. Army Aviation and 
Missile Command; Redstone Arsenal. He graduated with a 
B.S. in Electrical engineering from the University of 
Alabama in Huntsville. 
obert Milton. Attended 
Louisiana College and University Of Alabama In Huntsville 
with honors in mechanical engineering. Worked in 
Propulsion for 20 years. Received 28 civilian government 
awards for excellence including the achievement medal for 
civilian service. Nominated for federal engineer of the year 
for 1992. 
Areas of past experience: rocket exhaust plume signature 
characterization, Insensitive Munitions testing, explosives, 
bullet, and fragment impact testing and analysis, turbojet, 
turboprop, and ducted rocket testing. 
ark Kirkham is Physicist for 
the US Army Research, Development, and Engineering 
Command, Propulsion and Structures Directorate, 
Propulsion Technology Function. He holds a B.S. in 
Physicshstrumentation fiom Athens State University in 
Athens, Al. Mark has 20 years of experience in the areas 
of Research, Development, Design and Testing of 
solid rocket propulsion systems. 
2585 
