Opportunities for Grid Computing in Bio- and Health-Informatics 
Professor Albert Zomaya 
University of Sydney, Australia 
Over the past few years the popularity of the Internet has been growing by leaps and 
bounds. However, there comes a time in the life of a technology, as it matures, where 
questions about its future need to be answered. The Internet is no exception to this case. 
Often called the "next big thing" in global Internet technology, Grid computing is viewed 
as one of the top candidates that can shape the future of the Internet. Grid Computing 
takes collective advantage of the vast improvements in microprocessor speeds, optical 
communications, raw storage capacity, World Wide Web and the Internet that have 
occurred over the last five years. Grid technology leverages existing resources and delays 
the need to purchase new infrastructure. With demand for computer power in industries 
like the life sciences and health informatics almost unlimited, Grid's ability to deliver 
greater power at less cost gives the technology tremendous potential. Ultimately the Grid 
must be evaluated in terms of the applications, business value, and scientific results that it 
delivers, not its architecture. Biology provides some of the most important, as well as 
most complex, scientific challenges of our times. These problems include understanding 
the human genome, discovering the structure and functions of the proteins that the genes 
encode, and using this information efficiently for drug design. Most of these problems are 
extremely intensive from a computational perspective. One of the principal design goals 
for the Grid framework is the effective logical separation of the complexities of 
programming a massively parallel machine from the complexities of bioinformatics 
computations through the definition of appropriate interfaces. Encapsulation of the 
semantics of the bioinformatics computations methodologies means that the application 
can track the evolution of the machine architecture and explorations of various parallel 
decomposition schemes can take place with minimal intervention from the domain 
experts or the end users. For example, understanding the physical basis of protein 
function is a central objective of molecular biology. Proteins function through internal 
motion and interaction with their environment. An understanding of protein motion at the 
atomic level has been pursued since the earliest simulations of their dynamics. When 
simulations can connect to experimental results, the microscopic examinations of the 
different processes (via simulation) acquire more credibility and the simulation results 
can then help interpret the experimental data. Improvements in computational power and 
simulation methods facilitated by the Grid framework could to lead to important progress 
in studies of protein structure, thermodynamics, and kinetics. 
This talk overviews the state of play and show how the Grid can change the competitive 
landscape and, thus, become a potential "disruptive" technology. 
0-7 803 -8 5 77 -2/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 91 
