55 
Sound Detection in Noisy Environment - 
Locating Drilling Sound by using an Artificial 
Ear 
K. Bergsfrand’, K. Carlsson’, P. Wide’, B. Lindgren’ ’ Cenfer for Applied Autonomous Sensor System 
Dept. of Technology, University of Orebro, Sweden 
’Atlas Copco Rock Drills Equipment AB, Orebro, Sweden 
bergstrand.karin@telia.com, peter.wide@tech.oru.se 
AbsImct- In rock drilling, as in many industries today, the 
drive towards unmanned equipment and full rummatian is 8 big 
issue. A challenge io the automation process for rock drilling is 
the retraclian of the drill steels when the drilling is completed. 
Today the drilling can be perlormed automntically to some 
extend, but B human ear is required for the final part: when the 
splices between the drill steels are opened up enough to allow 
retraction. 
This paper discusses a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) method 
to search through aodio datn in order to detect and loeate speci6c 
sounds appearing wben retraction of the drill steels is possible, 
and to investigate if achieving full automation of the drilling 
process is passible. The use of Waveleb has also been evaluated. 
As far as the authors know, there is no system today for 
automatic retraction of the drill steels. 
By recording and analysing souads from rock drill rigs, a 
Comparison between a system implemented with an electronic ear 
and B buman ear bas been evaluated. The FFT has been applied 
as a preprocessing method and examines features of power 
spectrum for the detection of the sound, when the splices are 
opened up. This sound contains higher power spectrum than 
sounds from the rest of the drilling procedure. Using these 
features, a classification program has been designed. The 
experimental results shows that there is B good possibility to 
make a commercislized product that automntically detect when 
the drill steels are ready to be retracted. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The use of the human sense hearing as a part of examination 
and diagnosing is used in many fields. The piano teacher 
listens to the students chords to evaluate the correctness of 
them, the same way the car engineer listens to the sounds of 
the car engine to analyse possible damaged parts. A doctor 
listens to a patients heartbeat to detect abnormalities. In the 
aim of letting technology perform human tasks, we have to let 
a system imitate the human conception of “normal behavior” 
and teach the system to react when there is an unexpected 
deviation, the same way the senses informs humans. By using 
different analysing methods this imitation is implemented in 
many applications. James Walker [I] describes a method to 
detect abnormal heart rhythm by using Wavelets Transforms 
(WT). Kotani el al [2] describes the use of frequency and 
amplitude to extract a gas leakage sound from a noisy 
environment. Another system based on Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN) and sound recordings for aircraft 
identification is evaluated by Claesson, unpublished, [3]. 
Also in the mining indusky the use of the human perception 
is essential, and some research has been done in this area. FU 
et al. [4] have developed a matching pursuit approach to 
predict small drill bit breakage in the drilling process. By 
applying ANN, Abu-Mahfouz [5]  uses vibration features for 
detecting drilling wear. The approach described in this paper, 
however, is focused on automatic sound measurements, not 
vibration measurements. 
In the aim of producing drill rigs with a high level of 
automation, Atlas Copco Rock Drill Equipment AB is 
developing a rig control system, RCS, for a new generation of 
more automated drill rigs. Using the control system to its full 
extend, hy gathering information from sensors located on the 
rig, it can perform a complete drilling without the interference 
of a machine operator. The part still missing for full 
automation, is the retraction of the drill steels when the 
drilling is completed, see Fig. 1. Today, a machine operator 
must determine if the splices between the drill steels are 
opened up enough to be retracted. This is achieved by 
listening for a specific sound appearing when the splices open 
up. If a system could be able to detect this specific sound, it 
would be one step closer to an unmanned rig. 
0-7803-8296-W04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 
56 
Choose drilling 
Drill to 
predetermined 
depth 
Stop percussion feeding pressure 
Fig. 1. First the location of the drill hole is decided (a), lhcn tbc drilling is 
pclfamcd until pre~ot dcplh is  reached, by joining drill steels togcUler (b). 
The percussion runs for a short while without pressure until the machine 
operator h m  the specific sound, canying the informing fhat the splices we 
opened up (c). The percussion is terminated (d) and thc drill steels can be 
mracted (e). 
n. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Thc rig control system, designed by Atlas Copco, is 
implemented on their tophammer surface drill rig ROC D7 C. 
The drill rigs used for measurements are ROC F9 (next drill 
rig to be implemented with RCS) and ROC D7 C. The drill 
rigs will he referred to as F9 and D7 C. 
The RCS is based on CAN-bus technology and consists of 
WO units, calculation units and operator units. The operator 
sets the parameters, such as depth and leaning of the hole, and 
activates the automatic rod handling. The control system then 
drills the hole to the preset depth by joining the drill steels 
together, and constantly gathering information from the 
sensors located on the rig fur controlling the progress of the 
drilling. In Fig. 2 the principle of tophammer drilling is 
presented, and Fig. 3 show how a drill rig is designed. 
The percussive drilling bnaks the rock by hammering 
impacts transferred from the rock drill to the drill bit (Fig. 2)  
at the hole bottom. A hydraulic or pneumatic rock drill 
generates the energy required to break the rock. When the 
energy is released, the built up pressure drives the piston 
(impacl piston) forwards. The piston strikes on the shank 
adapter, which converts the kinetic energy of the piston into a 
s w s s  wave. This wave is transferred to the bonum hole 
through the drill steel (drill rod). When the shock wave 
reaches the drill bit, it is forced against the rock, thereby 
crushing it. 
1 I 
Pig. 2 Principle oftaphammer drilling. 
Fig. 3. Tophammer &ill rig, drill sfccIs joined together by rod handling. 
The splices between the drill steels are bard drawn together 
during the drilling. When the drill bole is completed, the 
machine operator has to “open up” the splices in order to 
separate the drill steels and retract them. This is achieved by 
letting the percussion run for a short while without pressure, to 
“shake” the splices open. The p m  of the drilling sequence 
when the percussion runs without pressure in order to open up 
the splices, will be referred to as shaking. When the splices 
have been opened up, normally after 0.5 - 2 seconds, there is a 
characteristic sound appearing from the drill steels. The 
machine operator describes this sound to be more intense than 
the rest of the drilling sound. When this distinct sound 
appears, the machine operator stops the shaking and retracts 
the drill steels one at a time from the completed drill bole. 
The part missing in the RCS, for achieving a completely 
automatically drilling, is the retraction of the drill steels. 
RCS knows today what the current state is in the drilling 
process: 
Drilling 
Shaking 
Machinery 
What must be complemented for achieving full automation 
is to let the system know when the splices are opened up and 
57 
the drill steels are ready to be retracted. For this purpose, a 
fourth state is introduced 
Drill Steels Aparf 
D7C or F9 Microphone Computer 
Fig. 4 shows the different states in a drilling process as a 
time - amplitude plot. 
3 r  I I I I , , , , , , 
Shaking 
:Y 
311 1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 s 
Fig. 4. Plot of B drilling sequence. Notice that Dell Stt& Apart is a part of 
Shaking. 
The sound change characteristically when the splices open 
up, and if the human ear is capable to recognize the sound, it 
should also be possible for an artificial system to detect it. The 
main goal of the project in the future is to further develop the 
full automation of the drill rig. The control system can then 
perform a complete drilling process, including the rehaction of 
the drill steels. The first part of the project was to investigate 
the possibility of a system that is able to detect the distinct 
sound that appears whcn the splices open up and the drill 
steels go apart. 
111. EXPERIMENTALS 
Sound and vibration are possible features for trigging the 
control system to retract the drill steels from the completed 
drill hole. Sound signals have been chosen in these 
cxperimentals, due to the consideration that the vibrations are 
too substantial on the rigs in interest. 
The sound recordings from the drill rig contain the four 
basic states of a drilling sequence: Drilling, Shaking, 
Machinery and Drill Steels Apart. Fig. 4. presents all four 
states in a time-amplitude plot. The amplitude easily separates 
the states Drilling, Shaking and Machmety, hut since the 
splices are opened up wiihin the Shaking state, i t  is therefore a 
condition that the states have to be separated. 
During the measurements, the microphone was placed 
outside the cabin at a distance of 3 meters respectively 4.5 
meters from the drill steels, see Fig. 5.  The distances where 
chosen based on a suitable future distance in a drill rig and to 
make the recordings rescmble real environmental 
circumstances. 
Fig. 5. MeaSuremmt sclup. Microphone placed st a distance of 3 or 4.5 meters 
from bc drill steels and caoncckd to B computer. 
One limitation in the measurements was the large amount of 
data the sound recordings produce. To be able to analyse the 
whole frequency spectrum that can be heard by a human ear, 
i.e. 20 Hz - 20 kHz, the sample frequency was set to 48 a, 
with a resolution of 16 bits. Each measurement is a 20-second 
sequence, which means that one single measurement produces 
960000 values, i.e. a file at about 1.8MB. 
W. SIGNAL PROCESSING 
To he able to separate the different drilling states from each 
other, analyses of the frequency content were performed. Both 
the use of fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and Wavelet 
Transforms (WT) has been evaluated. 
The basic idea of using FFT is to investigate preseocc of 
typical changes in the frequency content behveen the states 
Shaking and Drill Steels Apart (Fig. 4). By using a handpass 
filter to focus on a few frequency spectrums, the amount of 
data is reduced. The optimal result of applying the WT, is to 
detect a waveform that is typical for the exact time when the 
splices open up and create a new wavelet. This new wavelet 
can then be used to compare incoming data with. The example 
shown in Walker [ I ]  i s  based on the idea that a wavelet is 
created afier a specific abnormality in an ElectroCardioGram, 
ECG, and the new wavelet is then compared in real time with 
a patients ECG to detect the presence of these specific 
abnormality. 
A. FFT 
The FFT ( I )  decomposes a signal (or a function) into 
sinusoids of various frequencies, which when added together 
again recreates the original signal (or function). What this 
transform does, in short words, is that it separates the different 
frequencies along with their respective amplitude. This makes 
it possible to detect and analyse the frequency content of any 
signal or function. 
One method for the detection of the sound when the splices 
are opened up, is to apply the FFT as a pre-processing method 
and then examine features of power spectrum. In Fig. 6. and 
Fig. 7 Power Spectral Density, PSD, plots can be seen. The 
58 
Drillinq 
I 
Shaking 
Dell Steels Apart 
A.% . I 
Machinery c 1 
0 5 10 15 20 25 k H i  
Fig. 7. All four sfafes represented in the frequency domain, in a 
PSD plot. The signal is from the drill rig D7 C. 
In Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 the drilling is divided into four subplots, 
each representing on of the four states: Drilling, Shaking, Drill 
Steels Apart and Machinery. Each subplot is a FFT analysis on 
respective state, visualized as PSD plots. The energy content is 
continuously increasing from the state Drilling to state Drill 
Steels Apart, to be very low in the state Machinery. The states 
Shaking and Drill Steels Apart, consists of higher frequencies 
(> 7 Mz) and the energy content is higher than in the states 
Drilling and Machinery. Comparing the states Shaking and 
Drill Steels Apart, the state Drill Steels Apart has the highest 
energy content. In Fig. 8. and Fig. 9. the difference in 
frequency between Shaking and Drill Steels Apart is 
visualized. Drill Steels Apart (black) contains more energy 
than Shaking (grey). Fig. 8 - 9 are both FFT plots with one 
FFT analysis on a file containing only Shaking data (grey) and 
another file containing only Drill Steels Apart data (black) 
HZ 
Fig. 8. Differencss behueen Shaking (grey) and MI1 Steels Apart (black) on 
the F9. 
Fig. 9. Differences behueen SbaLiog (grey) and Drill Steels Apart (black) 00 
thc D7 C. 
For classifying the state Drill Steels Apart, two frequency 
intervals for the two different drill rigs have been tested. The 
first interval used to test the idea of classification with FFT for 
the first rig type, F9, was [7,5 - 8,s kHz] (Fig. 8). The interval 
[9 - 10 !&I21 was used at the second rig type, D7 C, (Fig. 9). 
The intervals was chosen based on where the state Drill Steels 
Apart shows distinguished differences in the frequency 
content, compared to the state Shaking. By using these 
intervals, it is possible to separate the state Drill Steels Apart 
from Shaking, by using algorithm (2). 
The energy content of the intervals shown in Fig. 8 - 9 has 
been used for classification: 
59 
(2) 
where E, = total mc%y, E. =energy at respective frequency, 
6 = lower hqumcy limit, f, = higher frequency limit 
Using this energy function Er with data From the F9, the 
lower frequency limit is set to 7.5 kHz, and the upper 
frequency limit to 8.5 kHz. In a similar way, the lower limit 
for the D7 C is 9 kHz and the upper limit is IO kHz. 
When classifying a measured signal containing all four 
states, a windowing method was used. The window function 
splits the signal into short segments, of 1024 samples (0.02 
seconds), performs a FFT analysis on each segment and 
classifies the segment as one of the four states. This depends 
on which preset threshold value the segment folds into. The 
position where the state Drill Steels Apart is separated from 
the state Shaking is hereby found. 
The systems performance can be evaluated by comparing 
result From the FFT classification and a decision based on a 
human ear. The tests show that FFT analyses recognize the 
sound when the splices are opened up at the same time, or in 
some cases a little while before, than the human ear does. In 
the test shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8, the Drill Steels Apart state 
is located 0.17 seconds earlier with the artificial system, 
compared with an experienced operator’s human ear. 
B. Wavelet Trmqforms 
In many applications the FFT is not enough efficient to 
perform adequate analyses because, of the time information 
loss. In this cases, the WT (3) can he very useful, mainly 
because it is not only based on sine waves like the FFT, but it 
is also able to use almost any waveform in analysing signals. 
The advantage of this analysing technique is that it has the 
possibility to detect all kinds of changes in a signal and also 
the possibility to present the signal in a time-frequency plot 
[61. 
(3) 
Wavelet analysis has, as a complement to FFT analysis, 
been used in order to detect the exact time when the splices 
open up. When this event occurs, the sound from the Shaking 
changes and becomes more “varied and intense”. The signal 
changes at this time and this can he considered as a significant 
change, that a wavelet analyse can be able to detect. 
In MatLabs toolbox “Wavelet” [6], there are a large 
number of wavelets. In this project the Dauhechies wavelets 
have been tested. By using these wavelets, rapid changes of 
the signal are expected to he detected. In order to detect 
discontinuitics, dbl to dbl0 has been tested. 
In Fig. IO, thc original signal can be seen. In this original 
signal there is no information visible regarding any abrupt 
behavior in the signal. In order to extract the relevant features 
for Drill Steels Apart, a special technique has been applied 
while using thc wavelet transform. The Drilling, Shaking and 
Machinery states have been considered as the main trend (or 
behavior) of the whole signal in order to classify the opening 
of the splices as an abnormal behavior to he detected. Then the 
first level approximation obtained by daub10 wavelet was 
subtracted from the original signal ( s )  in the aim of gening a 
resulting signal from which the opening of the splices could be 
seen. Fig. 11 shows the resulting signal, in a time plot, where 
the square indicates a different behavior of the signal, at the 
time around 8 seconds. The position of this change of behavior 
matches the human ear recognition very well, i.e. the human 
operator also detect the change of the sound characteristic in 
the same interval. 
~ * w I , P I  ‘L t- ,.ma-, 
0 2 4 I I I O  $2 $4 ,I 
. I d  
I(’
Fig. IO. Original time- amplitude plot of signal fmm h e  drill rig F9. 
I U 
v. CONCLUSION 
The best result for identifying and classifying a drilling 
sound comes from the FFT analyses, however, both tested 
analysing methods exhibit the same performance as the 
experienced operator. The analyses in this paper show that 
there are measurable frequency differences between all four 
states in a drilling process, and it has been shown that it is 
60 
possible to separate the state Drill Steels Apart from the state 
Shaking. It has also been shown that the fiequency rangc for a 
human ear (20 Hz ~ 20 kHz) can be applied to an electronic 
ear system. It has, furthermore, been shown that the frequency 
spec- can he filtered to reduce the amount of incoming 
data, and the remaining data can still be classified by 
identifying the energy content. This indicates that a future 
sound recognition system will have small needs from the 
processor power on the drill rig. 
Human ear classification has been compared with 
classification of a sound detection system, in order to verify 
the performance of the classification algorithms tested in this 
approach. The electronic ear is able to detect the specific 
drilling sound characteristic at the same time, or even before, 
the human ear. This implies the advantages of further testing 
on the systems performance on surface drilling rigs. 
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge Atlas Copco Rock Drill AB and 
Department of Technology, drebro University, at AASS for 
the financial support during the period of this research. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[I] Walker, James S.; A Primer an Wavelets and their Scientific 
Applications, University of Wisconsin, Chapman & HalliCRC 1999 
[2] Kotani, M., Anmoto, T., Ozawa, S., Akmwa, 4; Application of 
Independent Component Analysis to Detection of Gas Leakage Sound. 
IEEE 0-7803-7044-910 p.2287-2291, Kobe University, l a p .  (2001) 
Claesson, M; Detection and Classification of  Aim& sound, Chalmm 
Univcnity of  Techoology, 2001 
Fq LC, Troy C.A. Phillips, P.J; A Matching Pursuit Appmch lo Small 
Drill Bit Breakage Prediction, International Journal of Production 
Rcxareh, 1999, Vol. 37,No. 14.3247-3261 
Ahu-Mahfouz, I s m ;  Drilling Wear Detection and Classiflcatioo using 
Vibration Sig~als and ktiflcial Neural Nchvork, lntemational Journal af 
Machine Tools & Manufachlrc 43 (2003) 707 - 720 
[3] 
[4] 
[5 ]  
161 MatLah H e b  Version 6.5 
