TRANSPORTING ETHERNET SERVICES 
IN METROPOLITAN AREA NETWORKS 
(MANS) ,
Gianmarco Panza Cecilia Nenov, Glauco Bigini 
Fabio Valente 
CEFRIEL Network Systems Unit - Via Fucini 2, 20133 Milan (MI), Italy 
ALCATEL - Via Trento 30,20059 Vimercate (MI), Italy 
Abstract - In many big cities in the industrialized world, large 
dedicated data transport networks (the MANs, Metropolitan 
Area Networks) have been deployed in the last few years to 
provide cheap broadband Internet access to citizens, as well as 
fault protection (the Spanning Tree Protocol) and even basic 
QoS control and MAC layer authentication (IEEE 802.1~). 
1.1 n e  spanning Tree prO"J (STP) 
broadband interconnections between different branches of a 
business company. The current MANS are based, in  the 
backbone side, on legacy TDM (Time Division Multiplexing) 
techniques, like SONET (Synchronous Optical Network) and 
SDH (Synchronous Digital Hierarchy). The enormous diffusion 
of the Ethernet technology (wired 8023 or wireless 802.11) in the 
LAN environments and the availability of Ethernet interfaces 
with a very low cost has almost forced telecom operators to 
consider it as the only possible MAN access technology to sell 
Internet access services to the large public and business. The 
MPLS protocol has been chosen by the Metro Ethernet Forum 
( M E 0  111 to adapt Ethernet traffc to the SONETBDH 
networks. This article aims to characterize the behaviour of the 
different solutions for transporting Ethernet services in the 
MANs, with or without MPLS support, in  terms of efficiency, 
delay, trafiic Engineering capability, fault tolerance, scalability, 
cost and complexity. 
1. THE ETHERNET PROTOCOL 
The Ethernet standard (IEEE 802.3) [6] is a physical layer and 
MAC layer transport protocol designed in the 70's for 
supporting cheap Local Area Network (LAN) applications. 
The physical layer defines the type of media and modulation 
schemes and allows transmission speeds from I O  to 1000 
MbiVs. The MAC layer defines a packet switched 
transmission mode, based on the so called frames, with a 
concurrent access to medium and collision control based on 
the CSMAiCD schema. 
The number of concurrent stations and the maximum distance 
between two stations depends on the transmission speed. For 
the IOhaseT standard ( I O  Mbit's full duplex over copper 
twisted pair), at most 1024 stations are allowed over a single 
medium with a maximum distance of 4 km between two 
stations. 
The Ethemet frame has a maximum total length of 1526 bvtes 
To avoid the collision effect when many Ethernet station access 
the same medium, every Ethernet based LAN makes use of 
Ethemet switches. An Ethernet switch is an active MAC layer 
device, which has an Ethernet interface for every connected 
station and automatically builds a MAC forwarding table, to 
forward to every interface only the frames that are directed to 
the connected MAC address. With an Ethernet switch the 
maximum distance between switch and station is only limited 
by the electric or optical attenuation, since on a station-switch 
link the medium is not shared by any other station. The Ethernet 
switches can he connected together to build an all-Ethernet 
based LAN. To avoid loops in complex Ethernet architectures 
and to give some kind of fault protection, the Spanning tree 
protocol has been introduced to transform the physical 
architecture into logical tree architecture. The STP [IO] operates 
when the network is first set up by flooding the network of 
control packets to elect the root node of the tree and, starting 
from it, to disable links that can lead to loops and build a 
complete tree of the network. A tree reconfiguration message is 
sent by the root node when a failure is detected by one of the 
switches and reported to it. The tree configuration can last more 
than 60 seconds to complete in complex networks and during 
the reconfiguration all the stations are not allowed to transmit. 
The more recent evolutions of the STP are the Rapid and 
Multiple STP (IEEE 8 0 2 . 1 ~  [IO] and IEEE 802.1s [IO] 
respectively). The first one is an optimized version of the STP 
dedicated to switched Ethernet network (without hubs), 
introducing new type of fault detection and protection to speed 
up the root election mechanism. The 802.1s allows the 
simultaneous creation of multiple spanning trees, potentially 
one for every VLAN, or even backup spanning trees, which can 
substitute the current spanning tree in case of fault without 
needing to rebuild a new one. 
I 
(octets) including a 22 byte header, a 1500 bytes payload field 
and a 4 bytes error check code (the FCS). Every station is 
The 802,1q 
identified by a 6 bytes MAC address, the MAC layer discards A lack of the early Ethernet MAC layer was the ability to define 
all the frames that are not addressed to the station MAC virtual LANs. In fact every station connected to an Ethernet 
address. network is able to contact every other using the broadcast MAC 
The Ethernet protocol in its original specification lacks in address. The entire frame directed to the broadcast MAC are 
v i m 1  circuit and in Quality of Service (QoS) support and delivered to all the connected stations. To be able to split the 
thus is not natively suited for medium to large scale networks broadcast domains and to group Ethernet stations, the 802.1Q 
and legacy PSTW services. Subsequent evolutions and [IO] standard (subsequently included in the 802.1D 
enhancements to the base protocols have extended its specification) introduced a small 16 hit tag in the Ethernet 
capabilities including Virtual LAN support (IEEE 802.lQ), header that identifies a group of stations in the Ethernet 
network. The tag is compiled by the Ethemet switches and 
0-7803-8783-X/04/$20.00 0 2004 IEEE 53  
configured by the operator depending on the physical port, the 
MAC address or even the IP address of the station. Even 
stations connected to different switched may have the same 
802.14 tag, thus building a Virtual LAN (VLAN). The 
broadcast frames are delivered only to the stations belonging 
to the same VLAN of ,the frame originator, and the stations 
outside the VLAN are not visible at MAC layer, just like if 
they were physically separated. The 802.1Q can be used in 
complex and large networks to identify virtual channels. 
2. THE SONETISDH P n o T o c o L  
The SONETiSDH protocol has been developed by the ANSI 
(SONET) [7] and the ITU-T (SDH) [B] for transporting data 
over high bit rate optical fibre based backbone networks. It 
supports TDMA synchronous transmission of high speed data 
flows and offers an advanced fault protection mechanism and 
a reliable add/drop function, to add and extract low hit rate 
traffic from a high hit rate aggregate. The SONET and the 
SDH protocols define a hierarchy of “levels”. Each level 
includes a maximum transmission speed, a frame format and a 
medium. The levels for SONET are called STS-n if 
transmitting over copper medium and OC-n if transmitting 
over optic fibre, the SDH levels are called STM-n for both 
optical and electric domain, and the SDH STM-I equals the 
SONET STS-3 or OC-3. For each level a payload rate, a line 
rate and an overhead rate is defined: the line rate is the 
theoretical maximum speed of the line, the payload rate is the 
effective transmission speed of the data and the overhead rate 
is the transmission speed of every control and O&M 
information transfer. SONETiSDH defines a 125 
microseconds frame with a matrix internal structure. The 
frames contain a highly flexible addressing schema that 
defines a set of identifiers to address many different traffic 
flows into the frame. This allows multiplexing many different 
virtual circuits into a single aggregate to allow 
addingldropping flows when needed. The circuit identifier 
length grows when the basic flow is smaller, because a higher 
aggregation must be done to adapt them to flow into a higher 
bit rate aggregate. The SONETiSDH protocol is optimized for 
transporting circuit switched data. A set of adaptation layers 
are available to transport the most common packet switched 
traffics like IF’/PPP, ATM and MPLS. A protocol has been 
defined to allow transporting generic packet switched traffic 
over SONETiSDH, the GFP - Generic Framing Procedure [9], 
but is currently not widely used due to its complexity. 
3. THE MPLS PROTOCOL 
The main disadvantage of the 1P and Ethernet networks is that 
to forward packets to the correct destination every traversing 
node (switch or router) has to check the destination address 
inside the packet, look up a forwarding table and forward the 
packet on the correct interface. This mechanism is not 
optimized in Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) 
environment, where large virtual LANs are deployed and thus 
many flows coming from different IP addresses may belong to 
a single VLAN flow. The MPLS protocol [ I l l  is a Layer 2.5 
(between layer 2 and 3) protocol, introduced by IETF to 
overcome the limitation of IP in routing packets and speed up 
the forwarding process. MPLS introduces a small header 
between the L2 and the L3 headers, including a label that 
identifies the packet flow, instead of the sender station. The 
MPLS header has been defined for all the mostly used layer 2 
protocols, meaning PPP, Ethernet, ATM and Frame Relay. All 
the MPLS-enabled backbone devices in the network can thus 
discriminate a flow by only looking into the MPLS header; in 
addition to this, non-IP networks may take advantage of the 
MPLS capability of building up virtual channels starting from 
the IP tables of the router’s located at the border. MPLS allows 
the creation of virtual circuits with a similar flavour of ATM 
and Frame Relay, but over an IP network, using the IP tables of 
the backbone for building up the circuits. Like these 
technologies, MPLS includes traffic engineering capabilities 
and fault protection techniques. It allows creating virtual 
circuits through the use of the LSP (Label Switched Path), and 
allows stacking and chaining labels, to get flow aggregation like 
in the SONETiSDH networks and allows point to point 
transmission, as well as, point to multipoint (multicast). 
4. TRANSPORTING ETHERNET TRAFFIC I N  A MAN 
ENVIRONMENT - HE EOMPLS PROTOCOL 
Starting from the ubiquity of the Ethernet protocol, that is, 
simply speaking, the only LAN transport protocol in use today 
(there are still some token ring and ATM based LANs, hut have 
a very small weight in the whole LAN market), an important 
need in building MAN applications is to have an efficient and 
reliable transport of the Ethernet frames. What users want today 
is to connect their PCs Ethernet port or their switches to a 
“backbone Ethemet plug” and have their frames delivered at 
destination. 
We must note that Ethernet has still some lacks especially 
regarding traffic engineering and QoS control that still do not 
allow it to he deployed as a stand alone MAN transport 
Because of the growing importance of the Ethemet networks in 
enterprise environments, the IETF introduced a mechanism for 
transporting Layer 2 Ethernet frames into MPLS packets, called 
Ethernet over MF’LS (EoMPLS) [2][3]. The aim is to reduce the 
overhead of sending out IP traffic over the backbone, and 
instead send directly the Ethernet frames. This eliminates the 
need to install a backbone IP gateway for example in the branch 
offices of an enterprise company and instead use the cheaper 
Ethernet switches to connect to a backhone access point which 
is capable of EoMPLS. The EoMPLS solution is based on a 
work by IETF called the “Martini Draft” from the name of one 
of its developers and is currently gaining importance in MAN 
applications. 
Basically, when an Ethernet frame arrives to the input interface 
of the EoMPLS-based gateway, the gateway adds an EoMPLS 
tunnel label and a VC label (the second one depends on the 
802.14 VLAN tag of the incoming frame) and sends the frame 
protocol. 
54 
over the MPLS network. The tunnel label is used to build a 
tunnel LSP (T-LSP) used to route the traffic from the ingress 
gateway towards the egress gateway. The VC label is used 
only inside the ingress and egress gateways to identify the 
correct VLAN. Many VC labels can he used inside a single T- 
LSP, depending on the number of VLANs that must be 
transported. 
To foster the use of Ethemet in MAN environment, the Metro 
Ethemet Forum (an open consortium of Ethemet device 
manufacturers), adopted the MPLS protocol as a de facto 
complementary standard to the Ethemet protocol for 
deploying Ethemet based MANS. 
The new Ethemet based MANs must face with the existence 
of large already deployed SONETiSDH or ATM based 
MANs, and with the fact that these technologies offer a much 
higher QoS control, fault protection and error control, and that 
very unlikely telecom operators will switch from a robust 
backbone to a nearly experimental alBthemet based network. 
The basic idea is to deploy EoMPLS based MAN access 
points, that are reached by standard Ethemet equipment 
installed in the user's home or office, and then transport the 
Ethemet traffic towards destination using either the robust and 
reliable SONET/SDH networks or a novel infrastructure based 
on the last evolutions of Ethernet (e.g. 802.32 and 802.3ae). 
5. THE SIMULATION SCENARIO 
The issue of transporting the Ethemet services in MANS 
concerns the evaluation of important factors, such as the 
relatively large overhead introduced by the encapsulation of 
different transport protocols and the end-to-end delay which is 
influenced by this overhead. In order to quantitatively 
characterize the different transport solutions in terms of 
overhead and end-to-end delay we made a complete set of 
simulation using the OPNET network simulation tool. We 
considered three different situations: a native Ethemet MAN 
and the deployment of EoMPLS over Ethemet or 
SONET/SDH. We identified a MAN scenario with 3 
intermediate switching points, using the three different 
transport solutions, plain Ethemet, EoMPLSEthernet, and 
EoMPLS/SDH. 
The audio source model is a classic ON-OFF model that is 
valid for every source coderidecoder since it models the 
human voice instead of codec behaviour. The model 
characterizes the voice in terms of two variables, Kon and 
Koff, which express the activity and inactivity periods of the 
source. We used two codecs to (de) compress data coming 
from the source: a G.729 using 20ms packetization, which 
means 2 G.729 frames per packet, which coincide with a 20 
bytes payload and 40 bytes header (IP+UDP+RTP), and a 
G.711 using the same packetization time that leads to a 160 
bytes packet. 
The video source model uses a real H.263 video trace read 
from a file, with 256 kbit/s coding. The maximum frame rate 
is 25 fps with inter-frame delay of 40 ms. We did choose two 
different packetizations, one at 576 bytes and the other at 
1400 bytes payload per packet. A complete frame is 
packetized and sent when completely available in the sender 
buffer. The fixed overhead introduced by IPNDPIRTP, as in 
the ca 
Table 1 -Simulation scenarios 
We ran 5 different simulations, including the various sources 
explained before. The 5 scenarios are listed in the table above, 
and show the different ingress traffic types. In the AV scenario 
all the audio and video traffics are sent together inside the 
network. Every network node is traversed by a background 
traffic built of video and audio packets. 
6. THE OVERHEAD PROBLEM 
The three transport solutions have different overhead given by 
the packet and frame encapsulation. 
Figure I  the Ethemet hame format 
The overhead introduced by Ethemet is 30 bytes per frame 
(including the 4 bytes VLAN tag), with variable payload length. 
Using the Plain Ethernet transport solution the complete 
overhead consists of the fixed 30 bytes overhead plus the time 
between a just sent frame and the following that can he taken 
into account as another 12 bytes, that leads to a 42 bytes 
complete overhead. 
a nls. 
Figure 2 .The EoMPLSiEthemet packet format 
In the second solution (EoMPLSEthemet) we must consider 
that when encapsulating Ethernet frames in MPLS packets, we 
should not count the preamble and the FCS, that are included in 
the transport network frame. This thus leads to an overhead of 
18 bytes for the inner Ethernet frame with VLAN tag, an 8 
bytes EoMPLS header and a final complete 26 bytes Ethemet 
header (without VLAN tag). The complete header is 64 bytes 
per IP packet sent. 
- - 
Figure 3 . Thc EoMPLSlSDH packet format 
In the third case, keeping the inner Ethemet L2 header and the 
MPLS header, we have to add the PPP header (in this case 
EoMPLS is adapted to SDH using the PPP protocol 
0-7803-8783-X/04/$20.M) 0 2004 E E E  55 
encapsulation), which is 10 bytes and the SDH header that has 
not fixed length, but is approximately 1/27 of the transported 
uavload length. The total overhead in this case varies from a 
from the values specified in the data sheets of many products 
from different vendors and has been assigned as in the 
following table . .  - - 
minimum of approximately 40 bytes to a maximum of 93 
bytes, calculated as 18+8+1/27*(header + the minimum 20 Byte 160Byte 516Byte 1400Byte 
uavload of 46 bvtes and the maximum 1500 bytes). Router 7 ps 9 PS 14ps 24ps . _  ~. 
In the charts helow we can see the percentage of overhead L2 8 ps 11 ps 1 7 p  19ps 
compared with the Ethernet frame and with the Payload data 
(the IP packet) with different packet sizes. As we can see, the 
EoMPLSiSDH solution has significantly smaller overhead 
than the EoMPLSEthemet solution when dealing with 
smaller packets, similar to the Plain Ethernet solution. The 
overhead difference shrinks when the packet size grows, due 
to the percentage-based overhead in SDH, getting down to 
almost zero with 1000 bytes packets. 
Table 2 -Switching delayj 
The transmission delay depends on the link capacity and on the 
packet length and ahs been modelled in the simulations. 
In the first graph we see the results of the A2 Scenario (see 
before), with 160 bytes audio packets. We can note that in this 
the best performance is obtained using the 
EoMPLSEthemet, shortly followed by the SDH case. The 
delay is a little higher in the all-Ethemet case. This is due to the 
._l"lll ........_._.......... ~ .... ~. 
Figure 4 -Overhead VI payload length 
I 
~ ' ~ . . . ~ . .  . ..... ~ ~ .......... ~ 
*- -%. a.- ?.e- 
Figure 5 -Overhead VI Elhernel frame size 
7. THE END-TO-END ELAY PROBLEM 
To have a quantitative comparison between the different 
transport solutions in terms of end-to-end delays, we 
conducted various simulations. 
Figure 6 .  The simulation network topology 
The network topology we used is very simple, but still typical 
for many Metropolitan Area Networks, with 2 ingress nodes 
and two transit nodes. 
The end to end delay has been characterized using two 
components: the processing delay in every node and the 
transmission delay. The processing delay has been derived 
higher processing delay introduced by the MAC a 
switching, that is longer than the MPLS label swapping. 
.ddress 
,m m m .m m m 
-,.I 
Figure I -End to end delay A2 scenario 
_I"  
Figure 8 - End to and delay V2 scenano 
om,, 
Figure 9 - End lo end delay AV scenario 
56 
160Bt576B I X I  
EoMPLSiEthemet 
AI I 138 I +10.9 1 i17.1 I 162 I i 15 .2  1 i 2 i X  
16OB+14OOB 
I” .... . 
AI I 154 I i10.9 I k17.1 I 171 I k15.2 I i23.8 
A2 I 278 I iR.91 
I I I I I I I I 
Table 3 - End to end delay simulation resula 
The EoMPLS/Ethernet and EoMPLSiSDH solution are 
substantially equivalent, with a small margin in favour of the 
former. The all Ethernet shows worse results due to the longei 
frame switching time. The results let us conclude that the 
introduction of MPLS over an Ethernet based MAN allows 
reaching almost the same performance as in the case of SDH. 
in terms of end-to-end delay. 
8. THE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING PROBLEM 
One of the main concerns about building an all-Ethernet MAN 
is related to the poor performance of the QoS control 
mechanisms provided bv this protocol. Ethernet relies in facl 
.~ 
a meaningful example, shown in Figure lo. We simulated an all- 
Ethernet and an MPLS network with background link load of 
50% (links are all 10 Mbitls) and sent into the network two 
flows of 2 Mbitls video traffic. Using MPLS the path cost 
could be calculated as a function ofthe link loads and the packet 
forwarding is decided basing on this cost. When sending the 
flows, in the Ethernet case, the already built tree has selected 
path A because of the smaller number of transit nodes, while 
MPLS dynamically can take into account of the network load 
and select alternative paths. 
I ,  
i l  
( 5  
I 
* * “ n 1 s 8 I I L * I I * U . )  
Figure 11 -End to end delay comparison all8themet YS MPLS 
As we can see the introduction of MPLS greatly reduces the 
end-to-end delay variation (jitter), giving a better control on the 
QoS than the simple Ethernet protocol, even in a very simple 
network topology like this. 
For what concerns the SONET/SDH based solution, native TE 
functionality of such technology can be also exploited, mainly 
in a static manner due to configuration issues. However, to 
achieve a greater flexibility, MPLS capabilities have to be 
employed. 
9. THE FAULT PROTECTION PROBLEM 
Ethernet protocol has no other way to protect the network from 
faults than using the Spanning Tree Protocol. which takes too 
only on the .STP to b;ild a network tree and to distribute long to rebuild; whole delivery tree when a fault is reported 
traftic. Traffic engineering Capabilities of MPLS allow to from a switch. Using the Rapid STP (802 .1~)  reduces the tree 
dynamically distributing traffic on the network links to building time from tens of seconds or more to 1 or 2 seconds. 
optimize resources utilization and indirectly to reduce delay The 802.1s is not a speed improvement, but only a flexibility 
and losses. The problem is that the STP calculates a single enhancement, to support the VLAN management, thus 
recovering an Ethernet network from a fault would require, in 
0-7803-8783-X/O4/$20.M) 0 2004 IEEE 51 
the best case, 1-2 seconds for Rapid STP to rebuild the 
network tree. 
Figure 11. Application of MPLS fast reroue with either recovely path and 
shortcuts, or de-tour palh (LER - Label Edge Router, SP - Switching Point, 
DP -Detection Point; I = I ,  N=3) 
The introduction of the MPLS protocol between layer 2 and 3 
eliminates the need to use any fault protection mechanism 
provided by the lower layer. MPLS has its own protection 
schemas that have been developed with the specific aim to 
reach the same fault protection level of SONET/SDH, that is, 
within 60 milliseconds, where IO ms are for the fault detection 
and 50 ms are for switching to a backup circuit. This objective 
is driven by the fact that the SDH networks have been 
developed to support telephone network lraffic, the most 
demanding in terms of reliability (today’s telephone network 
have reliability levels of more then 99.99999%). 
While the switching time on the backup circuit is determined 
by the MPLS mechanisms, the fault detection time is still 
given by the underlying layer 1 and 2 technologies. There are 
in fact 2 types of faults: link fault and node fault (the entire 
node is not responding). The detection times are different in 
the two cases. As previously said, in a SDH network the link 
fault detection time is about IO ms, while in an Ethernet 
network is about 16 ms (time frequency of dedicated signal 
for the purpose). The node failure detection time is instead 
similar in the two cases and can reach various tens of 
milliseconds. 
After the fault has been detected, an alternative path must be 
taken to bypass the fault. This is done by MPLS with various 
techniques. The most widely accepted is called Fast Reroute 
[5]. In fast reroute, the node that detects the fault simply 
resends the traffic hack to the preceding node without sending 
any signalling; the preceding node fonvards the reflected 
traffic back in the path and so on, until it reaches a switching 
node which has an altemative path configured. When this 
node detects the retumed traffic, it stops sending traffic on the 
primary path (the working path) and reroutes it on the 
recovery path. To optimize the switching time, a complete 
recovery path is configured a priori and all the designated 
switching nodes of the concerned primary path have shortcuts 
to it. If the recovery path and the shortcuts are not configured, 
the issued switching node will set them run-time using 
standard MPLS signalling. Another possibility is to consider a 
de-tour path for each failure along the working path that simply 
goes around the fault. 
Assuming that the fast reroute mechanism is used, we can 
model the total MPLS fault recovery time as follows: Trec = 
Td+Tr, where Td is the fault detection time and Tr the recovery 
time, defined as the interval between the detection of the fault 
and the switching to either the recovery path or the de-tour path. 
Td is 16 ms as stated before in the case of Ethernet and 10 ms in 
SDH. 
It can be shown [ 5 ]  that the recovery time Tr is 3LTcross+(ZN- 
1)Tp. Where, L is the number of nodes from the fault detection 
point to the switching point and N is the total number of nodes 
constituting the shortcut or the de-tour path. In the second term 
of the equation Tp is the processing time needed to process (and 
transmit) the MPLS signalling, and is about IOms; this term is 
simply about 1 ms if the shortcut or the de-tour path has already 
been configured. Tcross is the time needed to cross a node. It 
can he shown that due to buffering delays the time to switch 
from the working to the recovery path after the shortcut or the 
de-tour path establishment is 3LTcross; instead, if no packet 
reordering is provided, the nodes do not buffer traffic and hence 
such a time is LTcross. Tcross can he assumed 10 ms when the 
reflected traffic is treated with high priority (the common case. 
In a well configured MPLS network, N and 1 are no more than 
3. In the former mentioned case of fast-reroute, the recovery 
path and the shortcuts are typically already configured, thus to 
the first term of the TI expression, about just 1 ms of further 
delay should be added. 
A total count of the recovery time, in a worst case, leads us to 
Trec=16+9*10+5*10=166 ms. A typical case, where the detour 
path or the recovery path together with the related shortcuts 
have been already configured, we have Trec equals to 10-20 ms 
plus 90 or 30 ms (at worst, with 1=3) if the detection and 
recovery points do not coincide, respectively with or without 
node buffering. 
This analvsis shows that. if the network is well confirmred. the 
I ~~~~~ ~ , 
recovery mechanisms developed for MPLS networks reach the 
target of SDH-like performance. Thus an EoMPLSEthernet 
solution can he seen as nearly equivalent to an all-SDH solution 
in terms of fault protection and reliability. Finally, for an 
EoMPLSiSDH solution the results are extremely similar. 
10. THE SCALABILITY PROBLEM 
Scalability is a matter of size of the network. SDH is a protocol 
that has been designed for large scale optical networks, but is 
not well suited due to its cost to small networks, where Ethemet 
reigns without opponents. On the other side, the Ethernet 
protocol is not sufficiently scalable for being used in large 
networks such as MANS. 
Figure 13 -The 802.1Q a g  format 
58 
Starting from the virtual LANs, Ethernet supports this type of 
services through the 802.1Q standard, hut since the 802.1Q 
tag is only 4 bytes long, with only 12 bits used for actual 
VLAN identification (the VID field in Figure 13), there is an 
upper limit of 4096 different virtual LANs for every MAN. 
Another scalability problem introduced by Ethernet is the 
relatively slow spanning tree protocol which introduces a high 
computational overhead in the network nodes, and the fact 
that currently available Ethernet switches have not been 
designed to work in a complex and large scale environment, 
with a great number of MAC addresses to handle. The 
introduction of MPLS overcomes these limitations. At fust an 
MPLS label is 20 bits long, thus targeting 1 million virtual 
paths, much more than the 802.1Q standard. Furthermore, 
MPLS allows other scalability features such as label stacking 
and increases the switching speed due to the small size of the 
labels. Metro Ethernet Forum suggests the introduction of an 
additional tag to improve scalability in all-Ethernet networks. 
This solution (Ethernet Multiplexing Function) partially 
solves the scalability problem, but introduces interoperability 
issues and an increased complexity of the Ethernet hardware 
to he deployed. 
11. THE COST AND COMPLEXITY 
The SDH devices are far more complex than the Ethernet 
switches, still being more stable and reliable. The same 
situation applies to cost considerations, where SDH devices 
greatly overtake Ethernet hardware. Even the protocol stacks 
in using the EoMPLSlSDH solution are more complex 
because of the greater number of adaptation layer needed to 
transport the Ethernet traffic over the SDH infrastructure. 
There is even another issue when SDH is used in MAN 
environments, where a large number of small virtual LANs 
are deployed, which also deals with scalability concerns: the 
fragmentation of bandwidth. This problem, which has 
partially been solved in the next generation SDH networks, 
happens because SDH has not been designed for supporting 
fine grain traffic engineering, and wastes bandwidth when too 
many low bandwidth channels are allocated inside a large 
capable backbone. The solution that considers Ethernet as the 
transport infrastructure is of course simpler and cheaper, 
especially from the customer equipment side. 
Therefore, the upper adaptation layer of EoMPLS and MPLS 
of course, with a small cost overhead greatly reduces 
complexity while increasing scalability. 
12. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper mainly analyzes the performance of different 
solutions for transporting Ethernet services in MANS based on 
EoMPLS either over SONETISDH or over Ethernet, 
quantitatively characterizing , the overhead and 
encapsulatioddecapsulation delays, as well as QoS 
capabilities in general, and to identify the weaknesses of this 
technology. The EoMPLS over SONETISDH or over Ethernet 
has also been compared with a full-Ethernet MAN solution, 
which considers Ethernet as the only transport protocol inside 
the MAN. Moreover, a comparison has been made between the 
different fault protection mechanisms that can he exploited in 
the above analyzed MAN technologies. 
What we have obtained as a result is that the full Ethernet 
solution is obviously not well suited for deployment in a large 
MAN, since it doesn't offer in any way traffic engineering 
capabilities, sufficient QoS control mechanisms, scalability and 
flexibility in assigning and maintaining VF" channel that are 
mandatory in such environments. The EoMPLS either over 
Ethernet or over SONETISDH offers much better results. In 
particular, the first approach allows to dramatically reduce the 
cost and complexity of the backbone equipment (IPMF'LS 
routers with standard Ethernet interfaces) and of O&M, still 
making use of the advantages of MPLS for QoS functionalities 
and VPN support, while the last one is much more expensive, 
but shows typically a lower overhead (the SONETISDH frame 
header is smaller compared to the Ethemet header for nearly all 
packet sizes, up to about 1400 bytes), a greater fault tolerance 
and reliability and has the advantage of reusing the already 
existing SONETISDH infrastructure (natively deployed to 
transport PSTN telephone traffic). 
The large diffusion of cheap broadband MAN access is the 
starting point for the successful deployment of value added 
services. The SONETISDH and the Ethernet are mature 
technologies: a good candidate for a contact point between these 
two different worlds needed to build robust, cheap and reliable 
Metropolitan Area Network is the MPLS protocol. We may 
conclude, on the basis of the results obtained in this study, that 
the EoMPLS over Ethernet is the hest solution for new MAN 
networks; while the EoMF'LS over SONETISDH can actually 
be considered as the only option for legacy reasons and 
leveraging the investments, where a SDH MAN infrastructure 
already exists. 
13. REFERENCES 
111 Metro Ethernet Forum web page 
bttnd/www.metroethernetforum.ord 
121 Luca Martini et al - Transport ofLwer 2 Frames over W L S  - 
IETF Internet Draft 
131 Luca Martini et nI - Encapsulation Metho& f r  Tronsporr of 
Elhernet Fromes over IP/WLSNefworla - IETF Internet Draft 
141 Framework for Mulri-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)-based 
Recoveq, - IETF RFC 3469 
151 L. Hundessa, J. Domingo-Pascual - Reliable andfast rerouting 
mechanism for aprotected label swirchedpath - Proceedings 
IEEE Globecom 2002 
IEEE - IEEE 802.3 CSMAiCD (ETHERNET) -161 
htt~://www.ieeeEOZ.ord3/ 
(71 ANSI - TI.105: Soner- www.ansi.org 
181 ITU-T-G.707.G.781, G.782, G.783, G.803:SDH-www.itu.int 
191 ITU-T ~ IP overSONET/SDHlTU-T G.7041 Generic Framing 
Procedure - www.itu.int. June 2002 
1101 IEEE - IEEE 802.lseries pope - httr:l/www.ieee802.ordl/ 
0-7803-8783-X/04/$20.00 Q 2001 IEEE 59 
