Development of an e-Business Skillset Enhancement 
Tool (eSET) for B2B Integration Scenarios 
Tom Lyons 
Information Technology Department 
National University of Ireland, Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
tom. l yons@nuigalway . ie 
Abstract- In  the world of e-business or Business-to-Business 
(BZB) there are a plethora of concepts and standards that one 
must have knowledge about and understand, before beginning 
the transformation path from traditional manual paper based 
business processes, to automated or semi-automated electronic 
based ones. The variety and complexity of- each of these 
standards and concepts present a significant barrier to entry into 
e-business for many small companies. Approximately 20% of 
European companies buy and sell over the Internet with big 
companies buying and selling more. The challenge facing the 
eEurope action plan is to enable the “Small to Medium sized 
Enterprises” (SMEs) to participate in e-business without over 
extending their resources. Aspiring e-business professionals in 
these small companies do not have the time or the resources 
needed to invest in understanding all these concepts and 
standards. They need to understand the concepts and standards 
quickly before deciding to invest their time in the area or not. 
This paper will discuss the development of an e-business Skillset 
Enhancement Tool (&ET) for BZB integration scenarios through 
the development of a working model of an e-business 
environment that can assist the SMEs and advanced 3rd level 
students in introducing them to the world of B2B. This will 
enable them to experience the B2B environment. Professionals 
will see how their enterprise can use e-business and B2B. They 
will see data in the electronic environment, experience the 
transfer of data electronically over the Internet, view their 
processes modeled and simulated. They will see an e-business 
B2B environment processing their data using their business 
processes. This will enable them to make an informed decision 
before investment in this area. The existing problem is that there 
is no easily accessible environment available for either students, 
who feed into the SMEs, or professionals to experiment and 
interact with. (Abstract) 
Keyworh- EDI; XML; EAI; 828; Supply Chain; E M ;  BizTalk 
I. INTRODUCTION 
93% of e-commerce in the USA in 2001 was Business-to- 
Business (B2B) [ 13. Forrester predicts that this percentage will 
rise to over 95% by the year 2006 [2] .  Most e-commerce 
occurs in a handful of industry groups within each economic 
sector, with manufacturing leading all industry sectors with 
Business-to-Business (B2B) shipments accounting for over 
18% of the total value of manufacturing shipments [I]. The 
Dr.Owen Molloy 
Information Technology Department 
National University of Ireland, Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
owen.molloy @nuigalway.ie 
European Union (EU), through the eEurope action plan, is 
striving to become the most dynamic knowledge based 
economy in the world by 2010. The regulatory environment 
has already been reshaped for communication networks and 
services for e-business [3]. This makes it easier for the large 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) customers to reduce 
costs by using new suppliers in new regions through the use of 
communication networks [4]. Large suppliers have the 
resources or the potential to invest in the Information 
Technology (IT) skills and resources necessary to create a 
presence in these communication networks. Once present they 
can compete for business. Small to Medium sized Enterprises 
(SMEs) do not have such resources or skills. The average 
European enterprise employs no more than six people and 
small and medium sued companies provide two thirds of 
private employment in Europe. A target of the current eEurope 
action plan recommends that, by 2005, Europe should have a 
dynamic e-business environment [3]. This target requires the 
SMEs to adopt and implement Enterprise Application 
Integration (EM) solutions, which typically deal with the 
integration of applications and data sources within an 
enterprise to solve a local problem, and also B2B application 
integration, which is the integration of systems between 
organizations to support business requirements [5].  In North 
America the situation is similar, where Electronic Data 
Interchange (EDI), a standardized way of exchanging data 
between trading partners, dominates B2B activity [l]. ED1 
requires trading partners to trade using Value Added Networks 
(VANS), which provide a single channel to facilitate the B2B 
communication. The complexity and expense of installing the 
software systems to implement EDI, combined with the per- 
transaction charge to use VANs has created a barrier to B2B 
entry for SMEs. This holds true for US and EU small 
companies. The EU has recognized that a key determinant of 
Europe’s recent under-performance in productivity growth is 
insufficient innovative activity as well as under-investment in, 
and weak diffusion of, information and communication 
technologies (ICT). In the same timeframe the US has had a 
surge in productivity growth reflecting the gains resulting from 
the investments made in the nations technological and 
innovation assets, where the ICT revolution has stimulated 
enterprise re-organization and has altered the terms of 
0-7803-8200-5/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 
118 
competition. It has also shifted the demand for labor towards 
the skills suitable for the new technologies [6]. This paper will 
discuss the development of an e-business Skillset Enhancement 
Tool (eSET) for B2B integration scenarios through the 
development of a working model of an e-business environment 
that can assist the SMEs and advanced 3rd level students in 
introducing them to the world of B2B. 
11. B2B HISTORY 
Over time companies have introduced heterogeneous 
systems to perform various point solutions throughout the 
company. Often, when these systems were installed, very little 
attention was given to the concerns of how these systems might 
share data with each other. Frequently the need arose for these 
independent systems to share data and this has led to Enterprise 
Application Integration (EAI). In the last 20 years large 
companies have invested heavily in EM. EAI enables 
companies to streamline internal business processes by 
implementing application integration initiatives and many of 
these initiatives are focused at intra-company level. The next 
logical requirement was for companies to communicate with 
their trading partners and participate in Business-to-Business 
(B2B). As with EA1 the advantages of doing this include a 
reduction in paperwork, the elimination of data-entry errors 
caused by re-entering data into systems. B2B potentially offer 
improvements in speed of business communication with 
suppliers, which can enable the introduction of the 
manufacturing philosophy of Just-In-Time (JIT) inventory 
management and “Lean Manufacturing” (both approaches 
require the suppliers to perform as though they are an extension 
of the manufacturer). 
The earliest form of B2B involved trading partners 
communicating with each other using a proprietary data 
format, over telephone lines, which they both agreed on. This 
was a Point-to-point solution, which was not suitable for up- 
scaling as the data formats, varied across trading partners. ED1 
was invented in the 1960s as an attempt to provide a 
standardized way of exchanging data between trading partners. 
The original ED1 standards (highly defined text formats) were 
specific to a given industry. In the 1970s ED1 became an 
established standard, which was hardware independent and 
allowed the originator of a transaction to monitor the document 
as it was transacted through to the recipient. Two main forms 
of ED1 evolved to dominate the market, X12 in the USA and 
Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce, 
and Transport (EDIFACT) in Europe [7]. 
The Point-to-Point nature of communication between 
trading partners using ED1 was difficult to manage. This gave 
rise to the emergence of Value Added Networks (VANs). 
VANs provided a single channel to facilitate the B2B 
communication. With the VAN the subscribing company only 
has to manage the link to the network while the VAN manages 
the quality of service of the message and provides an audit trail 
for the messages communicated. Individual VANs were not 
interconnected initially; they evolved and became interlinked 
allowing trading partners of different sectors to communicate 
electronically with each other. ED1 is expensive both in terms 
of resources to maintain a VAN connection and expense 
involved with the per-transaction charge. ED1 also has 
limitations, which include proprietary technology, batch 
orientation and lack of support for real-time information 
exchange, these limitations minimize its usefulness to most 
new B2B application integration projects [5] 
A new standard emerged in the B2B integration field in the 
late 1990s, extensible Markup Language ( X M L )  [8]. XML 
was derived from the Standard General Markup Language 
(SGML). SGML is very complex and XML formed a type of 
subset of the SGML [9], which was much easier to understand 
and implement. An XML document is a human readable text 
document, which contains structure. Soon after its inception, 
organizations discovered that it provided a tidy, self-describing 
message format. It promised significant advances in B2B 
integration providing a common data-exchange format. XML 
transmission only requires an Internet connection to enable 
data transport. Many database vendors are XML-aware. They 
provide built-in tools for extracting and inserting data into their 
systems using XML. XML is finding many uses in EAI where 
the information within an enterprise is not centrally controlled. 
In the domain of B2B application integration there is no central 
control of information, here XML provides a good format for 
information exchange and almost all businesses agree on XML 
as a good format for the movement of data between enterprises 
[51. 
111. CURRENT B2B ENVIRONMENT 
A .  EDI 
Business-to-Business (B2B) is about one business trading 
with another business. B2B represented 93% of e-commerce in 
the US in 2001. The manufacturing industry sector is the 
largest user of B2B in the US, where B2B shipments accounted 
for over 18% of the total value of manufacturing shipments [l]. 
Approximately 75% of B2B trading is performed using ED1 
[2], which is the dominant B2B standard in the world at the 
moment. The large manufacturing companies, the Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), invested heavily in ED1 
over the past 20 years. This investment has paid dividends for 
them and the ED1 technology used is still functioning. They 
will continue to use ED1 into the near future. Competition 
forces OEMs to realize cost cuttings by using new suppliers 
[4]. These new suppliers may exist in a Supply Chain, as in 
Fig. 1, which do not use EDI. This presents a problem to the 
OEMs. To realize the cost benefits of using the new suppliers 
they need to be able to perform B2B with them. The cost of 
implementing and maintaining ED1 might prevent the new 
supplier from becoming a trading partner with the OEM. 
OEMs may solve this problem by assisting the supplier with 
setting up EDI. This is expensive for the OEM and may negate 
the potential advantage of doing business with that supplier. 
Most SMEs do not have the resources to partake in ED1 
without support from a large customer, and this forms a B2B 
barrier against the SMEs. This barrier is created by the 
limitations of ED1 in B2B. 
B. XML 
An XML document is a human readable text document, 
which contains structure. The creator of the Xh4L document 
can define the structure. When two trading partners agree on a 
119 
structure for an XML document they can communicate by 
sending each other XML documents that comply with the 
agreed structure. This structure contains metadata (data about 
data), which defines the data that can be contained in the XML 
document [8]. The metadata can be a defined in a Data Type 
Definition (DTD) document or an XML Schema Document 
(XSD or schema). XSD surpasses DTDs when used to define 
the structure of an XML document as it is more flexible and 
offers more functionality than DTD documents, as well as 
being an XML document itself (DTD documents are not XML 
documents). When an XML document conforms to the rules of 
defining an XML document it is described as being a "well 
formed" XML document. If it also conforms to the structure of 
a given DTD or XSD then it is described as a "valid" XML 
document. There are various ways to implement B2B using 
XML. Two trading partners may establish a common set of 
schemas (XSD documents). Both parties implement any 
changes to the schemas. All XML documents sent between 
them will be "well formed and will be validated at both sides 
against the agreed schemas. This enables both partners to trade 
using XML documents. A small company may use this 
approach to enter the B2B arena. As new customers are 
introduced to this form of B2B, a scaling problem occurs. As 
more customers are added, more schemas need to be developed 
and maintained. This becomes a logistic problem and may 
consume too much of the SMEs resources. There is a need for 
a common structure (schema) for all business documents, 
which all trading partners agree on. This need is not an easy 
one to satisfy. The meaning and structure of an element in one 
industry sector often is different to its meaning in another 
sector. It is generally easier to establish an agreed structure for 
business documents in one business sector (business vertical) 
than across multiple business sectors (business horizontals). 
Different approaches to the creation of a common ontology 
have been established: 
C. Developing Standards 
0 ebXML: The ebXML objective was to provide a 
framework, based on XML standards, where SMEs, 
software engineers and other organizations can create 
consistent, robust and interoperable e-business services 
and components within an integrated global e-business 
market. It is a project that spans multiple business 
sectors aiming to support all business verticals 
simultaneously. It is a UN technology consisting of an 
international technology business consortium called 
the Organization for the Advancement of Structured 
Information Standards (OASIS) [lo]. 
RosettaNet: RosettaNet is a consortium of major 
information technology, electronic components and 
semiconductor manufacturing companies working 
together to create open e-business process standards, 
including XML standards and ED1 standards, within 
their industry vertical. It provides a master dictionary 
to define properties for products, partners and business 
transactions. It is very focused on creating contracts 
(agreements) between trading partners using the master 
dictionary [ll]. 
0 BizTak BizTalk is Microsoft's platform for inter- 
company communications and EM. It is information 
orientated and is applicable to multiple business 
sectors. It consists of the BizTalk Framework and the 
BizTalk Server. BizTalk Framework specifies a set of 
rules that allow multiple organizations to accept a 
common approach to XML. BizTalk Server has several 
components that make the management and movement 
of documents between companies possible. These 
components include trading partner management, 
document mapping and translation, document routing 
and delivery, data extraction and storage facilities as 
well as a rules-based document delivery mechanism 
and tracking facility [12]. 
This e-business Skillset Enhancement tool (eSET) was 
developed using BizTalk. 
IV. SKILLSET ENHANCEMENT 
This eSET aims to introduce users to the concept of a 
Supply Chain, demonstrate Data orientated E M  with an ERP 
system and introduce the B2B environment. 
A. SUPPLY CHAIN 
The Supply Chain starts from the origin of the raw material 
and ends once the product has been discarded or recycled. It 
involves getting the right product, to the right place, in the right 
quantity, with the right quality, at the right cost. The primary 
decisions made within the Supply Chain include sourcing the 
product, production of the product, inventory levels, logistics 
(transportation and distribution centers) [13]. Inventory is a 
major cost variable in the Supply Chain. There are costs 
associated with running out of inventory; these include loss of 
customer/sale, damage to reputation and disruption in the 
Supply Chain. On the other side of the coin there are 
"Inventory Carrying Costs" associated with carrying inventory 
which include [ 131: 
Interest on Capital Costs - this is the largest component 
of carrying cost and is associated with money tied up. 
Taxes & Insurance - insurance and taxes has to be paid 
on the current inventory. 
Obsolescence & Depreciation - inventory obsolescence 
is a major issue with products with a short shelf life or 
lose value over time (computer products). Companies 
involved with products that become obsolete quickly 
should be focusing on decreasing cycle times. 
Storage - the cost associated with having a facility to 
hold the inventory. . 
Opportunity Cost - what could the capital be used for 
that is tied up in inventory. 
120 
B. The eSET SUPPLY CHAIN MODEL 
A simple Supply Chain was created for this eSET, which 
consists of a Retailer, a Wholesaler, an Assembler and a 
Factory, as in Fig. 1. An end-customer purchases an item in the 
Retailer’s retail outlet. The purchase of the item causes the 
Retailers inventory level to fall below a minimum level 
allowed for the item. The Retailers system creates a Purchase 
Order (PO) for a quantity of this item that is sent to the 
Wholesaler. The Wholesaler converts this incoming PO to an 
internal Sales Order (SO). If the Wholesaler does not have 
enough of the required product on hand and it generates a PO 
to purchase a quantity of the required items. This PO is sent to 
the Assembler. The incoming PO is converted to an internal 
SO. This SO is then entered into its internal ERP system. The 
Assembler runs its Material Requirement Planning (MRF’) [14], 
which generates POs for the components which are necessary 
to fulfill the order. The POs are sent to the Factory. This eSET 
focuses on the interactions between the Wholesaler and the 
Assembler. The first step in automating a Supply Chain is to 
optimize all of the major business processes within each 
member organization. Attempting to integrate a Supply Chain 
before the members have their core systems in place is costly, 
frustrating and futile [5 ] .  
This eSET models this Supply Chain using BizTalk Server 
2002 [12], and an ERP system, ERF’lite [15], to represent the 
individual Supply Chain’s members internal systems. EWlite 
was chosen, as it is a lightweight ERP system that is very 
suitable for a small to medium sized company while also 
offering MRF’ capability. Each member in the Supply Chain 
was modeled. The example, as in Fig. 2, is the XLANG 
schedule representing the Assembler in Biztalk Orchestration 
Designer’s Graphical User Interface (GUI). Messages in the 
form of XML documents are received via HyperText Transport 
(or Transfer) Protocol (HTTP). An Active Server Page (ASP) 
is configured to send the received XML sales order into a 
preconfigured Microsoft Messaging Queue. 
Assembler 
Figure 1. The &ET Supply Chain Model 
C. DATA ORIENTATED EA1 WITH THE ERP SYSTEM 
I )  CREATING SALES ORDERS (SOS) 
Figure 2. Assembler’s XLANG Schedule 
The Biztalk Orchestration Designer (Biztalk OD) Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) is used to set up Enterprise Application 
Integration (EAI). Biztalk OD uses a process flow-modeling 
tool to model the processes of an enterprise. Biztalk OD then 
generates an XLANG file. XLANG is an XML business 
process language, which provides a way to orchestrate 
applications and XML Web services into larger-scale, 
federated applications by enabling developers to aggregate 
even the largest applications as components in a long-lived 
business process. The goal of XLANG is to make it possible to 
formally specify business processes as stateful long-running 
interactions [16]. The BizTalk OD GUI generates the XLANG 
file based on the graphical process modeled, thus enabling the 
user of the BizTalk OD GUI to focus on the process rather than 
the semantics of XLANG. This XLANG file is referred to as 
the XLANG schedule. The Assembler configures its XLANG 
schedule to receive messages from a specified messaging 
queue, envelope titled BizTalk, as in Fig. 2. Before the 
XLANG schedule is started, the BizTalk “Channel” (specific to 
the combination of source organization, destination 
organization and document type) uses an XSLT file to convert 
the incoming PO into an internal SO. In the process of 
converting the PO the XSLT runs BizTalk database functions 
to read data from the ERPlite database and insert it into the 
internal SO. While extracting the SO XML document from the 
messaging queue, the “XLANGport-GetDocument” XLANG 
port extracts designated field contents l?om the incoming XML 
sales order. These field contents are fields that can be used at 
any following process within the XLANG schedule. At this 
stage, static business rules can be applied to filter sales orders 
that meet designated static criteria supplied for the data fields. 
When the sales order’s data fields are accepted by the static 
criteria, the data fields are passed on to the next process. In this 
example all sales orders are wrote to disk for persistent storage. 
It performs this action by calling a method of a “Windows 
121 
Script Component”, represented in the diagram as 
“BT-SO-IN3.wsc”. The methods are written in VBScript. 
Once the SO is written to disk, control is passed to the 
UpdateERP process. This process updates the database. The 
method to update the sales order table is “Updateso”. The 
code uses standard Structured Query Language (SQL) 
combined with VBScript to update information in the Sales 
Order table. Afier the XLANG Schedule has updated the ERP 
database, the XLANG Schedule has completed its task. It 
continues to monitor the message queue for any new incoming 
XML purchase orders. When one is received the entire process 
starts again. 
2) CREATING PURCHASE ORDERS (POs) 
At a planned time Material Requirement Planning (h4FW) is 
run by the Assembler either automatically or manually. MRP 
can plan, schedule and reschedule materials as far into the 
future as required. ERPlite contains a comprehensive MRP 
program [14]. It can run MRP based on all or any combination 
of the following inputs: Projected Demand, Components 
Demand, Purchase Orders, Work Orders, Sales Orders and 
Inventory Levels. It identifies what components need to be 
ordered to meet the production demands. ERPlite exports these 
POs to a propriety flat file format. These files can then be 
imported into the ERPlite database. Once inside the database, 
the POs can be accessed using data orientated EAI. In this 
eSET another XLANG schedule was created to handle the 
creation of POs automatically, as in Fig. 3. This XLANG is 
triggered to start after MRP has been run. The PO XLANG 
schedule uses the “ERP-PO-0UT.wsc” Windows Script 
Component. This component only has one method. This 
method queries the Purchase Order tables of the ERPlite 
database. It loops through all released POs, examines the 
release date of each. If the release date is equal to or less than 
the current date, it begins to generate XML POs. The script 
component writes each of the POs from the tables to X M L  POs 
on the hard disk, assigning each PO a unique timestamp and 
name. In this system the POs are wrote to a “POout” folder on 
the server. 
I ’  I 
=le 1 . < -  I) ERPPOOUT.WSC 1 )-I 
Figure 3. Assembler’s Purchase Order XLANG schedule 
D. THE eSET B2B ENVIRONMENT 
Figure 4. The eSET B2B Integration Environmnet 
The process of “Data Orientated EA1 With the ERP 
System” described above is a prerequisite to performing B2B. 
EA1 is a subset of overall B2B integration as it is a vital and 
necessary component of B2B; this is represented in Fig. 4. At 
this stage in the B2B integration process, users of eSET will 
have been introduced to data in the form of X M L  documents 
conforming to specific X M L  schemas being sent via HTTP 
from a “Buyer” enterprise, the Wholesaler, to a “Seller” 
enterprise, the Assembler. Following the data flow in Fig. 1, 
when the Assembler wishes to purchase components to 
assemble the Wholesaler’s requirements, the Assembler then 
becomes the “Buyer” enterprise and requests components from 
the Factory. In the modeled Supply Chain the Assembler 
initially assumes the role of a “Seller”. To meet the Wholesaler 
demands the Assembler must purchase components from the 
Factory, thereby assuming the role of a “Buyer” between 
Assembler and Factory. Any enterprise within this Supply 
Chain assumes the role of “Buyer” or “Seller” depending on 
demand requirements placed by the their customers. By 
introducing users of the eSET tool to these two roles the users 
gains an understanding of the entire B2B Integration strategy 
for the Supply Chain. 
To complete the introduction to integration of a B2B 
Supply Chain, it is necessary to introduce the “Buyer” process, 
which is performed by the Assembler. The POs created by 
MRP and subsequently transformed into Xh4L by the PO 
XLANG schedule may or may not identify all data items that 
are necessary to send the PO. An example is the identification 
of a Factory to use for supply of a component. If a component 
can be supplied by two different Factories with different 
advantages and disadvantages for using either, then it may be 
necessary to determine the supplier dynamically rather than 
accepting a default customer. This dynamic determination of 
data could be performed by internal software or it is possible to 
communicate with an external web based software system. One 
advanced type of web-based software is “Software Agents”. 
Software Agents can be described as computer systems to 
which one can delegate tasks. Software agents differ from 
conventional software in that they are long-lived, semi- 
autonomous, proactive, and adaptive [ 171. Discussion on 
“Software Agents” is beyond the scope of this research, but is 
mentioned here as they could offer much to this eSET tool and 
this eSET tool delivers an environment to continue research 
into the use of “Software Agents” in the Supply Chain. 
122 
In this configuration of the eSET tool the selection of a 
Factory is made by a VB application. This application 
identifies the most suitable Factory, based on rules defined by 
given criteria. Once the Factory is selected it is entered into the 
PO XML file, into the relevant element and it is moved to 
another folder on the disk, “POsend”. A BizTalk Server “file 
receive function” was configured to monitor the “POsend” 
folder, and it is triggered when a new document is created in 
this folder location. This fimction sends the purchase order 
from this location to a “BizTalk Messaging Service Channel” 
which was configured specifically for this particular Factory, 
which was read from the XML PO document. This Channel 
maps the PO to a specific XML schema, which the Factory 
expects to receive. It then leverages user-defined XSLT to 
transform the XML PO to match the Factory schema. Once the 
Factory XML PO is created, there are many options available 
on how best to send the order to the Factory. In this 
configuration of eSET the PO is then sent to a messaging port 
where it is sent via Active Server Pages (ASP) to the supplier, 
via ”MY. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper highlights the B2B domination of e-commerce. 
This domination is expected to increase and continue into the 
near future. Large suppliers try to reduce costs by using new 
suppliers. They expect these suppliers to comply with their 
business processes that frequently involve some level of B2B 
e-commerce. Small suppliers often do not have the resources or 
skills required to enter into e-business interactions. They are 
left with a difficult choice of investing heavily in B2B 
technology or losing potential customers. This paper has shown 
how the B2B industry has developed, discussed its current 
dominant standards and established a tool that introduces the 
user to e-business technologies. The concept of a Supply Chain 
was introduced and modeled to enable a user of this tool to 
understand where the various technologies and standards are 
applicable. This Supply Chain was used to develop an EA1 and 
B2B integration strategy that encompasses the “buy-side’’ or 
“Buyer” and the “sell-side’’ or “Seller”. Using a preconfigured 
system the user’s skills get enhanced as they monitor and 
interact with the many different processes and technologies 
encountered as an incoming Purchase Order enters a “Seller” 
enterprise, is transformed to a compatible internal format, 
affects the “demand” and is used in MRP calculations. When 
the demand requires purchasing of items to fulfill a demand, 
the enterprise becomes a “Buyer” and the user is introduced to 
the “buy-side’’ processes and technologies. As the user 
becomes familiar with the preconfigured eSET system they 
may model the processes of their own enterprise and use their 
own data, thereby configuring this eSET to represent a business 
model that they understand. It is expected that this type of 
introduction to the B2B domain, using an “e-business Skillset 
Enhancement Tool” (eSET) will significantly advance the 
users skills and understanding of B2B integration , allowing 
them to interactively develop an understanding concerning the 
standards and technologies associated within this domain. 
eStats, (2003), US Census Bureau: E-Stats [Online]. Available: 
http://www.census.gov/eos/www/e-husiness614.hrm 
E. Ireland, (2003), Technology Roadmap Seminar - Extracting IT from 
XML and Web Services [Online]. Available: http://www.enterprise- 
ireland.com/news-events- 
detail~.asp?eventid=842&contactid=55&catid=4 
E. Commission, (2002), eEurope 2005: An information society for all 
[Online]. Available: 
http://europa.eu.intnformation_society/eeurope/action~l~index-en.h 
tm 
B. Schallock and A. Agustian, (2002), Building a Virtual Enterprise and 
Supply Chain in Agile Environments [Online]. Available: http://www- 
mmd.eng.cam.ac.uk/cim/imnet/papers2002/Schallock.pdf 
D. S .  Linthicum, B2B Application Integration, 1 ed: Addison-Wesley, 
200 1. 
E. Commission, (2002), Productivity: The Key to Competitiveness of 
European Economies and Enterprises [Online]. Available: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/enterpnse/~terprise~licy/competitiv~es~i 
ndex.htm 
e&-infonnation.com, (2003), Electronic Data Interchange and Electronic 
Commerce [Online]. Available: http://www.edi- 
information.com/btml/edi-vs-ec.html 
Coverpages.org, (2003), Extensible Markup Language (XML) [Online]. 
Available: http://xml.cverpages.orgixml.html#overview 
Coverpages.org, (2003), Standard Generalized Markup Language 
(SGML) [Online]. Available/ http://xml.coverpages.orgisgml.html 
[lo] ebxml.org, (2003), ebxML [Online]. Available: http://www.ebxml.org! 
[ l  I] RosettaNet.org, (2003), RosettaNet [Online]. Available: 
http://www.rosettanet.org 
[12] Microsoft, (2003), BizTalk Sewer 2002 : Product Overview [Online]. 
Available: 
ht tp: / /www.microso f t . cm~i~~~eva luat ion /overv iew~i~kse~er .~p  
[I31 SupplyChainToday, (2003), SUPPLY CHAIN REFRESHER [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.supplychaintoday.cm/reflections,htm#S~PLY%2OC~I 
N 
[I41 ERPlite.com, (2003), InstantMRP Tutorial: Overview and Numerical 
Example [Online]. Available: http://www.erplite.com/ERPlite12.htm 
[IS] ERPlite.com, (2002), Enterprise Resource Planning System, ERPLite 
[Online]. Available: http://www.erplite.cm/ 
[I61 Coverpages.org, (2003), XLANG [Online]. Available: 
http://xml.coverpages.org/xlang.html 
[ 171 MIT-Media-Lab, (2003), Software Agents [online]. Available: 
http://agents.media.mit .edn/index.html 
123 
