IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Nehvorks &Signal Processing 
Nanjing, China, December 14-17, 2003 
DESIGN OF LOW FKEQUENCY DISTURBANCE FILTER BASED ON DATA 
FUSION AND ITS APPLICATION TO RADIANT SIGNAL FILTERING 
Daren Yu. Yi Fan, ZhrqiangXu 
Harbin Institute of Technology 
Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, 150001, China 
ABSTRACT 
Due to the big-lagged and big-inertial characters of the 
load control object in thermal power units, it's difficult for 
conventional feedback signals to guarantee the rapidness 
and precision simultaneously. A low frequency disturbance 
filter is designed based on data fusion theory for filtering 
the measured radiant energy signal in boiler fumace. The 
low frequency disturbance of the signal is gotten rid of 
without any phase lags by using general observer 
configuration and frequency domain cross-complementary 
knowledge. The observer has additional degrees of 
fieedom for design, and the cross-complementary 
knowledge is measured from different sources, which are 
the radiant energy and the heat signal in the paper. The 
application to the measurement of radiation signal in a 
boiler furnace shows that the method can remove the low 
frequency disturbances effectively and is robust against 
model perturbation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The large supercritical power generation unit has been 
applied widely; which needs a rapider and more precise 
control for providing energy to the boiler. The control 
quality of the coal-fired power plant unit can be generally 
improved by high performance controller design, unless 
the rapid and precise feedback signals are found. 
The heat signal.is a more suitable feedback for the 
fuel flow control of the boiler, for the steady heat signal is 
precisely in token of the fuel energy, but unfortunately, 
because of its worst dynamic ch'mcteristic the application 
of the dynamic heat signal is limited especially in the once- 
through boiler control. Some measurements of the fuel 
flow are other kinds of feedback for the fuel flow control 
in boiler operation, but it is difficult to get the signal 
precisely and the signal cannot reflect the fuel species 
change correctly. The measurement and the application of 
radiant energy in boiler furnace [1,2] have come to 
researchers' attention, for the radiant energy signal has 
perfect dynamic characteristic and it can reflect the fuel 
flow change rapidly, since the radiant energy is got smn  
after the fuel combustion. Recently, some researchers 
brought forward a cascade control system using the radiant 
energy measured as a medial governing signal [2,3,4]. The 
disturbance of the fuel flow is attenuated, through the 
radiant energy feedback control, hence the control system 
can increase the system control quality and improve the 
track performance of the unit load and increase the 
economic efficiency. 
At present, because the low frequency disturbances, 
whose cycle changes from several to several tens of hours, 
are imported when the radiant energy is measured, the 
application of radiant energy signal in feedback control 
system has shortcomings. Some disturbances, such as the 
move up and down of the fire center, the change of gas 
recycling flow and blowing dust down from the hot face of 
the fumace, make the steady precision of the signal get 
worse. If there is no suitable way to resolve the problem, 
the fuel goveming system will take the wong action, thus 
the quality of control will get worse. The conventional 
high pass filter decreases the low frequency gain of the 
radiant energy and induces the phase lag, however the 
control input has gain needs, and therefore the 
performance of the system control will get worse [5 ] .  On 
the other hand, the unconventional low frequency 
disturbance filter [6] is sensitive to the measurement noise, 
so its robustness is bad. 
Based on the data fusion, a new approach filtering the 
low frequency disturbances of the radiant energy is 
developed, and the low frequency disturbance filter of the 
radiant energy of the boiler fumace is designed in this 
paper. The radiant energy and the heat signal are inputted 
into the filter, the fusion of cross-complement property in 
different frequency bands of signals is realized, using the 
general observer configuration [7], which has additional 
degrees of freedom for design, and then the low frequency 
disturbances of the radiant energy signal could be 
attenuated without any phase lags. The measurement 
radiant energy signal of the boiler capable of 350MW is 
applied in the filter for simulation later in this paper. The 
result of simulation is shown that this filter can reduce the 
low frequency disturbances effectively and the filtered 
radiant energy signal is a good approximation to the 
practical input energy of the boiler. 
0-7803-7702-8/03/ $17.00 02003 IEEE 936 
2. ANALYZE PROPERTY OF RADIANT ENERGY 
SIGNAL 
The radiant energy got from the CCD (Charge Coupled 
Devices) vidicon of a spot test system is calculated based 
on the principle of comparing color to measure 
temperature, which can distinguish the different tire 
intensity and the diverse frequency radiant energy from 0 
to 200 Hz, as figure 1 [8]. The main heat exchange method 
in the boiler is radiation, which takes 90 percent of heat in 
the boiler fwnace and SO percent of total heats [9 ] .  The 
radiant energy of the boiler fumace has its special virtue 
that reflects the change of fuel flow rapidly, for the energy 
is released rapidly soon after the fuel combustion and stay 
time of the fuel in the combustion furnace is very short. 
For example, the stay time of the fuel in the boiler furnace 
is about 2 seconds. On the contrary, the radiant energy 
signal has its defect, that is, the steady precision is not so 
good resulting from the following two factors, the inner 
and the outer. The inner factor is: the tire center in the 
fumace is not stahle, because of the change of the fuel 
species and the change of the wind from the first state to 
the second state, however the measurement devices are 
fixed on the stable points in the furnace, thus the 
measurement results will offset when the fue center moves. 
The outer factor is: the measurement result of the 
temperature has low frequency offset if the lens has dust. 
In order to draw a more precise conclusion, let’s suppose 
the radiant energy signal in the low frequency is additive, 
by calculation transform. The sharp turbulence is brought 
out, because of. the rapid flow of the air and the 
combustion of the mixture. The pulse frequency of fue 
center is much higher than the operating frequency zone of 
the combustion controller, and the pulse range is large. In a 
word, by analyzing the above frequency characteristic, the 
conclusion can he drawn that the steady precision of the 
radiant energy signal is low due to the low frequency 
disturbance of the move of the fire center and the other 
influence, and the middle frequency characteristic is 
precise due to the radiant energy rapid change with the fuel 
flow, and the combustion pulse is a high frequency noise. 
8 1 coal and oil 
. , I  . 2 flame ofcod 
3 110 flame 
Fig.1 Relation between flame frequency and brightness 
According to the above analysis, it can be seen that 
there are the low frequency disturbances and the high 
eequency pulse in the measured radiant energy signal. The 
effect of the high frequency pulse of the measurement 
signal is small, because of the big-lagged and big-inertial 
characters of the power plant unit; moreover the high 
frequency pulse can he easily attenuated by the filter. The 
low frequency disturbances of the radiant energy influence 
the heat signal output deeply, the wrong control of the 
system is produced due to the improper filtering approach, 
and these low disturbances are difficult to be filtered. The 
heat signal and the radiant energy signal have the cross- 
complement property in different frequency band. 
According to the property, the low frequency disturbance 
filter of the radiant energy in the boiler fumace is designed 
based on the data fusion theory as well as the general 
observer configuration. 
3. CONFIGURING THE FILTER FOR LOW 
FREQUENCY DISTURBANCES OF RADIANT 
ENERGY SIGNAL AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS 
ANALYSIS 
The above discussion indicates thq the dynamic 
characteristic of the radiant enetgy signal is constituted by 
the signals of the different frequency range. The radiant 
energy, Eo(s) ,  comes from the coal fuel into the boiler 
furnace. Because of the low frequency disturbances, 
d(s) , brought by the working process, the measurement 
apparatus, and the measurement method , the 
measurement radiant energy signal, E ( s ) ,  can he written 
as, 
E(s)  = Eo($)  + d(s) (1) 
Because there are the good steady precision and the 
large measurement noise element in the measured heat 
signal, e(.). Accordingly, the heat signal is composed of 
the practical output beat signal, Q,(s) , and the high 
frequency measurement noise, n(s) , i. e., 
Q(s)= Qo(s) + 4 s )  (2) 
Without loss of generality, let’s regard the 
unmodelled dynamics as the multiplicative plant 
perturbation. Though the actual value of the plant 
perturbation is uncertain, its bounds can he evaluated and 
represented as a simple function. In this case the practical 
model of waterwall thermal storage, P ( s ) ,  can be written 
as, 
P(s) = P,(s)[l+ AW(s)]  (3) 
Where e ( S )  is the nominal model of waterwall thermal 
storage. 
937 
Given these conditions, the low frequency disturbance 
filter for the radiant energy signal based on the general 
observer is designed, shown in Figure 2. Here the general 
observer is used, hecause compared with the classical 
Luenberger observers, it provides a dynamic 
compensator, G(s), so it has additional degrees of freedom 
for design, which is particularly useful to filter signals of 
certain statistic characteristic. 
The model of the waterwall thermal storage of the 
boiler shows in Figure 2. Because the plant is simple and 
the math simulation model is accurate, the property of the 
practical plant model, P(S) ,  and the nominal plant model, 
e(s) ,  is analyzed correctly. 
The practical output signal can be written as, 
The nominal output signal can he written as, 
Q o O  = Eo(s)P(s) (4) 
Q(s) = B ( s ) p , ( s )  ( 5 )  
The nominal input heat signal can be derived from Figure 
2, 
&s) = - [&(SI - Q(s)lC(s) (6) 
Low frequency disturbance filter 
Fig.2 Structure of zero-phase-lag low frequency filter for 
radiation energy 
The nominal radiant energy signal can be derived 
from equation ( 5 )  and equation (6): 
&) = &,(s)E(s)+ TWQ(s)8(s)Y' (7) 
(8) 
where, 
so (s) = [ 1 + pu (s)c(s)]-' 
T,(s) =[I + p,(s)c(s)l-'p,(s)c(s) (9) 
Noting that T,(s)+s,(s) = 1 , where so@) is generally 
defined as the sensitivity function, and To(s) is defined as 
the complementary sensitivity function, they are the 
h c t i o n s  of the nominal plant model, p , ( s ) ,  and the 
dynamic compensator, c(S) . A compromise design 
procedure is proposed using the loopshaping approach, in 
which it is primary to reduce the sensitivity gains at the 
low frequencies and reduce the complementary sensitivity 
gains at the high frequencies. It's achieved by designing an 
appropriate dynamic compensator. The fusion of data for 
the frequency cross-complement property of the heat 
signal and the radiant energy signal is realized. 
Without regard to the effects of the plant perturbation, 
Aw(s), and the measurement noise, n(s) ,the estimated 
output of the proposed low freqnency filter is given by, 
B(s)  = Eo(s)+So(s)d(s) (10) 
Equation (10) indicates that the radiant energy signal 
all passes across the entire frequency range because the 
transfer function is 1. Because the loopshaping approach is 
realized by designing the appropriate dynamic 
compensator, c(S) , which makes &(s)d(s)  + 0 
when Iso(S)l has a small gain at the low frequencies, the 
low frequency disturbance filter can selectively filter out 
the low frequency disturbances involved in measured 
radiant energy signal, without introducing any additional 
time delay to the signal. 
Design an dynamic compensator, c(s) , which 
makes the sensitivity function is a filter of all-pass across 
the high frequency range, IcGI<<1 , 
ITo[ + 0, and the complementary sensitivity function is a 
filter of all-pass across the low frequency range, 
Isol+l . 
lcpul >> 1, [sol 4 0 2 ITa\ -+ 1 .  
4. THE ROBUST PERFORMANCE 
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE FILTER 
Robust performance specifications of the zero-phase-lag 
filter for low frequency disturbances of radiant energy 
signal can be designed by using additional degrees of 
freedom based on general observer configuration. Define 
the estimating deviation of the radiant energy signal for the 
filter as, 
ea(s) = B ( s ) - ~ , ( s )  (11) 
Considering the model uncertainty, external 
disturbance and high frequency measurement noise of heat 
signal, if the interior dynamic system of low frequency 
disturbance filter for radiant energy is stable, and the 
estimating deviation is insensitive to the effect of the 
uncertainty, it's named robust low frequency disturhance 
filter for radiant energy signal. 
Performance specification of filter can be expressed 
that H, norm of the estimating deviation map operator is 
less than predetermined bounds. 
938 
4.1. The robustness with respect to the plant 
perturbation related to the thermal modes 
The robustness with respect to the plant pemhation 
related to the radiative modes, which means the estimating 
deviation of the radiant energy is insensitive to the effect 
of the unmodelled radiative dynamics, is the most essential 
requirement for zero-phase-lag radiant energy filter based 
on the general observer. Considering the effect of the 
unmodelled radiative dynamics, the estimating deviation of 
the radiant energy can be derived from equation (7) and 
written as, 
e,(#) =T,(s) .AW(s) .E, , (s)  (12) 
Therefore, the effect of the plant perturbation related 
to the radiative modes on the estimating deviation can be 
attenuated by the design of the generalized observer gain 
c(s), the loopshaping approach to make Iq(j0)l small 
at frequencies where IAW(j0)l is large 
Suppose the bounds of the plant pembation related 
to the radiative modes can be represented as a simple 
function, W, , that is, IAw(jW)l I (Wr(jW)l . Then the 
requirement for the robustness with respect to the plant 
pembation related to the radiative modes can be 
formulated in the form of the H ,  norm given by, 
JIT,(s). wr(s)ll- 5 “/I (13) 
[IT, (3) ’ w, (SI[(, 5 1 ’ (14) 
where O < y , < l  . Let y ( s ) = W T ( ~ ) / y l  , thus the 
specification (13) can be rewritten as, 
4.2. The robustness with respect to the measurement 
noise 
Considering the effect of the measurement noise of the 
heat energy of the proposed low frequency disturbance 
filter, the estimating deviation of the radiant energy is 
given by, 
e&) = T, (s ) .  AW(s) .  E&) + T&). n(s), pO(s)-’ (1 5 )  
Where the second term on the right side indicates the effect 
of the measurement noise on the estimating deviation of 
the radiant energy. Similarly, it can be attenuated by 
shaping the complementary sensitivity function and the 
corresponding specification in the form of the H,  norm is 
given by, 
IIW) ’ Jmll* 5 1 (16) 
Where W, denotes a frequency dependent weighting 
hc t ion ,  W,(s) = P,(s)-’F,(s)/y, 0 < y2 < 1 , and 
Fn(s) represents the bounds of the frequency spectrum of 
the measurement noise, that is, In(jw)l< I F .  ( j ~ ) l .  
4.3. The robustness with respect to the parameter 
perturbation of the nominal model 
Actually, the model parameter measurements inevitably 
include some uncertainties, which results in the parameter 
perturbation of the low order nominal model of the 
waterwall thermal storage. We expect the effect of the 
nominal model parameter perturbation on , the 
complementary sensitivity & to be as small as to be 
neglectable, since the high-frequency roll-off property of 
the complementay sensitivity indicates the attenuating 
capability of radiant energy filter based on the general 
observer. The sensitiveness level of the complementary 
sensitivity to the model parameter perturbation can be 
represented by their relative variation ratio, as shown on 
the left side of equation (17) which is proved in [IS] and 
given by, 
.. . 
Where Z(S) = [I + G(s)&(s)~G(s)&(s) ~ I 
i;b(s) = P,(s)+Mo((s) and Mo(S) denotes the model 
parameter perturbation. Noting that the right side of the 
equation (17) is just the expression of the sensitivity 
function so, therefore, the effect of the model parameter 
perturbation of the waterwall thermal storage on the 
complementary sensitivity, namely on the estimating 
deviation of the radiant energy, can he rejected by shaping 
the sensitivity of the robust low frequency disturbance 
filter. The corresponding specification in the form of the 
H, norm is given by, 
Where w, is a predefined frequency dependent weighting 
function. 
5. THE DESIGN OF THE ZERO-PHASE-LAG LOW 
FREQUENCY DISTURBANCE FILTER OF 
RADIANT ENERGY SIGNAL 
According to the above discussion, the robustness of the 
radiant energy low frequency disturbance filter requires 
both low sensitivity gains and low complementary 
sensitivity gains. Noting that &(s) +S,(S) = 1, reduction 
of both the sensitivity gains and the complementary 
sensitivity gains is a couple of contradictions. However, 
considering the fact that MO has large gains only at the 
939 
low frequencies and disturbances of the radiant energy d 
is also a low frequency signal, but AW has large gains 
only at the high frequencies and n is also a high frequency 
signal, a compromise design procedure is proposed using 
the loopshaping approach, in which it is primary to reduce 
the sensitivity gains at the low frequencies while to reduce 
the complementary sensitivity gains at the high frequencies 
by choosing the appropriate frequency dependent 
weighting functions. 
For a certain frequency U, , it can be relative to the 
bandwidth value of the system. Provided that at the low 
frequencies, V U €  (O,U,) , a weighting function, W, , 
can satisfy the condition given by, w, = W, , and at the 
high frequencies, V U €  (U,.+"), a weighting function, 
Wh , can satisfy the condition given by, 
max[u:(jw)l, IW*(jU)lk (W*(jw)I (19) 
Then the above performance specifications of the low 
frequency disturbance filter, equation (14), (16) and (I@, 
can be simnlified as. 
[ZI,. 
This is a typical mixed sensitivity problem of the H ,  
optimal control theory. The result of the optimum design is 
all-pass across the entire frequency range, 
= 1 , and the figure of the frequency gain 
~ 
of the sensitivity function and the complementary 
sensitivity function is determined by the weighting 
functions, 4 and wh. Accordingly, The key procedure 
in the design of the radiant energy signal low frequency 
disturbance filter is to choose the appropriate frequency 
dependent weighting functions, w, and W,, 
6. SIMULITION STUDY 
The transfer function of radiant energy to heat signal of the 
coal fired electrical power plant is considered in this paper. 
The nominal model for this study is based on the Maor 
David units, which is a coal-fired, natural circulation drum 
type boiler capable of 350MW at NCR [IO]. The 
MATLAB Robust Control Toolbox [ I l l  was used to 
design the zero-phase-lag low frequency disturbance filter. 
And then the above calculation can be explained by 
figures. The curve of the radiant energy signal to be 
filtered is in the figure 3. The curves of the signals passing 
across the low pass filter and the zero-phase-lag low 
frequency disturbance filter are in the figure 4. Compared 
the three curves in figure 4, it is shown that passing across 
the low pass filter, the high frequency pulse of the radiant 
energy is filtered, but the low frequency disturbances are 
not filtered and the phase lag are produced, but passing 
across the low frequency disturbance filter, the low 
frequency disturbances can effectively be filtered with 
zero-phase-lag. It is obvious that the low frequency 
disturbance filter of radiant energy has better characteristic 
than the conventional low pass filter. 
'I 
20 40 60 80 i W  
-0 5' 
Time 1 s )  
Fig.3 Simulation of radiation energy 
Data prmssed by 
Fig.4 Comparison between effects of low-pass-filter and 
zero-phase-lag filter 
7. CONCLUSION 
Fusion of cross-complement property in data is realized by 
the low frequency disturbance filter, in which the dynamic 
function is used as conipensator. Firstly, the filter can 
attenuate the low frequency disturbances involved in 
measured radiant energy signal, without introducing any 
additional time delay to the radiant energy signal. The 
radiant energy signal is all-pass across the entire frequency 
range because the transfer function is I.  Secondly, the 
filter has robustness, because robustness requirements of 
the unmodelled plant perturbation and model parameter 
940 
perturbation are formulated in the form of the H ,  norm. 
So many excellent characteristics of the filter are very 
helpful for its application widely in control system. The 
rapid and precise feedback control signal can be realized 
by the low frequency disturbance filter for radiant energy 
signal, which improves the control quality of the system. 
[111 M. G .  Safanov, R. Y. Chiang, The Robust Control 
Toolbox for Use with M T W ,  The Mathworks Inc. , 
South Natick, 1988 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study was supported by The Project Supported by 
National Natural Science Foundation under grant of China 
No. 59976008 and 59776047 
' 
REFERENCES 
[I] Zhou HC, Sheng F, W a n  SD, Huang YL, Zheng CG, 
"Reconstruction of temperature distribution in a 2-D 
absorbing-emitting system form radiant energy images," 
JSME Intemafional Joumal, Series B ,  vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 
104-109,2000, 
[2] Zhou H C, Zhang S S, Huang Y L, et al, "Monitoring 
of 2-D combustion temperature images in a 670th utility 
boiler and simulation on its application in combustion 
control," Dev. Chem. Eng. MineralProcess, vol. 8, no. 314, 
pp. 31 1-322,2000. 
[31 Zhang Shishuai, Zhou Huaichun, et al, "Simulation on 
a load control system of thermal power units based on the 
feedback signal of radiant energy," Proceeding of the 
CSEE, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 85-88,2001. 
[4] Li Yangchun, Wei Chengye, et al, "Cascade fuzzy 
control system based on the radiation signal of the 
furnace," Proceeding ofthe CSEE, vol. 21, no. 6, pp, 80-83, 
2001. 
[ 5 ]  Tian Xiaoping, Ding Yumei, "Removing low- 
frequency disturb in the seismic data by polynomial 
approach pattern method," Chinese joumal ofgeophysics, 
vol. 39, pp. 309-315, 1996. 
[6] Liu jinqi,Ma mongfei,Lu fangbong, "Vibration 
suppression control of two-inertia system based on a 
disturbance observer," Electrical drive automation, vol. 2 1, 
no. 1, pp. 49-52, 1999. 
171 H. J. Marquez, C. P, "Diduch, Sensitivity of failure 
detection using generalized observers," Automatic, vol. 28, 
no. 4, pp. 837-840, 1992, 
[8] Fan Quangui, Li Jiang, "Research on the Furnace 
Flames Dynamical Response Characteristics and the 
Infrared Rays Flame Monitoring Techniques for Large 
Boilers," Power engineering, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 9-12, 1997. 
[9] Wang Shuqi, "A new parameter for combustion 
control," Power engineering, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 535-538, 
2m. 
[IO] E. Cheres, "Small and medium size drum boiler 
models suitable for long term dynamic response," IEEE 
Transaction on Energy Conversion, vol. 5 ,  no. 4, pp. 686- 
692,1990. 
94 1 
