Environmental Benchmarking of Medium-sized TVs Sold in 
North America, Europe and Asia (China) 
Taco Carlier' Scott Duncan3 Casper Boks' 
'Ab S t e v e l ~ ' , ~ ~ ~  Bert Bras3 
'Design for Sustainability Lab, Delft University of Technology, Delft, NL 
2Environmental Competence Centre, Philips Consumer Electronics Eindhoven, NL 
G .  W. Woodruff School for Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 
track down design improvements and to check on 
supplier relationships. 
3 
Abstract 
The environmental benchmarkinz procedure as 
developed by the Design for Sustainability Lab of 
De@ University of Technology and the 
Environmental Competence Centre of Philips 
Consumer Electronics has been applied to TVs 
sold .in the. market in three continents: North 
America (USA), Europe and Asia (China). For 
each region three or four products of different 
brands have been considered. In  total some fifty 
parameters. which are relevant for  the 
environmental performance. have been measured 
~~ 
INTRODUCTION 
For a number of years, Philips Consumer 
Electronics and Delft University of Technology's 
Design for Sustainability Program (DE) have 
cooperated in a wide range of (applied) ecodesign 
related research projects. In 2002 these projects 
were expanded to include products from other 
local markets. In the summer of that year a project 
was completed in cooperation with a Philips 
production plant in Suzhou, China, and in Fall 
These measurements allow making calculaiion of 2002 another project was completed in 
life cycle performance of the products (based on cooperation with the Georgia Institute Of 
the Eco Indicator 95 system). Technology in Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
The results show big'differences in all categories; ' 
no brand scores consistently best in all focal 
areas. It will be concluded that although TVk are 
seemingly a 'mature product,, diffeereni .design , 
tradition, 'different supplier base and difference in 
speed of latest technology make that in practice 
differences up to 50% in life cycle performance 
have been found. . 
Also behueen products sold in the three regions of ' ' 
the world clear drfferences were found (although 
not as big as'between best and worst brand 
performances.) Only partly this observation can 
be explained by differences in for  instance 
environmental legislation. It will be speculated to 
what atmt the structure of the value chain is ' . 
responsible. 
It will be concluded that environmental 
benchmarking is a powerful tool to systematically 
Prior to 2002, all projects were conducted &the -: 
Netherlands, and focus was on products sold in the 
European market. In these projects, the ' ' 
Environmental Competence Centre (ECC) at 
Philips provided products, product data, research 
facilities, and the business perspective. Staff and 
students from the Design for Sustainability 
Programme at the DUT contributed design 
knowledge, creativity and methodological support -' 
where needed. The aim of this ongoing 
cooperation is to balance and bridge scientific 
theory and methodology development regarding 
sustainability issues on the one hand, and 
corporate practices as they exist in the 
(manufacturing) industry today on the other. 
One of the main research topics that has been 
particularly helpful in building the bridge between 
scientific research and implementing it in the 
business is the collection, and subsequent 
utilization and interpretation, of environmental 
'Corresponding author 
Ab Stevels, Environmental Competence Centre, Philips 
Consumer Electronics, Building SWA-4, PO Box 80002 
5600 JB Eindhoven. The Netherlands 
E-mail: ab.slevels~~hilios.com 
Te1+31402734169 Fax+31402735075 
0-7803-7743-5/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE 358 
benchmark data. The environmental benchmark 
method, explained in more detail in Boks and 
Stevels [I], is laid out in the Environmental 
Benchmark flowchart as depicted in Figure 1 .  
Developed in 1997, the environmental benchmark 
method emerged at a time when companies in 
Europe discovered that environmental care 
included ample opportunity for cost savings and 
product improvement, extending beyond just end- 
of-life issues particularly. Saving on resources 
could be directly related to cost and price 
reduction. Also, improving environmental 
performance could enhance brand image and sales. 
Environmental benchmarking is based on the 
assumption that market driven environmental 
performance means being better than the 
competition rather than scoring on an absolute 
scale as most traditional environmental 
considerations do. The method was more practical 
than the methods used before, as it focuses on 
physical parameters which actually can be 
measured, influenced and easily interpreted by the 
company itself, as opposed to using life cycle 
analysis only, which is for company employees 
and design students difficult to integrate into their 
day to day practice. 
II 
U 
Figure 1: The Environmental Benchmark 
Method 
The environmental benchmark method as recorded 
in an official Philips document, is laid out in 
figure 1. The method not only comprises the 
benchmarking of products; it positions this activity 
in an integral approach that facilitates the 
exploitation of the benchmark results. The 
flowchart explains that there are three main 
elements: the actual benchmark procedure itself, 
the link to Ecodesign and the exploitation in the 
market. The results of the actual benchmark are a 
basis for creativity later in the process. 
Recently, the cooperation between Philips' ECC 
and DUTs DfS has resulted in two international 
projects. In these projects, DUT students went 
overseas to do environmental benchmarking 
projects in China (summer 2002) and the USA 
(fall 2002). In both projects, 27" and 28" TV sets 
were benchmarked by the students. Apart of 
increasing and disseminating awareness about the 
importance of environmental benchmarking 
abroad, an additional benefit of benchmarking 
projects overseas is the relative ease with which 
local brands can be included in the benchmark 
studies. This inclusion was considered upfront to 
be of great importance, as differences in local 
legislation, differences in the local supplier base, 
differences in consumer preferences as well 
differences in applying the latest technology can 
be expected to have a significant effect on the 
design and consequently the environmental 
performance of products from various brands 
worldwide. Learning ahout these differences, and 
about other brands' solutions, is of great 
importance to Philips in order to continue 
improving their products. 
ENVIRONMENTAL BENCHMARKING 
The environmental benchmark method is split up 
into five focal areas: 
Energy consumption in various operating 
modes (and of various subassemblies) 
Material application including metals, 
plastics weight) 
Packaging and transport including 
materials, volumes) 
Chemical content including heavy metals, 
flame retardants, organics) 
Recyclability including disassembly 
analysis, mechanical treatments) 
In addition to checking these five focal areas, a 
life cycle assessment method is used for the 
validation of the environmental performance of 
the benchmarked product. The main idea behind 
this is to include the life cycle perspective in the 
final assessment of the product, and also to 
determine the feasibility of the environmental 
improvement options that are generated based on 
the benchmark results. 
The actual benchmark consists of four elements: 
the choice of products, the system definition, 
359 
comparison and validation of products, and the 
review of results. When the actual benchmark is 
finished the results have to be linked to ecodesign 
and later to business. 
Since its introduction, over 60 environmental 
benchmarks have been performed and reported on 
at the Philips ECC, most of them cover the 
consumer electronics (called “brown goods” in 
Europe) category. Benchmark reports have 
contributed to product improvements, cost 
reductions and general environmental awareness 
through the organization. But even more can be 
expected from simultaneous analysis of multiple 
benchmark reports, especially as regards to the 
identification of structural underperformance, 
trend analysis and degrees of freedom for design 
alternatives. Research on multiple environmental 
benchmark data analysis has been discussed by 
Boks and Stevels [2,3]. 
The current article compares environmental 
benchmark reports performed in different regions 
of the world, including analyses of locally 
manufactured products. 
DATA COLLECTION 
For this article, three benchmark studies have been 
compared. These include a ‘normal’ benchmark 
study executed at the ECC in Eindhoven, and two 
similarly conducted benchmark studies in Asia 
(China) and North America (USA). These were 
the first WO benchmarks executed outside the 
ECC in Eindhoven. 
It is important to first point out that although 
seemingly different CRT sizes are used in the 
three regions, in fact a 27” TV in the USA is 
actually the same size as a 28” TV in Europe and a 
29” TV in China. The differences in ‘designation’ 
can be explained by the fact that in some cases the 
measure reflects the visible part of the screen, 
whereas in other cases the actual screen size is 
measured. 
The Asian benchmark study was executed during 
an internship for two Dutch students from the 
DUTs Industrial Design Engineering department 
in July 2002 in Suzhou, China. After receiving 
environmental benchmark training at the ECC, 
their research took place in a Philips production 
facility with most of the measurement devices 
already on hand. The 29” TV sets included in the 
study were at that moment the top-selling 
television sets in China. They selected the best and 
second best competitors in the Chinese market, 
which were both local brands. In addition, a third 
local brand was chosen, because of its success in 
the Chinese rural market, its use of different 
components and because of its software features. 
All televisions were 29” flat screen sets. 
Three months later a similar benchmark study was 
executed at the Institute of Sustainable 
Technology and Development at Georgia Institute 
of Technology (Georgia Tech) in Atlanta, 
Georgia, by two of the authors of this article. The 
brand managers of the Philips mainstream 
television division in North America, also situated 
in Atlanta, chose two local brands (only sold in the 
USA) to be benchmarked against the Philips set, 
which was manufactured in North America 
(Mexico), sold in the USA and based on global 
electronic platforms. The collaboration between 
the initiators of the project and Georgia Tech was 
positive. On one hand it was very easy to complete 
benchmarking at the university because of the 
knowledge and devices already available. On the 
other hand, Georgia Tech’s staff and students got 
exposure to the environmental benchmarking 
method, and plans are already made to start future 
projects with Georgia Tech students. 
The third benchmark research was, like all other 
environmental benchmarks, executed at the ECC 
in Eindhoven, including a Philips set and its three 
best commercial competitors. It was executed in 
September 2002. In Europe widescreen TV-sets 
are becoming the standard, because of that there 
was no European benchmark of a conventional 
28” TV set available at the ECC. Of course this 
contains a problem in comparing the three 
benchmarks; the widescreen tube is almost 17 
percent smaller (figure 2). 
Figure 2: Widescreen Versus Conventional 
Screen 
Based on the fact that both TV sets have the same 
functionality for the user the difference in the size 
of the tube and the consequences of that are 
neglected in the results, but if relevant, used in the 
explanation of the results. 
360 
The main difference between the selected TVs is 
that they are not all flat screens. The European and 
Asian televisions were flat screens, the televisions 
in the USA were not. Other differences are the 
power source in the contingents, for the USA 1 IO 
Volts and 60 Hz, for Europe and China: 220 V and 
50Hz. There is also a difference in the antenna 
signal in the three regions, in the USA it is NTSC, 
in Europe and China PAL PLUS. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the differences in the results 
between the three regions are considered. 
Classification by the aforementioned five focal 
areas is used, as is validation using a life cycle 
analysis. 
Energy consumption 
Although the usage behavior of consumers in 
Europe, Asia and the USA is not the same, it is 
important to determine a uniform usage profile to 
enable comparison of the energy consumption. For 
this reason the usage profile in Table 1 was 
chosen. This model assumes televisions are always 
in stand-by or on-mode, and never in off-mode. 
Table 1: Average User Behavior Modeled in 
This Study 
On mode -,I Standb mode 
Off mode 
For correct energy measurement the benchmark 
manual mandates that the brightness and contrast 
should be calibrated with a color analyzer. As 
there was no color analyzer in China, the research 
was done with the setting from the manufacturer. 
If not all manufacturers use the same factory 
settings, comparing them might show a significant 
deviation from actual energy consumption. Before 
energy measurements were made, the TV sets 
were warmed up for 30 minutes before the energy 
consumption was measured using a power 
analyzer. The energy consumption was expressed 
in kilowan-houri year, using the described 
behavior pattern. The results are shown in Figure 
3. 
Figure 3: Differences in Energy Use 
There is a significant difference in energy use 
between the continents. The average of the USA, 
European and Asian televisions is respectively 
121, 98 and 116 kWh/year. These differences can 
be attributed to sizable difference in the energy 
use in stand-by mode. In the USA, for example, 
the Philips set uses 0.6 watts whereas the other 
brands use 7.7 and 6.8 watts respectively, in stand- 
by mode. 
In Europe and Asia all televisions have a power 
switch, but in the USA only one of the local 
brands does, whereas the Philips set and the other 
local brand do not have one. If consumers want to 
turn off their televisions they have to pull out the 
Plug. 
Research of one of the authors of this article has 
proved that in on-mode a 28" widescreen TV-set 
uses approximately 5 percent more energy than a 
28" conventional TV-set. This means the 
performances of the European TV sets on the field 
of energy-use are even better than can be seen 
from the results. 'The success of widescreen 
television proves that for consumers the 
advantages of widescreen television are of more 
importance than saving energy. 
Additional explanations for the differences in 
energy consumption could be: 
In Europe the Philips product was 
benchmarked against global brands whereas 
in the USA and Asia it was benchmarked 
against local brands. It may be that global 
brands spend more time on design for 
environment and are better connected to IC 
suppliers to get latest chip sets and therefore 
may use less energy. 
In Asia, televisions are designed with higher 
criteria for printed wiring boards, because of 
less stable power supplies in for example 
361 
China, which may cause Chinese televisions 
to use more energy. 
o As antenna signals differ in the various 
regions, this could ,lead to differences in 
energy use between the systems. 
Packaging & Transpod 
To compare different packaging solutions for the 
TVs, the environmental benchmark method uses 
the following 'packaging equation' (PE). 
Packaging wcight Packaging volume 
Product weight Produ.1 \uIumc 
PI:= *- x Nr of miltcnali 
This equation compares the weight and the volume 
of the packaging with that of the product. These 
two figures are multiplied by the amount of 
materials used in the packaging. The number of 
materials is relevant for recycling issues. In order 
to compare the different television sets, the score 
of the Philips product in the USA was set at 100 
percent. Results are shown in Figure 4. (It should 
be noted that the lower the PE value, the better) 
. r * q l " O  sY.UDn .c.=."lw.- 
n 
Figure 4: Packaging Equation Percentage Score 
Although there are some big differences in the 
packaging scores within regions, for example the 
Philips in the USA scores 55 percent better than 
the product which scores worst on this field, the 
differences between the averages of the three 
regions seem to be too small to draw any 
conclusion. A striking finding, however, is the 
poor Philips score in Asia. This is because of its 
relatively large and heavy box. Possible 
explanations for this are: 
Quality image in China; 
Retailers use already small flaws for an 
The transport conditions in China are as such 
much worse than in Europe and Asia; 
excuse to send TVs back to the manufacturer 
Material application 
Every TV in every benchmark is completely 
disassembled; every part is separated and weighed. 
In this way detailed information is obtained about 
how much of each material is used by the various 
manufacturers for the various applications. In 
Figure 5 ,  some interesting differences between the 
weight percentages of the TV sets in the three 
continents can be observed (Philips USA = 100). 
The averages of the USA, Europe and Asia are 
respectively, 35,41 and 47 kilograms 
Figure 5: Weight-Percentage Score 
The large differences in weight can be explained 
mainly by the CRTs. One of the TV sets in the 
USA has the lightest CRT (24 kilograms), the 
heaviest CRT is a Chinese, it weighs exactly 13 
kilograms more. Part of the difference can be 
explained by the fact that the Chinese televisions 
are flat screen TVs and the American is not. 
A CRT of a widescreen television uses 20 till 25 
percent more glass than a conventional television. 
If we would scale the amount of glass of the 
widescreens to the amount of glass of the 
conventional TV sets, the European would have 
the lightest CRTs. 
Apart from the difference in the weight of the 
CRTs, there are also interesting differences in the 
weight of the encasing, as shown in figure 6. The 
most remarkable thing is the weight of the lightest 
TV set in the USA. 
Figure 6: The Weight of the Encasing 
Further research has to point out why it is possible 
for the designers of this TV to use almost 2 
kilograms of plastic less than the second lightest 
362 
encasing. Maybe the encasing is less strong, but 
the question is whether it is strong enough for its 
purpose. 
Recyclability 
To calculate these figures we take all materials of 
the television. We assume 90% of the ferrous 
material is recycled, therefore we multiply the 
amount of Ferro fraction in the television by 0.9. 
Equivalent factors for percent-recyclability are 
multiplied with totals for aluminum (80%), copper 
(95%), glass (61%) and paper (31%), to yield the 
total amount of materials - from a weight 
perspective - that can be recycled. The Philips in 
the USA is set at loo%, which gives the results as 
shown in figure 7. 
Y I I l  .slml.a..oon 
Figure 7: Weight-based Recyclability 
percentagescore 
It is concluded that the differences between the 
televisions on material recycling efficiency are 
minimal. 
This is completely in line with findings in 
European practice. For years designers worked on 
Design for Disassembly and Design for Recycling 
while realizing very few improvements. Many 
more results can be gained by better organization 
of the recycling system, not on recycling quotes 
but on recycling costs. A better recycling system 
organization includes leverage of scale towards 
recyclers and getting better prices from material 
processors, for example because of better 
economics of scale. 
The environmental benchmarking report also 
checks on disassembly time. This is done by 
counting the amount of screws, snaps and solder 
connections that have to be opened to separate the 
materials. These figures are multiplied by the 
standard time needed to break these connections. 
The averages of the time for the Europe and Asia 
are respectively: 358 and 660 seconds. An average 
for the USA is not meaningful because of the large 
differences within this region. In the USA the 
three televisions will take approximately 180, 194 
and 794 seconds to separate. The differences in 
disassembly time can mainly be explained by the 
amount of screws: one of the American TVs 
scores best with 19 screws, a television in China 
performs worst with 107 screws. 
Chemical contents 
There are flame-retardants in the encasing of all 
benchmarked televisions in the USA, which make 
the plastics in these televisions very hard to 
recycle. No flame retardants were found in 
European and Asian TVs. 
All manufacturers use PVC in their products, but 
some of them use PVCs in their packaging. In fact 
the amounts are very small, some only use PVCs 
in their twist-ties, but they are very easy to replace 
by non-PVC twist-ties. 
Life cyc/e analysis 
As already stated, in the environmental benchmark 
method life cycle analysis is used to summarize 
and validate the results of the five focal areas. 
What can be leamed from the life cycle analysis is 
that energy use is the main issue, and real 
improvements for environment should be made on 
energy use on televisions. 
The averages of North America, Europe and Asia 
are respectively: 4030, 3650 and 4300 millipoints, 
according to the Eco Indicator 95 method. The 
differences can mainly be explained because of the 
differences in energy use between the regions. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have provided a comparison of environmental 
benchmark studies devoted to mapping the 
environmental performance of 27”-29” television 
sets of a variety of intemational and local brands. 
In total some fifty parameters, which are relevant 
for the environmental performance, have been 
measured. These include the following focal areas: 
Energy consumption in various modes (and of 
various subassemblies) 
Material application (metals, plastics weight) 
Packaging and transport (materials, volumes) 
Chemical content (heavy metal, flame 
retardants, organics) 
Recyclability (disassembly analysis, 
mechanical treatments) 
Considering the focal area of energy consumption, 
the European benchmarked televisions score 
significantly better, and an explanation for this 
363 
could be .the govemmental regulations. By 
improving energy consumption, manufacturers can 
potentially score much better in life cycle 
assessments, because with TV sets the energy use 
is very dominant in life cycle analysis. Some 
manufacturers could easily improve their 
performance on energy use by improving their 
stand-by modes; others already have but can make 
further improvements in on-mode. 
Although not much can be said in relation to any 
differences between the regions in the field of 
packaging, much can be leamed from the 
differences within the regions. The difference is 
big enough for Philips to reconsider its packaging 
designs. 
Considering the focal area of weight, televisions 
from the USA score significantly better than 
competitors in other regions. The differences on 
the areas of the CRTs and the encasing can be 
very large. 
On the focal area of recyclability the total amount 
of materials that can be recycled does not differ 
significantly, but interesting differences can be 
found in the disassembly time. A further analysis 
of these data will give rise to interesting cost 
savings. 
Also, between products sold in the three regions of 
the world, clear differences were found (although 
not as large as between best and worst brand 
performances). We have provided speculations 
about factors that contribute to this. 
The current study shows an example of how 
environmental benchmarking is a powerful tool 
for systematically tracking down differences in 
design solutions preferred by competing brands. 
We have also demonstrated how this knowledge 
can be used to identify where to focus product 
improvement and environmental redesign efforts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank: 
Jurjen Rolf and Brian Oliveiro for their excellent 
contribution to the benchmark study at Philips 
Suzhou in China. 
Members of the Environmental Competence 
Centre of Philips Consumer Electronics are 
acknowledged for their support and for providing 
environmental benchmark studies. 
The board of the AndersodInterface Chair of 
Natural systems is thanked for their support of a 
visiting professorship of one of the authors (Ab 
Stevels) at Georgia Tech. 
REFERENCES 
[ l ]  Boks, C., Stevels, A. (2002) “Theory and 
Practice of Environmental Benchmarking for 
Consumer Electronics”, submitted for publication 
in: Benchmarking - an Intemational Journal: 
special issue on Corporate Environmental 
Benchmarking 
[2] Boks, C., Stevels, A. Multiple-Environmental 
Benchmark Data supporting Ecodesign in both 
industry and academia. Proceedings of DESIGN 
2002, May 14-17,2002, Dubrovnik, Croatia 
131 Boks, C., Stevels, A. Multiple Environmental 
Benchmark Data Analysis: Meaningful Metrics for 
Management. Proceedings of CARE Innovation 
2002, November 25-28,2002, Vienna, Austria 
364 
