2"d GRSSLSPRS Joint Workshop on "Data Fusion and Remote Sensing over Urhan Areas" 172 
AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF LAND COVER WITH HIGH RESOLUTION DATA OF THE 
RIO DE JANEIRO CITY BRAZlL 
Luiz Felipe Guanaes Rego 
Barbara Koch 
Abteilung Femerkundung und Landschaftsinfonnationssysteme - FELIS 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat Freiburg 
Forstwissenschafiliche F a h l t a t  
Tennenbacher Strasse 4 * D-79106 Freibur 
Tel.:(49)-761-203 3694 * Fax:(49)-761-203 3701 
Regoluiz@felis.uni-feiburg.de 
Abstract The city 01 Rio de Janeiro, with more than 5 million 
inhabitants, have two big mountains in its centre with natural 
Atlantic rain forest. The growth of the city around these two 
mountains puts pressure on this lorest. This not only the 
endangers the remaining Atlantic forest (one 01 the most 
endangered lorest types of the world) but also causes landslides 
and mud flows. 
The city administration carried out a Landsover forest 
classification with visual interpretation using merged 
LANDSAT and SPOT data. This work produced a compatible 
thematic map in the scale 1:50,000. It took about 36 mouths 01 
intensive work and high costs to produce these maps. The scale 
of these maps permit to have a global vision of the land change 
cover but unfortunately do not correspond with the geographic 
information system of the city, which works with a scale of 
1:10,000. The city searched for options to make this work 
automatically and quickly to get information for planning and 
to propose solutions. 
In order to solve this problem high resolution satellite data 
and automatic classification of Land-cover classes are needed. 
Consequently, images as IKONOS (multispectral with four 
bands and 4 meters) need to be used to produce a classification, 
with a scale corresponding to the CIS of the city. The automatie 
classification of Laud-cover classes will provide a relatively 
rapid classification. 
Pixel based elassilication with high resolution data show 
some problems because the level 01 information in the data 
produce a lot of incorrect classified pixels. The solution to  
perform this classification uses the new approach that makes 
one "pre-classification" (segmentation), which transforms the 
pixel information in objects as well as the feature in the vector 
representation. This objects have spectral value (for example 
the medium value of the pixel inside of them), information about 
the area, the length, the shape etc. To carry out the segmentation 
and classification processes, oriented objects analysis are used 
(ecoGnifion). 
To achieve these results a method that operates in 3 phases 
was applied. Firstly, three generic classes were created, 
basically using spectral inlormation. Secondly, six subclasses 
with their respective neighbourhood information were applied. 
Thirdly, 4 more classes were created irrespective of 
Classification above. These classes involve one hierarchy 01 
segmentation with objeets 01 different sizes. The classification 
process used one level with small classified objects to make a 
classification of objects in another level containing bigger 
objects. 
In all phases were created reference points to make the 
accuracy assessment. The results in all were more than 85% 
overall accuracy. The hypothesis that with high resolution data 
we can automatically produce Land-cover classification, 
corresponding to the scale 1:10,000, is true. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Rio de Janeiro City is the country's second biggest city and 
has a 5,848,914 inhabitant population (Statistics Yearbook, 
RJ city, 2000). The city presents contradictions that express 
themselves spatially through two cities: a city with well- 
developed infrastructure and services, and a city with no 
infrastructure, with sanitation, electricity, power and service 
problems. These two cities in one experience a negative 
shocking process that leads to wrong-doings and 
environmental degradation processes. This duality may be 
seen spatially, for instance, between the noble city districts 
situated in the south of the city and the slums (they are illegal 
occupations, or occupations that are going through the process 
of being legalized, usually on hills, where people settle. The 
areas are inappropriate and there is the constant risk of 
sliding.). This spatial contradiction brings an articulation 
between service renderers and service absorbers, using a logic 
in which one depends on the other and, somehow, they justify 
themselves (Cor&, Roberto Lohato, 1997). 
These factors show the complexity of the spatial occupation 
of the city. They prove the need to produce Land-cover and 
Land-use maps that may enable the perception and study of 
spatial anangements that these pressures materialize. 
Land-cover maps were developed through visual 
interpretation techniques, which demands intensive analytical 
work and several months for its performance (Prieto, D. F., et 
al., 2002). Many times this time between the acquisition of 
the image and its classification does not let us accompany the 
process and there is no time to substantiate the making of a 
decision avoiding or diminishing the negative effects of urban 
expansion concerning the municipality's forested areas. 
2nd GRSSlISPRS Joint Workshop on "Data Fusion and Remote Sensing over Urban Areas" 173 
The Land-cover classifications of the city were developed 
using medium-resolution satellite images, LANDSAT and 
SPOT, which make way for the production of classifications 
based on the spatial resolution of these images that lead to 
maps that are compatible with the scale of 1:50,000 (Technical 
Report. SMAC. 2000). On the one hand, this scale does not 
help with the perception of the devastation processes that take 
place in many areas and involve few meters of the expansion, 
but that when added represent considerable areas. On the other 
hand, too, they do not allow the integration of this 
information to the GIS environment developed by the city that 
irregular urban expansion, agricultural a~eas within the park's 
limits and constant problems caused by annual tires. 
The coverage classes used by City Hall that belong to the 
area of study of this work may be grouped according to their 
hierarchy, that is, generic classes may be established and then 
subdivided into subclasses. Most of the Land-cover 
classification systems adopt this process of establishing 
classifications at different levels of detail (Meinel, G. & 
Hennersdorf, J., 2002). 
The process to evaluate classification techniques used in 
I 
I 
I 
I 
hectares I hectares hectares 
! I ,  I ,  
. .  
I I 1  1 1  
I 
I < Phase1  >GI c, Phase2 > S C  Phase 3 
! ' I  I ,  1 1  
Fiaure 1. Characteristics of the Phases of the Research Proiect 
works with information that is el'ther compatible or higher 
than the scale of 1:10,000, leading to a mistake, by both 
factors, between the environment of geographic analysis and 
the coverage information that is produced. 
In short, it is necessary to search for a classification process 
that in weeks enables the production of Land-cover maps of 
the city. It is also necessary that these maps have a level of 
detail that enables the identification of the fragmented process 
of urban expansion concerning the forests. The proposed, 
therefore, involves the verification of the capacity to reproduce 
automatically and, consequently, quickly, the city's official 
coverage classes using high-resolution IKONOS images that 
lead to classifications that are compatible with the scale of 
1:10,000. Therefore, there was an attempt to compensate the 
medium-resolution and the visual interpretation versus the 
high-resolution and the automatic classification. 
11. METHOKILOGY 
This work was concentrated on part of the Pedra Branca 
State Park, in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The Park was 
chosen due to the huge environmental problems the park faces, 
especially because of its insertion within the city of Rio de 
Janeiro. It was also chosen due to boundary limits such as: 
this work made use of this hierarchic concept of classes, 
dividing the problem into three different levels of detail called 
phases. With the phases, the results of the automatic 
classification techniques were tested from general to specific, 
beginning with three generic classes and ending with all the 
Land-cover subclasses used by City Hall. 
The first phase evaluated a set of three generic classes, in a 
relatively small sub-set using a great deal of classification 
techniques. Phase 2 evaluated a set of six classes, in a sub-set 
four times larger than the first one and with a lot less 
classification techniques. Phase three evaluated a set of 12 
classes, in a sub-set that represented half of the IKONOS scene 
and applied a classification technique. Each phase was 
distinguished by a set of factors: the classes that were used, 
the sub-set's area and the number of options for classification. 
These factors varied from phase to phase: the classes and the 
sub-set's area increased and the number of options for 
classification decreased as it may be seen in Figure 1. 
With the increase in the number of classes, from generic 
categories in the first phase, subclasses were created, 
deepening what is described on the landscape printed in the 
IKONOS image. The final product obtained in the third phase 
was 12 classes that were merged in 5 classes used by City 
Hall. 
Znd GRSSDSPRS Joint Workshop on "Data Fusion and Remote Sensing over Urban Areas" 174 
The increase of the number of classes from phase to phase 
coincided with the increase of the subsets' area that were 
evaluated. With this alteration, there was an attempt to 
confirm, on the one hand, the stability of the classification 
results, as, on the other hand, to increase the number of 
objects in the image that represented the classes intended to 
extract in each phase. We also tried to give a more realist 
touch to this work, looking for a practical solution instead of 
more theoretical results that may be found, for example, in a 
fixed sub-set that could not embody. the whole variance 
spectrum that holds the landscape represented in the complete 
IKONOS image. 
Since in each phase a different group of classes in subsets 
with different areas too was tested, it was necessary to develop 
three references, one per phase, to verify the accuracy of the 
classifications. 
In short, one phase was defined as a set of experiments with 
a fixed geographic area, the same set of classes and with the 
same accuracy system. 
An experiment was defined as a unit of study and 
evaluation that embodied the study of one or two variables 
with different values and tried to answer an objective question 
related to a technique and a result that could be compared to 
another technique's result. 
111. DISCUSSION AND RESULTS 
Phase 1 tested three generic classes, Field, Vegetation and 
Edification, and a great number of automatic classification 
techniques of orbital images. These techniques involved 
classifications based on the pixel as well as classification 
techniques based on objects. The results concerning their 
accuracy showed in more than 100 classifications that the 
system based on objects had a better classification than the 
one based on the pixel using high-resolution images as it may 
be seen in Graph 1. 
Pixel x Object Classification I I 
- Exp A L d  
Graph I. The 40 best results from experiments A (pixel based) and the 40 
best results from experiments B (object based) 
Phase 1 tested too the Membership classifier that proved to 
be, despite the large amount of available classifiers, inferior to 
the Nearest Neighbor classifier. The use of the Nearest 
Neighbor suggests that generic classes, which involve objects 
with great variations within one only class, reach the best 
results with the Nearest Neighbor as it may be seen in Graph 
2. 
Nearest Neighbor x Membership 
6 0,895 
0,885 
E 0.88 
8 0,875 
0,87 
6 0.89 
- 
I exp 1 b2 exp 1 b3 I 
~ ~ ~ ~ 
GRAPH 2. THE BESTCLASSlFlCAllON RESULTS FROM E(p 102 (NEARFSTNEIOHBOR) 
ANDW le3 (MEMBERSHIP). 
Phase 2 involved six classes that were extracted in two 
steps. The first involved the three classes from Phase 1: 
Vegetation, Field and Edification. The second one, six 
classes: Grouped Vegetation, Urban Vegetation, Urban Field, 
Grouped Field, Isolated Edification and Grouped Edification 
0 
Grouped veg 
Urban veg 
$ ;;;n field 
0 Grouped 
Edif. = 0 Isolated 0 Field 
p G J  1- 
Figure 2. Classes from Phase 1 and 2. 
from relations of neighborhood between classified objects. 
These classes were developed within the consistency 
principle used in the Land-cover classifications. The second 
group is composed of subclasses of the generic classes 
extracted from the first group, Phase 1, as we may see in 
Figure 2 
Phase 2 confirm potential to describe eminently contextual 
classes in the object environment. On the other hand, 
contextual relations proved to be very broad and flexible, in 
this aspect, the logic for the creation of these classes and the 
definition of their contextual relations used by the analyst are 
particular and different solutions may lead to effective results. 
2"' GRSSLSPRS Joint Workshop on "Data Fusion and Remote Sensing over Urban Areas" 175 
0 TT.t.nl -,., rnnrni;~otn~ 0 Isolated edificat 0 Grouped edifica 0 Urban area { 0 Urban 
Phase 3 involved classifications that are direct answers to 
the previous phases. More than this, the previous phases exist 
within Phase 3. This way, level 2 reproduced the three generic 
classes from Phase 1 with the Nearest Neighbor classifier. 
Level 6 reproduced the six classes developed in Phase 2 using 
contextual neighborhood classifiers and, finally, levels 17 and 
9 created the defined classes using sub-objects classified as 
Vegetation 6 and Urban Field 6. The results from levels 6, 9 
and 17 are integrated at level 7 producing a group of eight 
classes that besides considering the classes defined by City 
Hall, created other classes that prove the potential of 
classification of high-resolution images as well as of the 
classifying potential of the object environment. 
The classes from Phase 3 were produced using the classes 
developed in Phase 2. The Urban Vegetation, Urban Field and 
Grouped Edification classes were added to the Urban Area 
class that, later, was subdivided into the Urban not 
Consolidated and Urban classes. The Vegetation class was 
subdivided into Vegetation and Altered Vegetation and the 
Grouped Field class was renamed to Field as we may see in 
Figure 3. 
," 
using statistical parameters, 
but to the development of a 
spatial logic that enables the 
classes intended to classify to 
Field 6 class at level 6 with the following classes: Urban 91 
and Urban not consolidated 91. 
The classes from level I were developed based on 
proportion relations of the sub-objects classified at level 6 and 
of the super objects classified at levels 9 and 17 with the 
following classes: Grouped Vegetation 7111, Altered 
Vegetation 7, Field with Vegetation 711, Field with Isoluted 
Vegetation 711, Grouped Field 7, Isolated Edification 7, 
Urban 71 and Urban not Consolidated 71. 
Figure 4 shows the segmentation levels, the classes and the 
relations among these levels in terms of sub-objects, blue 
arrow, and super objects, red arrow, used in Phase 3. Level 7 
corresponds to the Phase's final result. 
Phase 3 took advantage of the inherent potential of classes 
and subclasses within a more complex environment involving 
relations among objects and sub-objects, leading a subclass 
like the Urban Field to work as a basis for the classification 
of super-objects in two classes: Urban and Non-Edijiid 
--- --l Orban. I -  1 w his level of relations 
veg 
0 urban veg 
0 Urban field 
0 Grouped fi 
among levels proved to be 
powerful but once again too 
dependent on the analyst's 
positions. This participation 
is not limited to the definition 
of samples and evaluation 
I 1 be developed in sequential-and 
Figure 3. Classes from Phase 3. interrelated phases. 
The production of classes in Phase 3 involved a classifying 
process among different levels, with generic planes (high 
scale) where large objects were classified using classes found 
in a lower plane (low scale) (ecoGnition Manual: Basic 
Concepts). So we created at level 6 a group of classes that 
worked a base to classify other classes at level 9 and level 17. 
These classes were composed of large objects and created other 
classes at level 7 that included the classes used by City Hall 
in the area covered by the sub-set of the image used in the 
Phase. 
The classes from level 17 were developed based on 
proportion relations of the subobjects classified as Field 6 
and Vegetation 6 classes at level 6 with the following classes: 
Vegetation 17, Area of Altered Vegetation 17, Area of Field 
with Vegetation 17, Field 17 and Urban 17. 
The classes from level 9 were developed based on 
proportion relations of the sub-objects classified as Urban 
Therefore, the classification process within an object 
environment requires the creation of logical hierarchies to 
reach the intended class within a context of relations, of 
classes and subclasses as well as using relations among 
objects from one class to another. This system resembles the 
one used for visual classification in which intelpreters select 
big groups and, using varied parameters, they subdivide these 
groups into sub-groups and so on, from the generic to the 
specific. 
The integrated results of the three phases of this project lead 
us to assert that the use of IKONOS images and the object 
environment enable the reproduction of classes used as 
coverage by the Rio de Janeiro City Hall. This classification 
may be developed automatically and may lead to results 
compatible with the scale of 1:10,000 and with higher 
accuracy results compared to the current classification 
developed by City Hall, 87% and 61%, respectively as it may 
be seen in Graph 3. 
2nd GRSSiISPRS Joint Workshop on "Data Fusion and Remote Sensing over Urban Areas" 
Iv. REFERENCE 
176 
0,61 / I  
I I Automatic classification Visual classification 
[ I ]  
[2] 
Coda,  Roberto Lobatu,L997. Trajetbnas Geogrlficas - Meio 
Ambiente e Sociedade. Berlrand. B r a d  
Pieto, D. F. at all, 2002. Development of EO derived Products 
and Service for Moniwnng Urban Sprawl at National Scale: 
URBEX, a joint ESA-WWF Effort. Proc 3 international 
Symposium Remote Sensing of U h  Areas Stambul: Page 497- 
503. 
Technical Report. SMAC. 2000. Mapeamento e caracterizaglo 
de "SOS das term e cokbermra vegetal no municipio do  Rio de 
Janeiro entre os anos de 1984 e 1999. Secretaria Municipal de 
Meio Ambiente. Rio de Janeiro. 
Meiael G, & Hennersdorf, I., 2002. Classifications Systems of 
Land Cover and Land Use And their Challenges for picture 
Processing of Remote Sensing - Slatus of Intemational . In 
Proceedine 3 intemacional Symrasium Remote Sensing of 
[3] 
141 
I I Urban Areas. Stambd. 
Graph 3. Automatically classification (IKONOS) compared to 
visual classification the current classification developed by City 
Hall (LANDSAT-SPOT). 
(a) Conclusion 
This work confirms the hypothesis first defined and suggests 
City Hall to adopt high-resolution images to produce Land- 
cover maps, with high accuracy levels, more details on the 
classes and produced in few months, opposed to the mapping 
produced from LANDSAT images, assuring updated 
information on the 
transformation of the 
municipality's space 
and, consequently, 
establishing 
management and 
planning actions of the 
city. 
dynamics of 
Despite the 
specificity of the area of 
study and of the classes 
used, this work enables 
us to generically 
substantiate the 
potential of the 
classification system 
via objects as well as 
the IKONOS images to 
use in Land-cover 
classifications, 
especially in urban 
areas due to the 
complexity of the 
classes in this 
environment as well as 
for the need of 
mappings on great 
scales aiming at actions 
at management and 
operational levels. 
Urban not :onsolidated 91 
0 urban #eg 6 
0 Urban field 6 
0 Grouped field 6 
0 Isolated edification 6 
0 Grouped odification 6 
4rea of Pltered veg 17 
&rea of iield ulth veg 17 
0 4ltered veg 7 
0 ZieH aith veg 711 
0 ?ekI ailh isoleted veg 711 
0 3rouped neld 7 
0 solatededikation 7 
0 Jrban 71 
0 Vot consolidated Urban 71 
1 0 Field 17 
Figure 4. Classification process of Phase 3. The arrows in red indicate classes classified from super 
objects relations and the arrows in blue, from sub-objects relations. 
