‘Pay-per-use’ Concept in Healthcare: A Grounded Theory Perspective 
Abdullah A. Akbar  
Abdullah@comp.leeds.ac.uk; 
 
University Of Leeds, Leeds, U. K  
 
 Abstract 
Healthcare organizations worldwide are 
faced with the growing challenge of 
introducing structural and technological 
reforms and cost-effective IT solutions 
that will transform the traditional 
structure of healthcare provision. 
Current technological developments 
have shed optimistic light on the future 
of IT in healthcare. This paper 
introduces ‘Pay-Per-Use’ concept in 
healthcare delivery services, which 
could prove appropriate for a small 
country like the State of Kuwait. The 
research question is directed towards 
the appropriateness and usefulness of 
such a concept. The need for effective 
and efficient healthcare delivery services 
in health organizations implies the need 
to establish a healthcare paradigm that 
is investment,communication,technology, 
platform,database,application - indepen- 
dent. The Grounded Theory (GT) forms 
the basis of the new concept, using a 
social context and referring to a typical 
clinical scenario. The social process 
fundamental to GT  provides a specific 
and systematic approach to understand 
medical work and network of 
relationships among healthcare entities. 
Interpretations and analysis of data in 
the social context facilitates clearer 
understanding of concepts and 
categories and enables the formulation 
of a theory and a model architecture. 
The State of Kuwait is a typical example 
of a small country that is fast advancing 
in IT, where the new concept can be put 
to the test within the required 
infrastructure for the development of a 
beneficial healthcare delivery system in 
the country. 
 
1. Healthcare Delivery and IT 
National healthcare delivery in most 
countries has come under strong and 
growing stresses to institute major 
structural reform. While conditions vary 
in different countries, the source of these 
stresses is remarkably common across 
most nations, being primarily generated 
by external demands from demography, 
technology and the economy 
(Wolvaardt,1998). Those responsible for 
provision of healthcare understand that it 
is possible to enhance the quality of 
patient care and the cost-benefit balance 
by the effective introduction of inform-
ation technology (IT), which will ultima 
tely transform the traditional structure of 
healthcare provision (Sosa and Levett, 
1995; Warner, 1998).  
In recent years, two noticeable areas of 
growth in the computer industry have 
been the number of distributed applica-
tions being shared using multi-databases 
which typically integrate information 
from pre-existing, heterogeneous local 
databases in a distributed environment 
and present global users with transparent 
methods to use the total information in 
the system; and the rapid growth in the 
area of telecommunications (Kim, 1995). 
The Internet has great potential to 
enhance peoples' health by developing 
communications and improving access 
to information for care providers, 
patients, health plan administrators, 
public health officials, biomedical 
researchers, and other health profession-
als (Sosa et al., 1998). The emergence of 
the Internet, Intranet, Extranet as 
preferred communication vehicles makes 
it possible for healthcare providers to 
access laboratory results, X-ray and 
medical records via the World Wide 
Web (Deluca and Enmark, 2001). 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
However, solutions to the problems of 
security, integrity, legality and ethical 
issues could become critical barriers to 
realising the objective of the global 
provision of healthcare (Deluca, 2000). 
2. Emerging Problems in Healthcare 
The poor state of current paper-based 
medical records and the difficulty of 
recovering information from disordered 
documents have posed several problems 
not only for the healthcare providers but 
also for researchers, administrators, 
insurance companies and other third 
parties who could benefit from having 
more direct access to patient data (Ball 
and Collen, 1992). More often than not, 
it is argued, the current medical record is 
messy, incomplete, and the terminology 
used is vague and interpretable in many 
ways. In the words of Bleich and 
Lawrence, “The medical record is an 
abomination. ... it is a disgrace to the 
profession that created it. The charts 
confuse rather than enlighten; they 
provide a forbidding challenge to anyone 
who tries to understand what is 
happening to a patient” (Bleich and 
Lawrence, 1993). Ideally, it is argued, a 
medical record both supports the 
physician's clinical problem solving and 
serves as a ‘repository of information’ 
for use by multiple parties. It should 
guide the physician's thought processes 
towards ‘an efficient, scientific 
problem-solving method’ and allow for 
quick, efficient access according to 
widely diverging needs (Dick et al, 
1997). To satisfy these requirements, 
many authors discuss the necessity to 
standardize terminology, to restrain the 
use of ‘free text’ or to automatically 
code the free text portions. In this way, 
the building blocks of medical thinking 
can be delineated and ordered. The 
record needs to be structured so that bits 
of information can be recognized by the 
computer as belonging, for example, to a 
single class or as standing in a 
distinctive type of relation (e.g. ‘request’ 
and ‘response’) (Shortliffe and Barnett, 
1990; McDonald and Barnett, 1990; 
Rector et al., 1991, 1993). Healthcare 
information systems need to be 
supported by security, integrity and 
legality for the successful transmission 
of information and for easy and reliable 
accessibility by those who need them. 
 
2.1 Challenges of the Electronic 
Health Record 
Information management, both 
administrative and clinical, is critical in 
today's healthcare environment. 
Physicians are challenged to increase 
productivity and simultaneously improve 
the quality and reduce the cost of the 
care they provide. Electronic Patient 
Health Records (EPHRs) are information 
tools ideally suited to help physicians 
meet these challenges (Dick et al, 
1997;Yamazaki and Satomura, 2000). 
EPHRs supplement traditional paper-
based medical records with computer-
based functions for the acquisition, 
processing, display, and reporting of 
clinical and related administrative data. 
The overall prospect of storing health 
information in electronic form raises 
concerns about standards, patient 
privacy, confidentiality of data and 
security (GMC 1995; Anderson, 1996; 
Berry, 1997; Pronkin and Shifrin, 1999; 
Bourka et al, 2001). If the concerns are 
not sufficiently addressed, they can 
discourage healthcare organisations from 
exploiting IT, and the healthcare 
consumer will be hesitant to share 
information (Zelmer, 1995; Drucker, 
1999). 
Several major impediments remain as 
barriers to the full implementation of 
EPHRs. These impediments include the 
lack of standards that define complete 
infrastructure inter-operability among 
different healthcare information settings, 
lack of agreement on the data sets and 
code sets that make up the content and 
structure of the EPHR applications, lack 
of standards to ensure data quality and 
completeness in one operational integra-
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
tion architecture, and lack of national 
legislation in several countries to protect 
adequately the privacy of health records. 
Even though these impediments have not 
been completely overcome on a local or 
national basis, the requirements of a 
mobile international society are already 
starting to demand the need for a 
framework for a global EPHR. Today, 
healthcare delivery is not just restricted 
to the local hospitals and doctors. 
Medical expertise is global and the 
patient can now be diagnosed and treated 
by a team of doctors distributed globally, 
yet all contributing collectively to 
patient healthcare delivery. This new 
healthcare delivery mechanism 
necessitates the global availability of the 
patient’s health information.  
 
3. Research Objectives 
The major objectives of the research 
described here are: to propose a 
conceptual IT solution to growing 
healthcare problems, which is suitable 
for healthcare system of a country such 
as State of Kuwait; to set the basic 
framework wherein the concept can be 
applied; to identify and interpret a 
suitable model and delineate the 
architecture that suits the proposed 
concept; and, finally, to demonstrate the 
future implications of the concept with 
reference to Kuwait’s healthcare. 
Therefore, the focus of the research is to 
address the question: Can the pay-per-
use concept allow easy and international 
access to electronic patient record and is 
it an appropriate approach for Kuwait’s 
healthcare? The research considers the 
benefits and the impact of the pay-per-
use concept in healthcare delivery. The 
research seeks to address the following 
requirements and challenges in health 
care delivery: accessing to patient health 
records anywhere with security; 
delineate a system architecture that 
allows authorities to update healthcare 
systems, permits selection and 
deployment of the best available 
application and facilitates maintaining 
the patient health record information 
with security utilising an independent 
infrastructure on a ‘pay-per-use’ basis.   
To address the stated objectives, it is 
important to understand medical work 
within a social setting, which in turn 
provides a realistic approach to the 
research problem. 
 
4. Significance of Scenarios 
The medical record is a tool, and a 
crucial one at that, aiding memory, 
communication, and so forth but it is not 
a ‘mirror’ of that work. It does not 
‘represent’ the work, but it ‘feeds into’ 
it, it structures and transforms it in 
complex ways: it structures the 
communication between healthcare 
personnel, shapes medical decision 
making, and frames relations between 
personnel and patients. Recent studies of 
‘thinking-in-action’ have shown that 
what we often consider to be 
‘intellectual tasks’ in fact often appear to 
be highly embodied activities, in which 
ongoing interactions with the immediate 
material and social surroundings play a 
crucial role (Clancey, 1995). Medical 
work is essentially a social process and 
an interactive activity. The unit of the 
analysis should therefore be the process 
rather than the data. 
Healthcare scenarios typically depict 
sequence of distinct actions that 
accomplish a particular task and detail 
the chain of interactions performed or 
experienced by healthcare experts. They 
describe one or more episodes or events 
of the healthcare disciplines. They 
highlight goals suggested by the 
appearance and behaviour of the system, 
what people try to do with the system; 
what procedure are adopted, not 
adopted, carried out successfully or 
erroneously, and what interpretations 
people make of what happens to them 
(Carroll, 1999). The use of scenario in 
human-computer interaction work seeks 
to describe and direct the appearance, 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
operation, and application of technology 
and its consequences for people, 
organizations, and their practices. They 
have been used to generate requirements, 
detect ambiguities in requirements, 
uncover missing features and incon-
sistencies among specified features, 
verify and validate requirements, and 
integrate analysis of functional and non-
functional, or ‘quality,’ requirements, 
such as security, safety, reliability, 
portability, and cost (Carroll 1999). 
They emphasize qualitative descriptions 
of human activity, directly engaging the 
laws of the social and behavioural 
sciences – our knowledge of what people 
need to do and wish to do, what they are 
most likely to do, how they will go about 
doing it, what they are most likely to 
recall or forget, what sorts of errors they 
are most susceptible to make, and so 
forth.  
A realistic artificial clinical scenario 
cited in this research makes useful 
interpretation of explanatory reference to 
architecture see figure 1. This will 
enable stakeholders to judge whether or 
not the architecture is a socially 
embedded process by which actors make 
sense of their situation. Patient visits and 
the eventualities form the episode. A 
retrieved record is ‘event-driven’ not 
‘content-driven’ because of the different 
structure of the content in each 
discipline. Hence, the same scenario can 
be applied to various disciplines and thus 
prove the internal and external validity. 
A scenario can be broadened to include 
national and international boundaries. 
Therefore two concepts are derived from 
each intervention (visit #, event #): one 
that constitutes the electronic patient 
health record content management for 
each episode; the other that promotes 
global access where heterogeneous 
database and different standards and 
structures are encountered. Then the 
relationships among concepts that 
‘ground’ the information architecture 
model which will form the basic 
technology for using the ‘pay-per-use’ 
within ‘investment- independence’ 
theory.  
 
5. Grounded Theory (GT) Approach 
To understand the ‘sociality’ element in 
medical and IT work, we put forward the 
GT method  as an appropriate theoretical 
tool for investigation and for the 
explanation of the research process. 
Glaser and Strauss (1967) were the 
original proponents of Grounded 
Theory,  which led to the development 
of the discovery of the empirical theory. 
The method is grounded in social 
settings and is based on the collection 
and analysis of qualitative data 
developed by Glaser and Strauss (1967). 
Although the method dates back to 1967, 
its use in Information Systems research 
is very recent. Useful summaries of the 
use of GT in IS research can be found in 
Hughes and Howcroft (2000) and 
Urquhart (2001). 
According to the method, conceptual 
properties and categories may be 
`discovered' or generated from  
qualitative data by following a number 
of guidelines and procedures where the 
aim is to indicate the importance of the 
actors in the social setting.  
GT proceeds with two analytical 
techniques - theoretical sampling and 
constant comparison. The theoretical 
sampling in GT is theory-driven. Strauss 
and Corbin (1998) emphasize that the 
grounds that determine which events, 
activities, or people require further data 
collection are analytic grounds based on 
the emerging theory. As each new 
incident or concept emerges, it needs to 
be compared against existing concepts 
and categories for both similarities and 
differences. The research utilises 
theoretical sampling of a typical clinical 
scenario and undertakes comparative 
analysis of emerging technologies and 
challenges and provides an interpretation 
of a theory that forms the basis of an 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
information architecture model suitable  
within the pay-per-use concept. 
 
The GT method enables understanding 
of the complexity of healthcare delivery 
and its relationships within the context 
of ‘sociality’. It implies a relationship 
view of health markets, which means 
that it is concerned with relationships 
between health institutions over time, 
rather than single exchange episode and 
transaction. Assuming such a 
relationships view to be an important 
empirical phenomenon in healthcare 
delivery system, Grounded Theory 
explicates these relationships by 
adopting a process perspective as 
opposed to a unit perspective. this is 
done by taking a social, psychological 
level of analysis and by defining the 
research problem from the perspective of 
the focal actor. It further leads to the 
assumption that that business takes place 
in a network setting where different 
business actors are linked to each other 
through direct and indirect relationships 
(as the definition of integrated delivery 
networks, systems (IDN / IDS). The 
network of relationships is the unit of 
analysis, not the individual firm 
(Forsgren and Johanson, 1992). Indeed 
the emphasis on connection is important 
because networks emerge and develop as 
a consequence of interactions. 
Relationships form the context in which 
interactions take place. Thus, grounded 
theory explicates these relationships by 
adopting a process perspective as 
opposed to a unit perspective. Refer to   
figure 2. for the whole process. 
 
6.  Pay-Per-Use Concept 
In the current rapidly moving 
technological environment, healthcare 
organizations that aspire to stay ahead of 
the technological curve, are in need of 
cost-effective and powerful applications 
that can improve the cost of care and 
overall enterprise performance without 
requiring huge capital investments. To 
serve that purpose, a new concept is 
introduced called ‘Pay-per-use’. This 
concept, which will be of interest to 
most healthcare organizations, is similar 
to a rental service, in which 
organizations pay for what they use for a 
period of time via the Internet. This 
‘Pay-per-use’ is accessed by users as per 
their needs, to accomplish a given task. 
So, it has several value added benefits. 
First, healthcare organizations that 
access applications through ‘Pay-per-
use’ typically pay only for what they 
use, not for unused time. There are no 
costly software contracts to maintain, 
and upfront costs associated with large 
hardware and software deployments are 
reduced. As ‘Pay-per-use’ will act as the 
technical services department of an 
organization, the need for experienced 
and highly paid technical staff to deal 
with installing, operating and 
maintaining applications is diminished 
significantly. The concept will assist the 
administrative processes and prove 
beneficial to healthcare organisations. In 
order to implement the concept, the 
healthcare delivery industry requires an 
infrastructure that is ‘investment-
independent’ with respect to the EPHR 
information asset management. 
 
6.1 Independent Information 
Infrastructure 
An independent information infra-
structure allows a healthcare 
organization to procure all the relevant 
services viz., the technology, 
application, data storage and 
communication services from the 
respective vendors with relatively 
minimal capital investment. This 
infrastructure would facilitate the 
organization to procure these services on 
a ‘pay-per-use’ basis. Today, the internet 
architecture and the Word Wide Web 
have laid the foundations for enabling 
the ‘investment-independent’ 
information infrastructure for the health 
care industry. Distributed database and 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
data management services are available 
from service providers. These 
applications also use the software 
technology, like Java, that can run on all 
hardware platforms under various 
operating systems. This enables 
‘platform-independence’ for the health 
care organizations. The applications also 
share data among various distributed 
databases using the database 
connectivity standards, like ODBC, 
IIOP, and CORBA etc. All these 
applications are now available to run 
from a simple ‘web browser’ from 
anywhere on a personal computer that 
connects to the Internet.   Communica-
tion and Internet services are available 
on subscription basis. This provides the 
basis for ‘database independence’ and 
‘communication technology indepen-
dence’. The vendors for the ‘enabling 
software’ and applications are now 
supporting ‘application-independent’ 
data formats (XML). Industry standards 
have been set to define this ‘application-
independent’ data definition and 
manipulation needs. With this, an 
application for a specific purpose, from 
vendor X, will be able to read/write data 
in a common format and exchange data. 
Organizations now are inclined to switch 
their vendors for applications according 
to their business needs. Healthcare 
service is now not bound by the 
application system and its vendor but is 
driven by competition among ‘applica-
tion system developers’ and service 
providers for better information 
management.  
 
7. Health Information Architecture 
Having provided a comparative analysis 
of concepts and categories within 
medical scenarios, the GT method 
enables interpretation of the model 
architecture for use within pay-per-use. 
The scenario-derived elements which 
focus on EPHR content management 
are: patients, healthcare service 
providers, healthcare delivery organiza-
tions, healthcare sponsors (Government 
e.g. Ministry of Health) as well as events 
such as patient visits, health problems, 
diagnoses, orders for tests or operations 
etc, references to other specialists, 
treatment, test results from service 
orders. Additionally, Images, audio 
,video clips, multi-media attachments, 
medical fields (Paediatrics, Orthopae-
dics, Radiology etc.) that have unique 
terminology and vocabulary used in 
health record management for problems, 
diagnosis, results, inference, treatment 
have significant relevance and 
contributions to EPHR. 
 
Social theory  also enables the setting of 
standard requirements for global EPHR 
access, namely, functional independence 
(different record management featured 
for different medical fields); the 
application chosen to manage data 
content for patient health record (PHR) 
in a field; the choice of ‘best-of-breed’ 
technology (by sponsor) to promote 
‘application - independence’; universal 
data manipulation formats used by 
applications to facilitate ‘data - 
independence’; data storage definitions 
(the choice to store data anywhere) to be 
used by applications to promote ‘data 
storage independence’ (able to store data 
at locations of choice). The stated 
features promote ‘platform, 
configuration, machine independence’; 
enable application access definitions to 
allow authorised persons to access 
secure data of a patient health record 
from all storage locations; data 
presentation to healthcare service 
providers (HSPs) to access and record 
data in different relevant formats (text, 
images, audio, video, charts, numbers in 
accessible formats) using simple, thin 
browser clients; and the merging of 
patient health data (PHD) from various 
medical centres, stored in distributed 
storage locations. 
 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
The baseline for a model health 
information architecture is described as 
follows: 
• For health care organizations 
(sponsors), healthcare delivery is 
the ‘core’ paradigm business and 
‘not’ healthcare systems 
development, maintenance. 
Hence, health organizations 
demand application investment-
independence. 
• Easy-to-use patient health record 
management software in each 
specific healthcare area is 
deployed in a ‘Pay-per-use’ 
model. 
• Processed health record data is 
stored at an information service 
provider’s facility in a ‘portable 
format’ on a ‘Pay-per-data 
storage’ basis and accessible 
always. 
• Health service providers access 
and manage patient health 
records using a simple 
workstation with a browser. 
• Health care sponsors select the 
application software to be used 
for each area. 
• Health care sponsors defines a 
‘portal’ through which authorised 
health care service providers can 
manage patient health records . 
• The Portal authenticates each 
user access, deploys all 
‘applications’ currently in use for 
various medical disciplines. 
• When an authorised practitioner 
accesses the portal and (s)he is 
directed automatically to use the 
relevant software to record, 
access, store patient health record 
information. 
• The selected application aided by 
the portal provides a single 
logical collection of all 
components of the patient health 
record covering medical history 
by visit and allows additional 
updates to the patient's health 
record. 
• The selected application software 
saves the patient health record 
(PHR) details in a universal 
format (e.g. XML) in storage 
areas directed by the set up 
established by the healthcare 
sponsor(HCS). This establishes 
the ‘Data Independence’ and 
‘Data Storage or Configuration 
Independence’ (a vision for the 
future). 
 
8. Discussion 
This paper focuses on social process in 
medical work and IT network to 
explicate the investment-independent 
theory within pay-per-use concept. It 
delineates a model of standards for 
healthcare information, network and 
communication while maintaining that 
the proposed concept is a theoretical 
development, in view of an evolving 
technological environment in modern 
times. The ‘open’ information system is 
itself an evolving concept for evolving 
problems in healthcare delivery and is 
subject to further studies and 
development. 
 
The ‘sociality problem’ in the 
information architecture model in the 
healthcare delivery system stems from 
its interdisciplinary roots. Indeed, when 
we consider the numerous 
interdependent links such as technology, 
knowledge, social relations, administra-
tive routines and systems and legal ties, 
components from different disciplines 
are difficult to integrate because they 
come encumbered by values, meanings 
and associations that often remain 
immiscible. Grounded theorists’ 
distinction between process and unit is 
that researching units are generally 
concerned with developing static 
descriptions, whereas processes are 
conceptually developed to account for 
behaviour as it occurs over time. Hence, 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
in assuming a process orientation 
dynamic, cross-contextual properties of 
behaviour can be uncovered. The 
complexity and interdependency of 
business relationships can be understood 
and explained by taking processes as the 
unit of analysis. The grounded theory 
approach provides a specific and 
systematic approach to the study of 
process. This notion of a generic process 
orientation addresses the ‘sociality 
problem’. The problem of attempting to 
integrate components from other 
disciplines is not a problem for the 
grounded theory method, as those 
concepts are only allowed as data and if 
they do not 'fit' the emerging codes and 
categories they are rejected. Grounded 
theorists claim that the key to their 
method is that the data should fit the 
theory, not the other way around. 
Finally, the GT methodology 
incorporates the assumption that the 
actors under study have their own  
perspectives, are able to interpret these 
and those of others and they get 
incorporated into the researcher's own 
interpretation. The theory evolves 
through a continuous interplay between 
analysis and data collection; however, 
this redefining involves interpretative 
work and grounded theorists accept 
responsibility for their interpretative 
role. While multiple prospective are 
systematically sought during the 
research process, the emerging theory 
are interpretations made of the data and 
all interpretations are temporarily limited 
judgements that can be made about the 
soundness or probable usefulness of the 
theory (Strauss and Corbin, 1994, 1998). 
 
Since the nineties, Kuwait like many 
other states has made tremendous 
progress in the field of IT. The growth of 
internet technology has been very rapid 
and has taken a place of dominion in 
most work places. Similarly, the health 
sector has also shown several transitions 
that have brought about useful 
transformation in administrative tasks, 
such as the increased use of computer 
records for management purposes. 
However, high rise in the demand for 
quantity and quality of health services 
and the costs of implementing IT utilities 
have posed problems in the health sector 
with difficulties in providing sufficient 
local resources and experience with 
knowledge to invest in IT. Based on an 
empirical research, Khalfan et al (2001) 
pointed out that shortages of IT skills in 
Kuwait, as an example of a developing 
country, has always been problematic 
(Khalfan and Gough, 2001). IT skills are 
an important ingredient for IT diffusions 
and assimilation. To overcome such 
‘serious’ problems different 
organisations tend to adopt different 
strategies. This paper proposes ‘pay-per-
use’ concept as an alternative option that 
can prove to be beneficial for a small 
country like the State of Kuwait. 
 
9. Conclusion  
‘Pay-per-serve’ concepts open for us a 
‘investment-independent technology’ 
theory. The phenomena of technology 
evolution will no longer frighten 
healthcare authorities from investing in 
technology that may become obsolete. If 
health informatics is really to serve 
people and their health, attention needs 
to be given to deploy a National Patient 
Health Information System. Only then 
will shared information and record 
system linkage become super highway 
of knowledge between patient and their 
supporting professionals. The 
relationship between concepts and 
categories will be a template for any 
healthcare institution having lack of 
expertise to develop such system and a 
constrained budget.  Mapping the 
complex everyday reality of the area 
under investigation into the scenario 
domain will result in well-constructed 
model or framework. One of the features 
of Grounded Theory is that it represents 
the complex everyday reality of the area 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
under investigation (Strauss and Corbin, 
1990). 
References: 
Anderson, R. J. (1996), “Security in 
Clinical Information Systems”, BMA, 
London.  
Ball, M. J and Collen, M (1992), 
Aspects of the computer-based patient 
record. New York: Springer.   
Berry, R. M (1997), “The Genetic 
Revolution and the Physician's Duty of 
Confidentiality. The role of the old 
Hippocratic Virtues in the Regulation of 
the New Genetic Intimacy”, J. Leg. 
Med., Vol. 18(4): pp: 401-441, PMID: 
9433035. 
Bleich, H. L and Lawrence, L (1993), 
“Weed and the Problem -Oriented 
Medical Record.” M. D. Computing, vol. 
10, pp: 69-71  
Bourka, A., Polemi, N. and Koutsouris, 
D. (2001), “An Overview in Healthcare 
Information System Security”, In: Patel, 
V. L., Rogers, R. and Haux, R (eds.) 
Proceedings of the Tenth World  
Congress on Medical Informatics  
(MEDINFO '2001), IMIA Canada 
Carroll, J. M. (1999), Five reasons for 
scenario-based design. In Proceedings 
of the 32rd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on Systems Sciences Los 
Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society 
Press. 
Clancey, W. L (1995) “The Learning 
Process in the Epistemology of Medical 
Information”. Methods of Information in 
Medicine. vol 34, pp: 122-130.  
Deluca, J. M (2000), “The Ethics of E-
commerce”, Health Forum Journal, Vol. 
43(3), pp: 28-35, San Francisco.  
Deluca, J. M. and Enmark, R (2001), 
“The Latest Revolution” Health Forum 
Journal, Vol. 44(1), pp. 22-25, San 
Francisco. 
Dick, R. S., Steen, E. B., and Detmer, D. 
E. 1997. The Computer-Based Patient 
Record.. An Essential Technology For 
Health Care. Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy Press. 
Drucker, P. (1999), “Management 
Challenges for the 21st Century”, Harper 
Business Press, New York. 
Forsgren, M and J Johanson (1992), 
"Managing Internationalisation in 
Business Networks", in Managing 
Networks in International Business, p 1 - 
15.  
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. (1967) 
The Discovery of Grounded Theory: 
Strategies for Qualitative Research, 
Aldine, New York. 
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. (1967) The 
Discovery of Grounded Theory: 
Strategies for Qualitative Research,  
Aldine, New York. 
GMC (1995), “Confidentiality and Good 
Medical Practice”, London: General 
Medical Council.   
Hughes, J. and Howcroft, D. A. (2000), 
“Grounded Theory: Never Knowingly 
Understood”, Information Systems 
Review, 4(1), pp:181-197. 
Khalfan, A. and Gough, T.G. (2001), 
“Vender Selection Criteria and Post-
implementation Evaluation Practices for 
IS/IT Outsourcing: A Case Study of a 
Developing Country”, Seventh European 
Conference on IT Evaluation, 
September, Dublin, Ireland. 
Kim, W. (ed.) (1995), “Modern 
Database Systems: the Object Model, 
Interoperability, and Beyond”, ACM 
Press, New York, Addison-Wesley. 
McDonald, C. J and Barnett, G. O 
(1990) “Medical-Record Systems”, In: 
Shortliffe, E. H and Perreault, L. E (eds). 
Medical Informatics. Computer 
Applications in Health Care. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley; pp: 181-218.  
Pronkin, M. A and Shifrin, M. A (1999), 
“Security for Electronic Patient Record 
System”, In: Kokol, P., Zupan, B., Stare, 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
J., Englbrecht, R. and Premik, M. (eds.) 
Medical Informatics Europe ‘99 Bridges 
of Knowledge, IOS press, Ohmsha. 
Rector, A. L., Nowlan, W. A. and Kay, S 
(1991) “Foundations for an electronic 
medical record”. Methods Inf. Med. vol 
30, pp: 179-86.  
Rector, A. L., Nowlan, W. A., Kay, S., 
Goble, C. A.and Howkins, T. I (1993) 
“A framework for modelling the 
electronic medical record”. Methods Inf. 
Med., vol 32, pp: 109-19.  
Shortliffe, E. H and Barnett, G. O (1990) 
“Medical data: Their Acquisition, 
Storage, and Use”, In: Shortliffe, E. H 
and Perreault, L. E (eds). Medical 
Informatics. Computer Applications in 
Health Care. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley; pp: 37-69.  
Sosa, M. and Levett, J. (1995), “The 
Information Society: Why Europe and 
Develop Countries should boost 
Partnership in Health Knowledge 
transfer”, Health Information society and 
developing countries, IOS Press, 
(Netherlands). 
Sosa-ludiciss, M et al (eds.) (1998), 
“Internet, Telematics and Health” IOS 
Press, Ohmsha. 
Strauss Anselm and Juliet Corbin 
(1994), Grounded Theory 
Methodology: An Overview, in N.K. 
Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds.), 
Handbook of Qualitative Research, 
Sage Publications, London, 273-285.  
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990), 
Basics of Qualitative Research: 
Grounded Theory Procedures and 
Techniques, California: SAGE 
Publications, Inc.  
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1998) Basics 
of Qualitative Research: Techniques and 
Procedures for Developing Grounded 
Theory, Sage, London. 
Urquhart, C. (2001) “An Encounter 
with Grounded Theory: Tackling the 
Practical and Philosophical Issues”, in: 
Trauth, E.  (ed), Qualitative Research 
in Information Systems: Issues and 
Trends, Idea Group Publishing, 
London. 
Warner, David (1998), “The 
Globalization of Medical Care”, in 
Zarrilli, S. and Kinnon, C. (eds) 
International Trade in Health Services: 
A Development Perspective, UNCTAD 
and WHO, Geneva.   
Wolvaardt, Gustaaf (1998), 
“Opportunities and Challenges for 
Developing Countries in Health Sector”, 
in Zarrilli, S. and Kinnon, C. (eds) 
International Trade in Health Services: 
A Development Perspective, UNCTAD 
and WHO, Geneva.  
Yamazaki, S., Satomura, Y (2000) 
‘Standard Method for Describing an 
Electronic Patient Record Template : 
Application of XML to Share Domain 
Knowledge,’ Method Inform Med, 
Vol.39 No.1 p50-55  
Zelmer, J. L (1995), “Informatics and 
Health Care Reform”, In: Greenes, R. 
A., Peterson, H. E., and Protti, D. J. 
(eds.) Proceedings of the Eighth World  
Congress on Medical Informatics 
(MEDINFO '95), IMIA Canada.  
 
  
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
Fi gu re1
F ar w a n i ya  c l i n i c
( V i s i t # 1 - Ev e n t #1 )
D r . J o h n  S u l l i va n
( Vi s i t # 1 -E v e n t 2)
E l ec t r o n i c  P a t i en t  H ea l t h
R e c o r d
M O H  U R L :
R e c e p t i o n
P r o g r am
M O H  U R L :
Ge n e r al
M e d i c i ne
( C l i n i c )
W ah e e d W a h e ed W a h e ed
R a d i o l o g i s t
-  V i s i t # 2 -
E v en t # 3
M O H  U R L:
R a di o l o g y
Vi s i t # 1
Vi s i t # 1 -
Ev e n t 2
de t a i l s
Vi s i t # 2 -
Ev e n t 3
d et a i l s
w i t h
Xr a y
i m a g e
M O H  U R L :
R e c e p t i o n
P r o g r am
M O H  U R L :
G e n er a l
M e d i c i n e
( C l i ni c )
W a h e ed F ar w a n i ya  c l i n i c
( V i s i t # 3 - Ev e n t #4 )
W a h ee d
V i s i t # 3
D r . J o h n  S u l l i v a n
( V i s i t# 3 - E v en t 5 )
V i s i t # 3-
E v e n t 5
d e t a i l s (
r e f e r r al
t o
O r t h o p
a e d i c )
W a he e d
M A K  H o s p i t a l
V i s i t# 4 - E v en t # 6
M O H  U R L:
R e c e p t i o n
P r og r a m (
M A K ) W a h e e d
V is i t # 4
D r . M u s a
V i s i t #4 -
E v e n t # 7
M O H
U R L :
O rt h o p a
ed i c s
V i s i t # 4- E v e n t 7  O p e ra t i o n
r e q u e s t
1 2 3
4 5
6
7
O p e r a t i o n  T he a t r e
M O H
U R L :
O r t h o p a
e di c s
O p er a t i o
n s
D r . M u s a
V i s i t #5 -
E v e n t # 8
O p e r at i o n  d e t a i l s
D r . M u s a
V i s i t #5 - E v e n t # 8
8
M OH
U R L :
O r t ho p a
e d i c s
D r . M u s a
V i s i t # 5-
E v e n t #9
O p e r a t i o n  d e ta i l s
D r . M u s a
V i s i t # 5 - Ev e n t #8
9
Ph a r ma c y
( V i si t # 6 - E ve n t 1 0)
1 0
M O H
U R L :
P ha r m a
c y
P h a r m a c y  d r u g s ( V i s i t# 6 -
E v e n t 1 0 )
W a h e e d
M A K  H o s p i t a l
( V i s i t# 7 - E v en t # 1 1 )
1 1
M OH URL:
Re ce p t i o n
P ro g ra m (M
A K )
V i s i t # 7
D r . M u s a
V i s i t # 7 -
E ve n t # 12
1 2
M O H
U R L :
Or t h o p a
e d i c s
W a h ee d   i s O K ( Vi s i t # 7 -
E v e n t # 1 2 )
Sc e na ri o f or
Arc hi t e c t ure
 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
  
Figure 2 Conceptual Development of Healthcare 
Architecture Model Baseline Utilizing GT 
 
 
 
 
THEORETICAL 
SAMPLING 
(Literature Review) 
CLINICAL 
SCENARIO 
CONCEPTS CATEGORIES 
Electronic Patient 
Health Record 
(EPHR) 
Stake- 
holder(s) 
Diagnosis
/tests
Treatment Terminology
Identifying Relations
Emerging 
Technologies 
Emerging 
Concepts in IT 
INTEGRATED 
ARCHITECTURE 
BASELINE 
MEDICAL  
WORK 
IT 
NETWORK 
Interpret Theory 
Evolving Healthcare 
Delivery Paradigm: 
Pay-Per-Use 
EُPHR Content Management, 
Global Access 
Define Organization 
Requirements
Select technological 
components 
Independent application, 
platform, operating 
infrastructure, configuration 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’03) 
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE 
