FS/O 12 
Seafloor Geodesy and an Ocean Bottom Cable System 
HiromiFujimoto 
Gmduate School of Science, Tohoku Univmity, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan 
f U i i m o t o ~ a o b . F . t o h o ~ ~ . i ~  
Space geodetic technologies such as GPS, VLBI (Vq Long Baseline Interfkmmetry), SLR (Satellite Laser Ranging), and SAR 
(Synthetic Aperture Radar) have revolutionized geodesy on land However, these technologies based on electric waves cannot be directly 
applied to seafloor geodesy because electric waves inclusive of light can hardly pmpgate in the seawater. We have to adopt sound waves 
and ocean bottom cables for un- communidoq positioning, power supply, and data m v q .  
Impoltance of crustal movement on the Seanoor has been pointed out for long time, and at last the dream is coming true; there have been 
pmising rep016 on GPS/Acowtic d o o r  positioning, repeated acoustic mging on the seafloor, ocean bottom pressure monitor& and 
tilt measmments in deep-sea boreholes. Long-term, continuous, and regional obse~~aiion is crucial for geodetic monitonhg of 
geodynarmcs. Now it is time for us to examine a new plan of scien!ilic ocean bottom cable system Although global coverage is diEcul< 
hns-mean monitoring systems or regional systems over seismogenic mes can be fwible. The latter can maintain real time ohemtiom 
on the d o o r ,  which are crucial for the study how a big earthquake is prepared 
1. Introduction 
Japanese Islands lie in subducton mes, and most of big eahquakes in 
and am" Japan occur under the d o o r .  There have been big progresses in 
the monitoring of crustal deformation associated with the plate subducton A 
GPS (Global Positioning System) network (GEONET) operated by 
Geographical Survey Institute, Japaq has enabled regional gecdetic monitoring 
of clustal deformation on land Distnbuton of seismic couphg in the 
subduction m e  has been estimated h land-based GPS obserdon and 
seismic observabon (e. g., Igarash 2001). However, the Japan trench axis lies 
about 200 km ofEhore, and the defxmation on land is much smaller than that 
on the d o o r  (e.g., Heki et 4 1997). Therefm, defmtion in the 
seismogenic zone, especially in its shallower part, is weakly conshahed b m  
the observations on land For the back-slip mcdehg, the plate motion of the 
Pacific plate at the sutdwtion zone is assumed to be constant, but there has been 
no observational co&t on the assumption 
Importance of crustal movement on the d o o r  has been pointed out for 
long time, and at last the dream has been coming true. chadwell et al. (2002) 
have recently repnted d t s  of GPS/Acoustic Seanoor positioning which 
suggest episodic q " g  of the Juan de Fuca ridge. Results of repeated 
acouStic ranging (Nagpya et al., 1999) and ocean bottom pressure monitoring 
(Fujimoto et al., 2003) for 14 months across the axis ofthe sqer-fiist q"g 
southem East Pacific Rise also suggest episcdic activities and t h d  
contmction of the crust in the sp"g center in the interqtion period 
Another impowt point is that theoretical and e m e n t a l  studies on the 
dynamics of a fault plane in the simogenic zone suggest a small slip before a 
main qtm of the faut There are Several important repolts on anomalous 
d deformations before inter-plate earthquakes. Such a p s l i p  is crucial for 
the study of earthquake @clion. Real time or semi-leal time m o n i w  is 
indqensable to detect such a crustal d e f d o n .  Now that monitoring of 
d defonnations on the ocean bottom has become one of important items of 
long-term d o o r  observation, we have to examine applicafions of an ocean 
bottomcablesystemtodoorgeodesy. 
2. Seismic monitoring of repeated slips on inter-plate faults 
There have been many big earthqukes and much more background 
d q u a k e s  in the subduction zones mund Japan Igarash~ (2001) anallyzed 
background Sesimicity in the sekmogenic zone off Sannku, ndeastern Japan, 
and found that the d @ e s  Occuning near the plate boundary are gmuped 
into many seismic clusters. Some chkm show characteristics that earthquakes 
of the CW show @te similar waveforms. Such earthquakes are d e d  as 
similar earthquakes. A c c d q  to the inteqmbdon of 1- (2001), similar 
athqwkes have the same focal m m m  and occur at much the same 
position on an inter-plate fault. There is an empirical law between the magnitude 
of a similar &quake and an estimated value of the sllp associated with the 
event Then we can esfimate the slip rate of the faut h m  the similar 
d q u a k e s ,  that is, slip rate at the plate boundary. 
ISBN : 0-7803-7775-3/03/$17.0002003 IEEE - 251 - 
Thm is also an empirical law b e e n  the magnitude and the number of 
background eadquakes; the smaller, the more. Decrease of magnitude by one 
cOlTeSpOndS to in- in the number by one order. Continuous obsenation is 
lndispensabe for monitoring backgmund seismicity. These are why 
o h t i o n  of small and mim earthquakes is qmtanmt, and why dense and 
high quality seismic networks have coved the Japanese Islands. Because 
seismic waves attenuate in propnbon to square of the distance hm the focal 
site, we have to observe the earthquakes at locations close to seismogenic m. 
Most of the seimogenic mes around Japan lie beneath the ocean There&, 
we have to monitor the seismicity on the door. However, long-term and 
continuous seismic ohervation on the d o o r  has been quite limited. Now we 
know that an ocean bottom cable system can monitor the activity ofbig hulk in 
the plate boundary, it is time to launch a feasible program 
3. Geodetic monitoring of horizontal seatloor crustal movement 
Space gecdehc technologies such as GPS, VLBI (Vq Long Baseline 
hltd"etry), SLR (satellite Laser Ranging), and S A R  (Synthetic Aptme 
Radar) have revolutionized geodesy on land However, these technologies 
based on electric waves cannot be directly applied to d m  geodesy 
because electric waves inclusive of light can hardly propagate in the seawater. 
We have to adopt sound waves in place of electric waves for un- 
c"mication and positioning. Serious limitation lies in the maxi" 
xange and the mlution of acoustic positioning due to big differences in the 
available mges and velocities of them Gmsidenng these limitations, we 
have developed two systems for geodetic monitoring of horizontal d o o r  
crustal movement 
The 6rst is horizontal seafloor acoustic mghg in a short xange of 1-2 
lan Rem€utionof m g h g  can be improvedto be better than 1 c m  by using a 
ladar technology for pulse compression swh as correlation of waveforms or 
Fh4 mochbtion of the fiqwnq. One of iqatant  problem is the sound 
velocity in the ocean, which i n c "  as bmpahre, salinity, or pressure 
inc". The effect of bmpahre is the most serious, and we have to 
measure the with an acc~nacy of 0.001 degm or M. Although 
it sounds quite diflicult, it is feasible because the deep sea is a natural 
laboratoIy ofquite stable bmpahre; temperahne variation ma year is only 
0.02 degm or so near the Seanoor ofopen oceans. 
Another qmtant  problem is a ray path of sound waw. Ahigh rate of 
variation of sound waves means that it is diflicult for them to propagate 
shaightly. Since temperatclre and salinity are almost constant in the sea deeper 
than some 1000 m, sound velocity imxeases with the water depth When a 
wave pqagtes h u g h  layers of diffmnt velocity, it will bend towad the 
layer of smaller velocity. It is a general rule for any wave inclusive of an 
acoustic wave. Therefm, acoustic waves projected horizontaly near the 
d o o r  gradually bend upwad due to the effect of pressure. Horizontal 
d o o r  acoustic mging on a ilat d o o r  is thw limited to be 1-2 lan or less. 
Butthe xange is still feasible f o r d m o b e m i t i o n  across abig U t  such as 
a q " g  center of rnid-ocean ridges (e.g., Nagaya et al., 2000), a transform 
fidt or a big t h s t  hult in M o n  zones. Nagaya et al. (2000) canid out 
acoustic ..lging across a s p " g  center of the southem East Pacific Rise 
for 14 months, and o k w d  that the Seanoor is slightly COIlverging at the 
ulha-hst q"g center, which is q"g at a mean halfrate of l-. 
Long-term and continuous o b "  of acouStic langing across a big fault 
is one of impt" objectives of an ocean bottom cable system. 
The second approach for horizontal gexlehc measurement is a 
combination of sea surface hematic positioning and undenmter acoustic 
positioning. GPS/AcouStc d o o r  geodebc measurements have already 
started in several areas such as the Juan de Fucandge (Chadwell et al., 2 W ) ,  
southeast slope of Hawaii Island, and sutdudon mnes mund Japan. Japan 
coast Guard has started GWAmustic d o o r  positioning at more than 10 
sites along the Japan tmch and Nankai trough. Tohoku University and 
€%&quake Research Institute, Univaity of Tokyo, have jointly deployed 
similar positioning system on both sides of the Japan trench for in si& 
ohervation of plate motions and seismic coupling (Figut 1). Similar 
expimen6 will soon start also in theNankai trougk 
We have used a s u r b  buoy for GPS/Acoustic ohervation in order 
to minimize the effects of shrp's acoustic noises. The buoy, equipped with 3 
GPS antennas, an acoustic t", and a motion is towed with a 
rope and cables about 80 m away h a shrp. Two refxnce sites on land 
have been used for kinematic GPS positioning. The mlution of the two-way 
hvel time of acousfic signals is prel" ly  estimated to be h u t  1 cm for 
Mi the shallow- and deep-water acoustic systems. We have a"d the 
ability of kinematic GPS positioning of 2-3 cm mlution for 3 1 @ h  
k h e  hm areference sit on land Although it is &cult fbm aviewpoint 
of engineering and cosis, a GPs/Acoustic sy&m d i n e d  with a surhce 
buoy and an ocean cable enables long-term and real time monitoring of 
d o o r  positions on the door. 
4. Geodetic monitoring of vertical d o o r  crustal movement 
Ocean bottom pressure monitoring is one of Lmic items for d o o r  
observation with an ocean cable, and has already been inshumented as 
k"i sensors. Ocean bottom pressure monitoring is iqa tan t  for both 
Seanoor geodesy and physical oceanogaphy (e.g., Fujimoto et al., 2003). 
Space gecdehc techniques such as satellite altimehy and the Global 
Positioning System are applicable only to the sea surface. Seafloor pressure 
monitoring is an indqensable approach to dekmmng seawater mass 
changes and vertical movement of the door. How=, pressure mods 
show the combed eff- of ocean dynarmcs and crustal dynarmcs. We have 
tried to solve the problem with an amy of ocean bottom pressure m" 
(OBPRs). Because the horizontal scale of ocean dym" is much h e r  than 
that of the anay, oceanic e& would be u " o n  to al l  instnrmentS in the 
anay. Relative pressure variations among the anay inshumen6 would thus 
reveal underlying crustal dynarmcs. 
252 - 
Fujimoto et al. (2003) reported important new 6ndings h m  14 months 
of observations of ocean bottom pressure variations in the s o h a t e m  Pacific. 
OneisapressureincreasestahginDecanber1997atalmostthesametime 
as the termination of the 1997-98 El Nitlo. It is also co@ident with a 
remarkable change in the J2 term of the M s  gmvity field These d t s  
suggest that the El N5o might have brought about mass redistribution in the 
eastem Pacific Ocean The other f a t m  in the observations is a local p" 
variation across the spwdmg axis of the ulh-ht spreading southem East 
Paci6c Rise. It is estimated that the d o o r  near the sp"g axis was 
depressed at a rate of about 20 "/month. The result suggests thermal 
" c t i o n  of the crust in the q " g  center in the interaption period. 
These observation have shown the impomce of ccean bottom pressure 
monitoling. 
5. Monitoring of tilt and strain on the seafloor 
Tilt and sttain are among w t  items of geodebc measuremen@ and 
their merits are high resolution of lo9 or better. For example, pre-slips observed 
before some big inter-plate earthquakes are quite small. Observaton close to the 
seismogenic zone with high sensitivity is a key for the mcmitonng 
Measurements with high resolution m p i ~  a stable condition Rainfalls and 
kq"c changes are main sources of dishbances in tilt and Strain 
"ents on land Of come, there are no rahfdls on the d o o r .  
T e m p e "  is stable within 0.02 'C in a year on the Seanoor of open oceans 
Oceanic aut is much more simple and unifim than continental clust. In spite 
of technological diffculties, the ocean bottom can be a desirable site for 
observafion of tilt and shain 
A tiltmeter and a -, which have been installed in the ODP 
(Ocean Drilling Program) downholes JT1 and JT2 on the landward slope ofthe 
Japan bench, are big initiatives for obsavafion of tilt and Strain on the ocean 
bottom There is an ocean bottom cable system near the holes, and it is quite 
lmpoaant to connect the systems. 
6. Summary 
Although the seawater plays a key role in keeping this planet of the Earth 
in a moderate and comfortable condition for the E, it is a big barrier for 
Seanoor observations. Most of the ocean floor remains without detailed 
topopphic surveys, while Magellan got global views of Venus within 3 
months. As is mentioned above, maximum range and resolution of undemater 
positioning have sexious limitations. Solar batteries are useless. Remote control 
of ocean bottom instnnnents and data recovery h m  them are another difficult 
problems. Wehave to be onboard a ship to get the obsaved data 
An ocean cable system can be a b r a k h u g h  to solve these problems. 
Although global coverage is difficult, " monitoring systems can be 
fmile .  It can maintain real time and long-term observations on the d o o r ,  
whicharecrucialforthestudyhowabigearthquakeisprepared 
References 
Chadwek D. C., E N. Spies, J. k Hildebrand, and H. Dmgert, Seafloor 
gecdehc evidence of episodic spxwdug 25 lan east of the Juan de Fuca 
Ridge, EOS Trans. AGU, 83 (47, F1385,2002. 
Fujimoto, H., K Koizumi, Y Osada, and T. Development of 
i"enb for d o o r  gaxlesy, Earth Planets Space, 50, 905-911, 
1998. 
Fujimoto, H., M. Moc- K. Mitsuzawa, T. Tamala, and T. Sato, Ocean 
bottom pressure variations in the soutlleastan M c  following the 
1997-98 El NGo event, Geophys. Res. Len.., 30 (9), 
10.1O29D002GLQ16677,O2 May 2003. 
He@ K, S. M&zak~, H. Tsuji, Silent Wt slip following an inkxplate thrust 
eadquake at the Japan Trench, Nature, 386 (6625): 595-598,1997. 
I& T., Plate subducfion processes at the mheatem Japan Arc: Studies 
on data analyses of small &quakes, Doctor Thesis, Tne G"te 
School of Science, Tohoku Univmity, 1 16 p., 200 1. 
Nagaya, Y, T. U& and T. Yabula, " C d  D e f o d o n  Observaton at the 
Crest of EPR 18.5s with the Seafloor Acoustic Ranging Mebxl", EOS 
Fans. AGC! 80, (46), F1076,lW. 
Spies, F. N., C. D. C h i n e b  J. k Hildebmna L. E. Young, G H. b l l  Jr., 
and H. Dmgert, bise GPSJAcoudc positioning of Seanoor reference 
pin& for tectonic studies, PhF. Earth, Planet Inter.., 108, 101-112, 
1998. 
- 253 - 
41' 
F i p  1. Ocean bottom seismic and geodetic systems near the Japan trench off saraiku, northeastern Japan. 
Open squares: Tsunami sensors of the ocean bottom cable system. 
Black scpilares: Seismometers ofthe ocean bottom cable system 
Red quam: Ocean bottom pressure recorders at 
Blackstars: Oceanbottom boreholes with seismometers, atillmeter, anda st"&. 
Red stam: GWA seafloor positioning sites by a university group. 
Yellow stam: GWA seafloor positioning sites by Japan Coast Guard 
points of TOPEX/Poseidon satellite hacks. 
- 254 - 
