A Newly Developed Wave Monitoring System on Ocean Platform 
Tetsuro Ikebuchi, Naoyuki Takatsu, Toshiyuki Kita, Norihito Okada 
Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd. 
1-1 Kawasaki-cho, Akashi, Hyogo 673-8666, Japan 
ikebuchi@ati.khi.co.iD 
Wataru Koterayama, Masahiko Nakamura 
Research Institute for Applied Mechanics, Kyushu University 
6-1 Kasuga-koen. Kasuga,Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan 
Satoshi Fujii. Kenji Sat0 
Okinawa Subtropical Environment Remote-Sensing Center, Communications Research Laboratory 
4484 Aza-Onna, Onna, Kunigami,Okinawa 904-0411, Japan 
Abstract - A new wave monitoring system was 
developed to meet a need for measuring waves accurately 
and continuously for long period in ocean. 
This paper describes the newly developed wave 
monitoring system which is able to monitor not only 
frequency spectra but also directional spectra. The results 
of the model experiments are shown ,which was carried out 
in order to confirm the validity of the system. It is 
- demonstrated that the accuracy of the wave measurement 
is fairy good. One of the measured wave data, which were 
obtained when a big typhoon hit Okinawa in September of 
2002 is presented. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
We have developed a new wave monitoring system to 
meet a need for measuring waves with good accuracy for 
long period in ocean. The first system was installed on the 
CRL (Communications Research Laboratory) platform 
"COMPASS, which has been operating 40 km off lriomote 
Island of Okinawa and observing waves, current, wind and 
temperature to obtain the sea-truth-data for development 
of the long-range ocean radar by Okinawa Subtropical 
Environment Remote-Sensing Center of CRL [I]. Photo 1 
shows the COMPASS operating in the sea. 
This paper presents firstly the outline of the COMPASS 
Secondly we describe the newly developed wave 
monitoring system with emphasis on how to measure 
waves with good accuracy in any sea condition such as 
calm, moderate and severe sea. Thirdly the results of the 
model experiments are shown, which were conducted to 
confirm the validity of the system and obtain the response 
functions of the platform motions. Lastly one of the 
monitored wave data of a big typhoon is shown, which are 
t I 
Photo 1.CRL Watform " COMPASS " 
compared with the results of hindcast 
II. CRL PLATFORM "COMPASS" 
The COMPASS is a big platform with diameter of the 
floating body of 9 m and displacement of about 100 
ton-force as shown in Fig. 1. The platform has sensors for 
wind, current and water temperature. Solar panels are 
installed on the decks tO supply electricity through the lead 
battery to these sensors and the computer for the 
observation system, watching system and the data 
communication system inside the body. 
The installed location of the platform is 24"37' north 
latitude and 123"27' east longitude at water depth of about 
1,500m shown in Fig. 2. The shaded fan-shaped area is 
0-933957-30-0 2522 
DATA COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 
Disp.: abt. lOOn 
(1) Wave Monttoring 
System 
ObSewstion 
System for data 
(2) ~ ~ n i t a r i n g  a 
, -- ____ --/ 
CRL Platform "COMPASS" 
Fig. 1 Sensor and instrument 
Localion of CRL Platform and Long-Range Ocean Rader by 
Okinaws Radio Obsewatory 
Fig. 2.Location of COMPASS and long range ocean radar 
observation zone where the long-range ocean radar can 
observe waves and current. 
Fig.3 shows the schematic diagram of the whole 
system, which is composed of above mentioned three 
systems. The observation system is for measuring-waves 
current, wind and temperature. The watching system 
monitors the platform position, the power level and 
flooding of the equipment room. If emergency condition 
occurs; the voice alarm operates at the land station of 
Okinawa Subtropical Environment Remote-Sensing Center 
The data communication system utilizes two satellites 
Orbcomm" and "N-STAR". Orbcomm is an orbital satellite 
and used to send watching data such as power level and 
position Of the platform and receive the command signals 
from the land station. On the other hand, N-STAR is a still 
satellite and send a lot of raw data such as time history 
data of the platform motions responding to the order from 
the land station. 
~ 
2523 
d-* 
Orbcomm N-STAR 
K d 
CRL Platform 
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of whole system 
Ill. WAVE MONITORING SYSTEM 
A. Principle o f  Wave Measurement 
A wave monitoring buoy operating in ocean for long 
period needs to measure not only waves themselves but 
also wind .current and temperature, which are important 
as monitoring environment. To fulfill this requirement, the 
buoy necessarily becomes large. The large buoy cannot 
follow shorter waves and as a result. the measuring 
accuracy deteriorates. 
To solve this problem, the influence of the motions on 
wave measurement must be eliminated. The present wave 
monitoring system is designed to minimize the effect by 
converting the measured motion time-history data to those 
of wave elevation and slope using motion response 
functions. 
Since the shape of the platform is vertical body of 
revolution as shown in Fig.1, the motion responses are 
independent on directions of incident waves. Therefore if 
the motion response function of the platform to incident 
waves from one direction is given, the motions can be 
.transformed into the wave elevation and wave slopes with 
FFT based on principle of superposition. 
Fig.4 shows the analyzing procedure of the wave 
monitoring system. High precision and reliability of the 
motion sensor are essential to accurate and long period 
monitoring. One of the motion sensors on the market was 
selected, which has abundant deployment in north sea 
where sea is very severe in winter. The time-history data 
of the motions are measured by the sensor and are 
transformed into Fourier integrals by FFT. 
The Fourier integral of the motions are transformed 
into the time-histories of the wave elevations and wave 
slopes with the motion response functions of the platform, 
which were obtained from model tests and theoretical 
calculations. Spectrum analysis gives frequency spectrum .~ 
and directional spectra from which significant wave height, 
averaae wave Deriod and dominant wave direction are 
2) Directional Spectra and Cross Spectrum - - ~  ~ ~ . ~~ ~ ~ 
Directional spectra ,S( f ,e) can be expressed in the estimated. The calculation method of directional spectra 
will be described below. following form : 
S(f,#) = S(f)G(# 1 f )  (3.2) 
where S( f )  :Frequency Spectrum(f: frequency) 
G(# I f ) :  Directional Distribution Function 
Then the relation between directional spectra and 
cross spectrum a,& takes the form : 
Fig. 4.Analyzing procedure where h, is a function associated with wave variables 
such as wave elevation, wave slopes and wave particle 
velocity. Since wave elevation q ,  wave slopes qx and 
qy are used ,which are transformed from motions of the 
Platform, 
B. Calculation Method o f  Directional Spectra 
of ocean waves have been proposed so far. This system 
employs a method .based on the maximum entropy h , ( k ) = l  , a = P = O  for q 
method is to be able to analyze ocean waves composed 
of sea and swell. This is suitable for oceans around h , ( k ) = i k ,  a=O, /?=l .for  'ly 
Japan where many typhoons pass every year 
Various calculation methods of the directional spectra . 
the h m  is expressed as follows: 
analysis proposed by Hashimoto [2]. The feature of this h, (k )= ik ,  a = l , / I = O  for q. (3.4) 
where k is wave number. 
1) Transform of Motions into Waves 
x ( t )  are measured 
automatically at the arranged time. These data are stored 
~ ~ ~ ~ . ~ i ~ ~ ~ ~  data of the 3) Estimation of Directional Distribution Function 
Directional distribution function G(# I f )  is supposed to' . . .  
temporarily in the hard disk of the computer on board. 
Accordina to the command from the land station. ordered 
be positive and satisfy following equation: - 
(3.5) data are sent to the land station via the satellite "N-STAR", 
and are analyzed with the computer there. 
For example, if we express Fourier integral of the 
heaving motion x( t )  by X( f ) ,  wave elevation v(t) is 
calculated by the following equation. This means that G(Blf) can be considered as a 
I q ( t ) = 2 [ ~ c o s ( 2 R R + # ,  Wl --E )df probability density funciion defined in the section [0,2~11. Then maximum entropy method can be applied and the following expression for G(0 1 f )  is derived. 
(3.1) qf? I f )  = expt& -(A, cos;#+& sin#+& cos28+&4sin28)) 
(3.6) 
The unknown constant aj(i = 1L3.4) can be obtained by 
solving the following simultaneous equations which are i where X ( f )  = Ix(f)lei" H ( f )  = lH( f ) IG : response function . 
2524 
.derived from (3.3) and (3.4) : When we have the wave frequency spectrum S ( f )  , we 
(i = 1,2,3.4) 
where 
a , (8 )= l ,a , (6 )=cos0 ,a2 (8 )=s ine ,  
a@) = cos28, a,($) = sin28 
=C, -14 
C,  : cospectrum 
Q, : quadrature spectrum 
4 can be calculated by the following equation: 
(3.7) 
IV. MODEL EXPERIMENT 
pia 
M e r  &- E- wave 
L? 
Y Plntfarm - 1  
I Modrl 
A. Response Function 
In order to estimate the motion response functions and 
validate the accuracy of the wave measurement, model 
experiments were carried out at the wave tank of Kyushu 
University. Figure 5 shows the schematic picture of the 
model experiments. A 1/12-scale model was made and the 
real motion sensor was fixed on it. 
In regular wave tests, heave, surge and pitch motions 
were measured to get the response functions. Free 
oscillation tests were conducted to estimate viscous 
damping coefficients. 
Theoretical calculations were also performed based on 
a linear potential theory [3] to obtain the response 
functions. The estimated viscous damping coefficients are 
included in equations of the motions. 
Both the experimental and theoretical response 
functions of the heaving and pitching are shown in Fig. 6 
and 7 respectively. The agreement between them is fairy 
good as expected. The theoretical response functions are 
employed in the wave monitoring system. 
B. Accuracy of Wave Measurement 
In long crested irregular waves, we measured the 
incident waves by a wave probe and motion time histories 
by the real motion sensor at same time. Heaving motion is 
only analyzed by the present method to estimate the wave 
frequency spectrum S(f )  
I I 
Fig. 5.Schematic picture of experiment 
2525 
Fig. 6.Heave response function 
W m e  P e e d  Tu (+I 
Fig. 7.Pitch response function 
can easily calculate spectrum moment mo and ml from the 
following equations: 
m, = hS(f)df, m, = r fS(f)df  (4.1) 
The significant wave height H v ~  and average wave period 
To, are obtained from the following equations [4]: 
Significant Wave Height :H,,, = 4 . 0 G  (4.2) 
Average Wave Period :To, = Plr'm, / m ,  (4.3) 
' Fig. 8 shows the result of the comparison of significant 
wave height and average wave period between incident 
waves and estimated waves. Left side of the figure is the 
result for wavel: wave height is 5cm and period is 1.1 
seconds. Right one for wave 2: wave height is 5cm and 
period is 2 0 seconds longer than that of the case of wave 
1. Blue bar is incident waves and red bar is estimated 
waves. We can easily find good agreement between 
incident and estimated wave. From these comparisons, it 
was confirmed that the new wave monitoring system could 
estimate ocean waves with good accuracy. 
significant wave height as shown in Fig. 11 indicates 
Fig. 9.Path of Typhoon 16 
Date 
Fig. 8.Comparison between incident and estimated wave 
V. MEASUREMENT of TYPOON 16 
A strong typhoon 16 with maximum wind speed of 41 
m/s hit Okinawa in September 2002. The typhoon 16 
came from east, crossed the southern part of Okinawa 
island and landed on China as shown in Fig. 9 The 
platform "COMPASS succeeded in continuous and 
regular monitoring of sea waves by the typhoon 16. 
A. Time Trend of Monitoring Data 
Fig.10 shows the time trend of the average and 
maximum wind speed measured every hour from 1" to 
12th in September. The wind speed increased linearly as 
time passed. The maximum speed 35m/s was recorded 
at 0:OO on the 7'h and afterward it went down rapidly to 
about 5 mls around noon on the Elh. The time trend of the 
Fig. 10.Time trend of wind speed 
1 z 3 Y I b 7 d 9 L O L L L ? > i  
Date 
Fig. 11.Time trend of significant wave height 
2526 
same tendency as that of the wind speed. Rapid increase 
of the significant wave height began at noon on the 4Ih 
half a day behind wind speed, and maximum significant 
wave height was up to 9.5m. 
B. Directional Wave Spectra 
As mentioned above, according as the typhoon 
approaches the platform, wave height increases rapidly. 
At the early stage of approaching, it is supposed that the 
ocean waves are composed of sea and swell. As an 
example of such waves, the data measured at 2:OO'on 
the -5Ih September are analyzed. Also are analyzed the. 
data at 20:OO on 6Ih September when the typhoon 16 
approached the platform closely. 
1) Ocean Waves with Sea and Swell 
The motions of the platform are recorded for about 20 
minutes with sampling interval 0.07 seconds. The total 
digital data of 16384(=214) for each motion are analyzed 
by the present method. Fig. 12.13 and 14 show the 
time-history, frequency spectrum and directional spectra of 
the waves, respectively. The frequency spectrum has a 
feature of broad band. The contour map of the directional 
spectra indicates that the swell from the typhoon comes 
from northeast and the sea induced directly by the wind of 
the typhoon enters from north. This agrees with the 
inference from the path of the typhoon. 
2) Ocean Waves closely near Typhoon 16 
The wave elevation, frequency spectrum and directional 
spectra at 20:OO on 6Ih September are shown in Fig. 15, 
direction is clearly indicated to be east-northeast. 
-90 0 90 
Wave DfectiDnPl : N o m )  
Fig. 14a.Obse~ed directional spectra of 5Ih 
0 e m  YO0 LOO 800 LOO0 *so0 
T i l e & )  
Fig. l2.Wave time history of 5Ih September 
i 
- 
2002/09/05/0200 1 1  1~ 16 and 17, respectively. It is found that the directional 
concentrates around 0.7 Hz. And the dominant wave -180 -90 0 9Li M O  
spectra have a sharp single peak and the wave power " I ' ' ' " 1 .  ' 0 0 0  
Wave Diectima : N o m 1  
Fig. 14b.Hindcasted directional spectra of SIh Sept. 
2527 
Fig.15.Wave time history of 6"' September 
025  
020 
N 
- 
Fig. 16.Frequency spectrum of 6Ih September 
. 0 brervamn ,Jm 
I " 
*$BO .... 
. .  . I juoo - - IJm . .~ 
. ..
-90 0 90 
W aye D i e c t i n O  :North1 
Fig. 17b.Hiridcasted directional spectra of 6Ih 
C. Comparison with Hind-casting 
A hind-casting of the typhoon was performed. In the 
hind-casting, firstly information on the path and the 
strength of the typhoon is collected. And the wind speed 
distribution above the sea around the path of the typhoon 
is calculated using a typhoon model. Finally using that 
distribution as input. the ocean waves are estimated with 
a third generation wave prediction model JWAJG 
developed by Japan Wipather Association 151. The results 
of the hind-casting are shown in Fig.l4b, 17b, 18 and 19 
which are favorably compared with the measured results. 
But the significant wave height by the hind-casting is 
much smaller than the measured one. This is because 
only the wind by the typhoon is taken into account and 
the power of swell outside the calculation area is not 
included in the hind-casting. 
D a b  
Fig. I8.Hindcasted wind speed 
2528 
v 5 b 7 8 9 
Dah 
Fig. 19.Hindcasted significant wave height 
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The newly developed wave monitoring system on  the 
COMPASS has been measuring ocean wave successfully, 
and is supposed to operate for five years from 2001. The 
monitored data will surely be  used not only as sea-truth 
data for the long-range ocean radar but also to increase 
the knowledge of ocean waves. 
References 
[ I ]  S. Kajima, K. Sato, T. Matsuoka and S. Fujii, " Development 
of long-range ocean radar for ocean waves observation," 
Coastal Engineering, Vol. 50, 2003, in printing. 
[2] K. Kobune and N. hashimoto. "Estimation of directional 
spectra from the maximum entropy principle," Proc. 5Ih Int. 
Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering Symposium, Vol. 
1, pp.80-85. 1986 
[3]K. Nema, H. Shimizu, Y. Yamagami and T. Ohnishi, 
"Calculation method of hydrodynamic forces on vertical body 
of revolution", J. of The Kansai Society of Naval Architects, 
No. 193, pp.61-70 (in Japanese), June 1984 
[4] W. G. Price, and R. E. D. Bishop, "Probabilistic theory of ship 
dynamics", Halsted Press, 1974 
[5]  Y. Suzuki. I. lsozaki and T, Tanahashi, 'I On the development 
of a global ocean wave model JWAJG," HYDRO - PORT94 
Yokosuka Japan, October Japan 
2529 
