A REVENUE-BASED MODEL FOR MAKING 
RESOURCE INVESTMENT DECISIONS IN 
IP NETWORKS 
Srinivasan Jagannathan,' Jorn Altmann? and Lee Rhodes3 
'University ofCalifornia Sanfa Barbara, 
Company 
'jsrini@cs.ucsb.edu.2jornallmannOacm.org, 31ee~rhodes@hp.com 
Abstrad: 
University ofCalifornia Berklq, 3Hewletf-Packnrd 
Capacity planning is a critical task in network maoagement. It identifies how much capac- 
ity is needed to match future M c  demand. It directly affects customer satisfaction and 
revenues. In this work we present a network usage analysis tool called Dynamic Nemalue 
Analyzer (DNA), which helps alleviate a big problem that network engineers and market- 
ing executives face- making optimal resource invesunent decisions. Marketing executives 
have to project customer gmwth while network engineers have to project UafEc volume 
based on the entire customer population. DNA helps the prediction process by present- 
ing actual network usage d a h  h m  a business perspective. in a form that is useful to both 
network engineers and marketing executives. Using these projections. decisions on how 
to upgrade resources can be made. We show that information from DNA can be used to: 
( I )  quantify revenue a d  on each link. (2) quantify rehrn-on-investment on performing 
a l i  upgrade. and (3) quantify the loss due to customer dissatisfaction when a liok is not 
upgraded. We also illustrate how these formulations based on business information can be 
used to improve capacity planning decisions. 
Network and Systems Monitoring, lnvesunent Cycle, Business process. Network and Ser- 
vice Management 
Keywords: 
1. Introduction 
The explosive increase in the number of Internet users as well as in volume of usage 
poses significant challenges to the network infrastructure and, by extension, to the 
network service providers. Network service providers are faced with two challenges 
today. On the one hand, they want larger number of customers in order to increase 
revenues. On the other hand, they want to manage the data volume efficiently. Capacity 
planning plays a crucial role in helping network providers tackle these challenges. 
Capacity planning is the process of predicting tomorrow's needs and preparing for 
them today. Network capacity planning involves combining marketing information 
and traffic analysis results to predict future resource requirements. Intelligent capacity 
planning can result in enormous cost savings and increased customer satisfaction. At 
the other extreme, poor capacity planning can result in enormous expenditures, poor 
customer service, and loss of revenues. The importance of capacity planning cannot 
be over-emphasized. 
Capacity planning for Internet infrastructure requires good understanding of net- 
work traffic growth. The overall traffic growth depends on the number of new sub- 
scribers on the network as well as the usage increase per subscriber. Predicting these 
growth factors determines the decision on the investment size for upgrading network' 
capacity. Currently, there is no standardized process to combine both growth factors. 
186 Jagannathan, Altmann and Rhodes 
Prediction of traffic growth and intelligent decision-making can be greatly facilitated 
by correlating network data with business-relevant information. Such information can 
be classified into: 
1 Subscriber usage information: Considering usage of individual subscribers (or 
of subscriber segments) reveals more information than considering the aggre- 
gated usage of all subscribers. 
2 Value of the subscriber to the business: The revenue and costs of an individual 
subscriber are important in evaluating the value of an investment. Clearly, an 
investment is worthwhile only if the revenue per subscriber outweighs the costs 
incurred per subscriber. Therefore analyzing the value of customers can help 
make educated investment decisions. 
3 Competition in the market: Since competition in different geographical regions 
can impact subscriber loyalty, it is important to consider its impact before mak- 
ing costly investment decisions. 
By associating such business information with raw traffic data, the network ser- 
vice provider can make better decisions about investments. However, today's capacity 
planning for the Intemet does not incorporate this kind of information. The dominant 
reason is that the data collection and analysis process is not in place. The current pro- 
cess suffers from the problem that the data volume overwhelms conventional database 
management systems. Moreover, marketing and engineering disciplines of the service 
provider business lack a common vision. Marketing managers concentrate only on 
customer numbers and ignore the traffic-volume aspects of the business, while net- 
work engineers concentrate only on traffic volumes and ignore the customer aspect of 
the business. Each discipline views data in isolation, which results in myopic decision 
making. A holistic view of the data is necessary for informed investment decisions. In 
this paper, we present an innovative tool called Dynamic Netvalue Analyzer (DNA) that 
overcomes these lacunae. DNA aggregates, analyzes and models network data streams 
on the fly [l]. We show how this tool can be used to combine marketing, revenue, and 
engineering aspects of a service provider's business in order to make efficient capacity 
planning decisions. 
In this paper, we only focus on capacity planning for regional networks. Our solu- 
tions are not directly applicable to capacity planning in backbone networks because of 
the following differences. First, the cost structures in these two categories of networks 
are dissimilar. For instance, laying optical fiber from coast to coast imposes very dif- 
ferent costs than laying cable in an urban neighborhood. Second, the ratio between 
the traffic of an individual subscriber and the total traffic is significantly higher in case 
of a regional network. On the Intemet backbone however, a huge number of individ- 
ual flows is aggregated, thereby decreasing the impact of individual flows on overall 
traffic. Conversely, traffic of one individual subscriber in a regional network has much 
more impact on the overall traffic. Third, the size of the network and the volume of 
traffic in regional networks is much smaller. Therefore, capacity planning solutions 
for regional networks are not limited by scalability issues. 
We now briefly discuss related work. Some of the previous work on capacity plan- 
ning has focused on IT issues. Diao et al. propose an approach to maximize prof- 
its in service level agreements by designing feedback loops at application level [31. 
Menasce and Almeida discuss performance issues and capacity planning for client- 
server-systems [SI. On the network side, Robertazzi presents practical aspects ofplan- 
Revenue-Based Resource Investment Decisions in IP Networks 187 
ning telecommunication and telephone networks [121. Keshav discusses network ca- 
pacity planning from the perspective of traffic management [7]. In addition, there are 
many software products that perform network capacity planning [ll, 9.6, 101. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the capacity 
planning problem in greater detail. We describe current approaches to capacity plan- 
ning and illustrate how a combination of marketing, revenue, and engineering analysis 
can greatly improve the planning process. In Section 3, ,we describe the DNA tool in 
more detail, and its versatility in collecting varied kinds of network data. In Section 4, 
we describe new algorithms to improve capacity planning decisions. We conclude the 
paper with a discussion on architecture and implementation issues in Section 5. 
2. Capacity Planning 
Network Capacity planning has three phases- (1) predicting future growth in cus- 
tomers, (2) predicting future volume of traffic, and (3) planning resource upgrades for 
the future. In the first phase, the marketing team estimates how many new customers 
will join the service and how many old customers will leave the service. The mar- 
keting team can use historical growth patterns, advertising budget, channel strength 
and customer satisfaction reviews, etc. to determine future growth and chum. This al- 
lows prediction of total number of users in the network. In the second phase, network 
engineers translate the number of customers into possible network traffic. This helps 
identify hot-spots in the network. Once the hot-spots are identified, in the third phase, 
the service provider must decide where investments are necessary in order to provide 
a good network service to customers. 
For example, one simple approach to make investment decisions could be the fol- 
lowing. The service provider sets a policy that all links should have overall utilization 
less than a threshold, 'rs,,ggested. Consider link I with capacity pt that has a projected 
volume of traffic bl,future bits over the future time period Tfuture. Therefore, overall 
utilization of 1, denoted by q,future can be computed as $;;I:;, . If this exceeds 
Tauggested. then the service provider marks the link to be upgraded. The quantum of 
upgrade, XI, should be greater than - x e - pi. This is obtained by 
solving the following inequality representing the service provider's policy decision: 
Using some such mechanism, the service provider can construct a set of resources 
S ,  that need tn be upgraddpurchased, and also determine the capacities of these re- 
sources. In this paper, we assume that the service provider has done some analysis to 
determine this initial set S of resources that need to be upgraded/purchased. 
In the rest of this section, we examine the state-of-the-art in capacity planning and 
ways to improve it using an illustrative example. 
2.1 State-of-the-Art 
The example we present to describe the state-of-the-art is contrived and simplified, 
but it serves to illustrate the inefficiencies of capacity planning as practised today. 
Consider the example network shown in Figure 1 
Figure 1 shows a small network with two edge routers, A, and B ,  and a border 
router C. There are two main links in the network- A C  and BC. A back-up link AB 
188 Jagannathan. Altmann and Rhodes 
Internet 
Customer 
Figure I. A Capacity Planning Example 
is used for fault-tolerance. Customers are connected either to A or to B. Further, let 
us assume that there are two kinds of customers-residential and business. Residential 
customers pay a flat fee of $20 every month, while business customers pay a flat fee 
of $1000 every month. Currently, there are 20 business customers, 6 at A and 14 at B, 
and 200 residential customers, 150 at A and 50 at B.  The problem of capacity planning 
involves analyzing existing traffic, predicting growth and making intelligent decisions 
on: (1) scheduling maintenance of AC and BC, (2) upgrading links AC, BC, AB, 
and routers A, B, and C, and (3) changing physical topology with new nodes and 
links. 
Currently, service providers monitor the traffic using protocols like Simple Network 
Management Protocol ( S N M P )  [2]. A huge amount of data is collected, usually at 5 
minute intervals. Let us assume the example network also uses SNMP and that a 
network engineer has analyzed S N M P  data collected over the past 6 months (sampled 
in 5 minute intervals). The analysis result is that link AC has overall utilization of 
60% and a peak utilization of 70% (over a 5 minute interval). Similarly BC has 
overall utilization of 51% and a peak utilization of 65%. The engineer also observes 
that link AB has less than 5% utilization. 
The marketing team believes that it will acquire 5 residential customers each at A 
and B every month over the next 6 months. In addition, it estimates that it will acquire 
1 business customer each at A and B every month over the next 6 months. Further, the 
marketing team believes that there will be no loss of customers in the next 6 months. 
This information is presented to the network engineer. 
Currently, there is no industry-wide standard for interpreting marketing projections. 
Different service providers use different metrics. To the best of our knowledge (based 
on direct inquiries to network service providers), network engineers use some rule- 
of-thumb to convert marketing data to traffic volume predictions. For instance the 
rule-of-thumb may translate every new residential customer into 64kbps network ca- 
pacity and every business customer into 512kbps network capacity. In addition they 
may assume that current customers’ usage will increase 50% every 6 months. Some 
service providers use the traffic volume predictions obtained from such rules-of-thumb 
in sophisticated network simulation tools [ 11.9.6, 101 to analyze points of failure and 
then decide on investments and expenditures. But most service providers make deci- 
sions using simpler analysis. For instance, in this example, the network engineer can 
compute that after 6 months the requirement would be as follows. Current customers 
in A would require 0.6*10240*1.50= 9216kbps. New residential customers will re- 
quire 30*64 = 192kbps. and new business customers will require 512*6 = 3072kbps. 
This means that traffic on link A C  will he 1248Okbps which exceeds the link capacity. 
Similar analysis reveals that traffic on link BC will be 11098kbps which also exceeds 
the link capacity. Based on these results, the engineer may conclude that the capacity 
Revenue-Based Resource Investment Decisions in IP Networks 189 
of AC and BC needs to be doubled. Furthermore, this capacity increase may require 
router C also to be upgraded. Suppose that upgrading AC and BC costs $20000 and 
$10000 respectively. And let a high-capacity router cost $20000. Thus, using this 
analysis, capacity planning expenditures total $50000. 
In summary, today network capacity planning is an art and not a science. We now 
present our vision for capacity planning. 
2.2 Improving Capacity Planning 
Our vision of capacity planning uses information that is available, yet unused. For 
example, the service provider can ascertain how much data on each link belongs to 
each customer segment. This can be done by observing the source or destination IP 
address of network flows and then correlating this address to the customer segment 
assigned that address. The network engineer generates a histogram to study how usage 
by residential customers has grown over the past 6 months. Using this information, 
the network engineer can use standard mathematical techniques of extrapolation to 
estimate how much volume of traffic new customers will generate. By performing a 
similar analysis, the engineer can also estimate how much data the business customers 
will generate. Thus the network engineer can estimate overall traffic growth in a more 
objective manner. 
For the example presented in the previous subsection, let us assume that the en- 
gineer performs subscriber-specific usage analysis and diagnoses that usage per sub- 
scriber has not grown over the past 6 months for both residential as well as business 
customers. Based on this result, he predicts that the same trend will continue. Since 
the marketing team predicts negligible customer churn, and that there will be many 
new customers over the next 6 months, the service provider needs to analyze if current 
capacity can sustain future traffic. Based on past statistics, the overall utilization on 
both the links AC, and BC will exceed 50%. Therefore if more customers are added, 
the service provider may decide on upgrading one or both the links. 
The monetary value generated by the customers can also provide critical informa- 
tion for capacity planning. In this example, customers at A generate 6* 1000 + 150*20 
= $9000 each month, and almost all the data they generate traverses AC. Similarly, 
customers at B generate 14*1000 + 50*20 = $15000 each month, and almost all the 
data they generate traverses link BC. Clearly, link BC has been more lucrative over 
the past 6 months. Furthermore, based on the marketing projections, adding new cus- 
tomers to region A will increase revenues by (1000 + 5*20)*(1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6) 
= $23100 over the next 6 months. Similarly, adding new customers to B will increase 
revenues by (1000 + 5*20)*(1+ 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6) = $23100 over the next 6 months. 
For simplicity, let us assume that link capacities can only be doubled. Since doubling 
capacity of link BC will cost only $10000, while gain in revenue is $23100, it is 
worthwhile to double the capacity of link BC. On the other hand, in case of link AC, 
the gain in revenue almost matches the cost of doubling the capacity. Furthermore, if 
capacity of AC is also doubled, then the router will also need to be replaced. There 
will therefore be a loss if one invests in link AC and BC together. Based on this anal- 
ysis, the service provider can decide to: (1) double capacity of only link BC, (2) ask 
marketing team to not campaign aggressively in region A, and (3) ask marketing team 
to intensify campaign in region B. 
The example illustrates the power of combining marketing, revenue and network 
usage data in devising better capacity planning solutions. A tool that collects, ag- 
190 Jagannathan, Altmann and Rhodes 
gregates, and visualizes network usage and revenue data is a prerequisite for such a 
capacity planning scenario. In the next section, we describe one such tool. 
3. Dynamic Netvalue Analyzer 
Hp OpenView Dynamic Netvalne Analyzer (DNA) is a business intelligence and 
decision support tool targeted for network service providers [I]. It transforms raw 
customer usage data into business information, supporting business managers and net- 
work engineers to model revenues and profitability for new and existing services as 
well as network capacity upgrades. It helps network service providers to understand 
the usage behavior of their subscribers in real-time. In general, it enables new revenue 
and return on investment paradigms. 
DNA uses statistical models to analyze customer usage data. A statistical model 
can he thought of as a histogram-based distribution of observed data. By converting 
raw usage data into statistical models (streaming data analysis), instead of storing all 
the raw data as in a warehouse approach, DNA frees storage space. It thus enables 
the analysis of more historical data in a shorter time period. Also, a benefit of this 
approach is that statistical models are small in size and do not grow with increased 
traffic volume - instead they get more accurate. The statistical models are based on 
business dimensions such as pricing plans, services, or geography. The only drawback 
of using such statistical models is that it is static; the business dimensions have to be 
decided well in advance. If new business dimensions are selected then new data has to 
be collected to populate the statistical models along these dimensions. 
DNA is comprised of a hackend server, which aggregates usage data, and clients to 
view and model business decisions. The backend server is built on HP’s Internet Usage 
Manager (ILIM) mediation platform. At the data collection stage, three modules of 
IUM are used to aggregate customer information, session information, and the actual 
usage data of all end-users. The second level correlates the output of the previous stage 
and transforms the data into an internal format, which allows rapid access of individual 
usage data. The third stage is comprised of statistical models, which are specified by 
the user of the tool. The models are populated by the second stage’s output. The 
third stage also interacts with clients, which request model data. DNA clients allow 
network usage data to be viewed in numerous formats with varying levels of detail. 
Data is presented in statistical histograms, tables, and summaries. For an in-depth 
analysis, it allows the business manager to view individual subscriber usage. 
How DNA can improve communication between network engineers and marketing 
managers, especially with respect to the capacity planning process, can he demon- 
strated using the analysis example shown in Figure 2. Instead of aggregating all usage 
data across all subscribers to one number, DNA splits up the data into those business 
dimensions (e.g. pricing plan, link, subscriber, etc) that are important for the deci- 
sion making process. Figure 2 illustrates the usage of individual subscribers over a 
time period of 30 days for one customer segment under a flat-rated pricing plan. By 
looking at this distribution and the historical trends (such as mean and variance), the 
network engineers can predict the usage of new subscribers in this customer segment. 
The marketing manager, who analyzes this figure, notices the imbalance between light 
users and heavy users. As a consequence, he can work on introducing pricing plans 
that resolve this problem. 
In detail, DNA allows an on-the-fly analysis of raw data coming from a NetFlow- 
enabled router. Considering the example of Figure 1,  DNA would analyze the NetFlow 
data coming from router A and B. It would aggregate usage data in units of bytes with 
Revenue-Based Resource Investment Decisions in IP Networks 191 
Figure 2. DNA analysis result of subscriber usage behavior 
respect to the customer segment (based on the pricing plan), the destination IF' address, 
and link congestion. The result of the aggregation would be used to make the decision 
for resource investments for all links as described in the following section. 
4. DNA Decision Making Process for Resource 
Investments 
We now present" approach to make smarter resource investment decisions. The 
approach assumes that there is an initial set of resources S that need to be upgraded 
and that the quantum of upgrade for each resource is known. Our main contribution 
is to associate a number called investment gain with each resource upgrade in S. The 
investment gain associated with a resource upgrade indicates how much benefit is ac- 
crued from the upgrade per unit money spent on that upgrade. The problem of making 
the right upgrade decisions then reduces to solving an optimization problem where the 
total investment gain is maximized subject to budgetary constraints on the investment 
costs. The investment gain @ ( I )  for each link I in the network is based on two business 
criteria: 
1 The size of the return-on-investment (RoI). The Rol depends on tbe quantum of 
upgrade, growth in customer base as well as on projected volume of traffic per 
customer segment. 
2 The loss of customer satisfaction. The loss is directly correlated with the loss 
caused by not upgrading. Customers who are unhappy with the service may 
choose a different service provider thereby decreasing revenue. 
The investment gain @ ( I )  is calculated according to the following formula: 
192 Jagannathan, Altmann and Rhodes 
where ~ I , T ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  is defined as the revenue earned on link 1 in future time period 
Tfuture, C,T~. , ,  represents the monetary value of customer unhappiness,with link 1 
during the past time Tpast, FCl is the fixed cost for upgrading link 1 by a quantum X I ,  
and  MI,^^^^^^ is the additional maintenance cost of 1 in time period Tfuture. 
The numerator represents the sum of revenue earned and the monetary value of 
gain in customer satisfaction as a result of the upgrade. We assume that the quantum 
of upgrade is such that all the customers who were discontent with service before the 
upgrade are no longer discontent. The denominator represents the cost of the invest- 
ment. The ratio reflects what is gained per unit of investment. The higher the ratio, 
the greater the priority for upgrade. Suppose that a network provider has to choose 
the right set of resource upgrades from set S. given a budget constraint B. For each 
resource ri in S, we ascertain ( FCi, O(ri) ) where FCi is the cost of the upgrade 
and O ( i )  the investment gain. Let di denote the decision to upgrade ri, i.e., I5i = 1 
represents a decision to upgrade and 6: = 0 otherwise. Then the network provider can 
choose the right set by solving the following optimization problem: choose 15i E (0, 
1) to maximize FCi 6; 5 B. This optimization problem is a 
version of the 0- 1 Knapsack problem which is known to be NP-Complete. If the cardi- 
nality of the set S is large, then any of the well known polynomial time approximation 
algorithms for 0-1 Knapsack problem can be used to solve the resource investment 
problem. 
In our model, even though we focus on link upgrades, the approach is easily ex- 
tended to include other resources like routers. Router investment costs can be sub- 
sumed' into the costs of the first link that necessitates a router investment. 
In order to quantify return-on-investment and loss of customer satisfaction, we in- 
troduce two algorithms to computeyl,~,,,,,, and CI,T,.,, in the following two subsec- 
tions. 
4.1 
Rational customers are discontent with the service if the service provider does not 
meet QoS requirements. This occurs if one of the links of the data route is congested. 
By observing the degree of congestion at each link, we can compute the degree of 
customer dissatisfaction at a particular link. 
For each link, we assume that the business manager sets a threshold. If the data 
transmitted per unit time on that link exceeds the threshold, then we shall assume that 
the link is congested. For example, the network provider can follow a policy that if the 
data transmitted on a link in a 5 minute interval exceeds 70% of the total link capacity 
then that link is considered to have been congested in that interval. 
Since all customers who are using a link when it is congested are equally affected, 
we shall quantify customer dissatisfaction as follows. Compute the monetary value of 
bytes transmitted during congested intervals on a link. This represents revenue earned 
when customers are discontent with the service. Now, let us assume that the business 
manager weights the importance of customer satisfaction to his business on a scale 
Q(ri)bi subject to: 
. 
Quantifying Loss of Customer Satisfaction 
'In this case FCi is not known initially, and will vary with the candidate solutions of the knapsack problem. 
Revenue-Based Resource Investment Decisions in IP Networks 193 
between 0 and 1. Suppose this weight is 8. Then, the monetary value of customer 
dissatisfaction C can be computed as described in Figure 3. 
Input : 
Network topology N, and link maintenance costs 
Routing tables for time period Tpoat 
Customer flows F T ~ ~ . ,  for time period T,.t 
Customer billing information f o r  time period Tpost 
Link utilization congestion threshold rmaz 
Relative importance of customer satisfaction I3 (a 
number in the range [0.11) 
output : 
Customer dissatisfaction <I,T~.,~ f o r  each link I 
within time Tpoat 
Algorithm: 
For each lid 1 
Initialize customer dissatisfaction. <J,T,,,,, = 0 
Using flow information and topology: 
For each flow f E FT~.,, and small time intervals t 
Let nj,t be the number of linka 
in path taken by f orer time interval t 
Let bf,t the number of bytes of f transmitted 
Let pf be the cost of transmitting a single byte 
Let & the capacity of l ink I 
in interval t 
in flow f 
Let v ( f , t )  = - 
"f.t 
For each link 1 
For each small interval t 
Figure 3. Computing cusulmer dissatisfaction 
4.2 Quantifying Return-on-Investment 
Return-on-Investment depends on future revenues that the service provider hopes 
to earn. Therefore, to quantify RoI, we also need a mechanism to estimate future 
revenues. Suppose that there exists some mechanism to project growth of data volume 
as well as growth in the number of customers. Let us call this algorithm Pred - Algo. 
Then the return-on-investment can be computed as shown in Figure 4. The algorithm 
takes as input, the network topology, future routing information, current maintenance 
costs, quantum of upgrade for different links, the cost of these upgrades, and future 
maintenance costs. It produces as output, the projected revenue on all links for a 
future time period TfYtYVE. 
The algorithm for quantifying return-on-investment assumes that we know how to 
quantify revenue earned on a link. To this end, we now develop an algorithm to dis- 
tribute revenues among the links in the network. Our algorithm considers how much 
each link has been used by each customer. Then, using pricing plan information, the 
algorithm partitions the customer segment's payment to each of the links based on vol- 
194 Jagannathan. Altmann and Rhodes 
Algorithm: 
For each customer C (including future customers) 
Apply Pred-  Algo to project growth of usage over 
(source. destination) pairs and payment PC 
in time period Tfvtvre. 
Let ~ I , T ~ ~ ~ ~ * ~  be revenue earned on linlr 1 
in interval Tfvtvrc 
Far each link 1 compute T I , T ~ ~ , ~ ~ ~  
Let FCI be fixed cost of upgrading I 
let M I J ~ ~ , ~ ~ ~  be the maintenance cost of 1 
in interval TfYtull 
Input : 
Network topology, and link maintenance costs 
Amount of extra capacity to be added to each 
linlr 1 and investment and maintenance costs 
Cuatomar usage information for time period Toid 
Customer billing information for time period Told 
An algorithm Pred - Alga to project usage and 
==.venue for the future time period TfYtUIC 
output : 
R O I ~ , T ~ ~ ~ ~ , ~ ,  the return on investment 
for each lid in Tfutur. 
Figure 4. Estimating Rem-on-Ivesment on upgraded links 
ume of usage. The value of each link then, is the sum total of the money earned by that 
link from all customers. By comparing the value of each link with the investment and 
maintenance costs, we get a reasonable estimate of the importance of each link to the 
NSP's business over a given time period. The algorithm is presented in Figure 5 
The algorithm outlined in Figure 5 estimates the price of each flow and equally 
distributes the payment among all the links in the path taken by that flow. Notice that 
the way we choose to distribute revenues and estimate value of a link is just for "ac- 
counting simplicity'' and by no means an exact measure. It however gives us adequate 
perspective about which links are on popular revenue-generating routeS. The algorithm 
in Figure 5 makes an implicit assumption that there exist alternative paths to every des- 
tination, and that should a link in one of the paths fail, the alternate path can sustain 
the traffic. Otherwise, a bridge link will be worth as much as the revenue earned from 
traffic traversing that link. The path redundancy assumption is justified because of two 
reasons: fault tolerance of network and computational complexity. Path redundancy is 
highly desirable from the perspective of fault tolerance. Hence almost every real-world 
network can be expected to be a strongly connected graph with redundant paths to ev- 
ery destination. The computational complexity of estimating whether an alternate path 
can sustain the traffic load is prohibitive*. Assuming that alternate paths can sustain 
'For each edge in a given path in an undirected gaph, one fan estimate the impact of removing an edge 
in that path, using a modified shortest path algorithm [4,51. But this approach cannot be used for directed 
graphs, and the pmblem is provably harder. 
Revenue-Based Resource Investment Decisions in IP Networks 195 
the traffic however allows us to perform a fast computation to estimate link value at 
the cost of some loss in accuracy. 
Input : 
Network topology N and link maintenance costs  
Routing tables for time period T 
Customer flow information f a r  time period T 
Customer billing information for time period T 
output : 
The revenue y j , ~  generated by each link 
Algorithm: 
For each link 1 
Using flow information and topology: 
Initialize revenue earned by that link. 7i,T = 0 
For each flow f 
Let nf,t be the number of links in path 
tahsn by f over time interval t 
Let b,,t be the number of bytes of f 
transmitted in interval t 
Let p f  be the price f o r  transmitting one byte of f 
For small time intervals t 
For each link I in path 
71,T = 71.T + 
Figure 5. Distributing revenues among links 
We now illustrate our algorithm using an example. Figure 6 shows a network ser- 
vice provider (NSP) with two customers- XYZ and ABC. XYZ pays a monthly rate of 
$20000 for time critical data that it transmits to other locations. ABC pays a monthly 
rate of $5000 as data transmission costs. The NSP pays $5000 a month to the backbone 
provider for data transmission. The maintenance costs for each link are indicated in the 
figure. The figure also shows how much data has been transmitted by each customer 
(say in the past month) and which links the data traverses on its way to destinations. 
XYZ senddreceives 50MB data on link A-B and A-C and 200 MB data on link B-D. 
ABC senddreceives 300 M B  data on link A-C. For simplicity, we shall ignore the links 
connecting ABC and XYZ to nodes A and B respectively. 
BOOMB-abc 
Link Maintenance Costs 
A-B: $lowmonth 
(-5000/mO"th) B - D  $500/monfh 
ZOOMB-xyz w 
Figure 6. Estimating the Value of a Link 
Let us use algorithm to estimate the revenue from each link in this network. We 
assume that the entire volume of data over a link was generated in a single flow. Since 
paymentofcustomer ABC is$5000,thepriceofeachMegabyteispasc = E =$16.67. 
For customer XYZ, the payment is $20000. Hence p x y z  = - = $80. ABC has 
196 Jagannathan, Altmann and Rhodes 
only one flow of volume 300MB over path A-C which contributes $5000 to "(A-c,T. 
Customer XYZ has two flows, one over B-A-C and the other over B-D. The former 
has a data volume of 50MB and contributes $ x x 20000 = $2000each to "(A-B,T 
and TA-C,T. Similarly, the second flow contributes x 20000 = $16000 to TB-D,T. 
Thus we have, "(A-C,T = $7000, "/A-B,T = $2000, and TB-D,T = $16000. 
250 200 
5. Discussion 
In this paper, we have described a new approach to capacity planning. We illustrated 
the power of combining marketing, revenue, and customer usage information. We then 
showed that the Dynamic Netvalue Analyzer (DNA), a tool that can aggregate and 
analyze raw network data on-the-fly, can be used for this new approach to capacity 
planning. In more detail, we outlined algorithms that use DNA-aggregated data for 
making investment decisions. 
We now discuss some architectural issues and tradeoffs associated with some possi- 
ble implementations. An important issue that arises is the location of the data collect- 
ing agents within the network. Network managers are very reluctant to make changes 
to the network or install monitoring equipment on important or busy routers. Our archi- 
tecture does not require DNA at any of the internal or border routers. DNA runs at the 
network edge. Because all traffic bas to enter or exit through one of these edge-routers, 
information collected from these routers is sufficient to capture the entire network sce- 
nario. Our algorithms do require routing information from the network. One possible 
approach is to get a daily update of routing tables from all routers in the network. A 
daily snapshot will suffice if internal routes are relatively stable over time. Even in 
case of route instability over short intervals of time, our analytical results will not be 
significantly affected because capacity planning is a long-term process and uses data 
over long intervals of time (often using data gathered over months). 
The algorithms we have described are implementation independent. They can be 
implemented over a sophisticated network simulation tool, or they can be implemented 
inside the monitoring tool itself, thus performing all the analysis on-the-fly. A simu- 
lation based approach has significant data storage and transportation overheads. To 
perform a realistic simulation of observed traffic, we need detailed information about 
network flows to be collected, transported and stored at a centralized location. Fur- 
thermore, the simulation will be computation intensive and could be time consuming. 
However, since capacity planning is a long-term process, a dedicated machine can ac- 
complish the task. A possible optimization is to use "aggregated network data" or 
traffic models instead of detailed flow information. This will reduce the accuracy of 
the analysis, but will also significantly reduce the data transportation and storage costs. 
DNA can he used to perform such traffic modelling [l]. 
If the second approach is adopted, our algorithms that compute monetary value 
of links and customer dissatisfaction are implemented within DNA. This may require 
approximations of the price of transmitted data because the actual price charged for 
transmission may not be known in real-time (e.g. tiered-pricing plans). Moreover, 
some coordination may be required with a network management protocol like SNMP. 
Specifically, the network management protocol should trigger alarms whenever link 
utilization over observation intervals exceed pre-configured thresholds. This is re- 
quired to compute the customer dissatisfaction with links. But at the cost of adminis- 
trative overhead, this approach saves significant data transportation and storage costs. 
An important issue concerning our capacity planning vision is in evaluating the 
trade-off between information utility and data collection overhead. Data collection and 
Revenue-Based Resource Invesmenr Decisions in IP Networks 197 
analysis, if done efficiently, can deliver business information, whose value outweighs 
the cost of the data collection. We believe that DNA and our algorithms for investment 
decisions deliver this efficiency. 
References 
[I]  I. Alhnann and L. Rhodes, “Dynamic Netvalue Analyzer - A Pricing Plan Modeling Tool for ISPs Us- 
ing A d  Network Usage Data”, IEEE WECWISIOM. lotemational Workshop on Advance Issues 
of E-Commerce and Web-Based Information Syslems, 2002 
121 I. Case, K. McCloghrie, M. Rose and S .  Waldbusser, “Protocol Operations for Version 2 of the Simple 
Network Management protocol (SNMPvZ)”, RPC 1905. 19%. 
(31 Y. Diao. I. L. Hellenlein. and S .  Parekh, “A Business-Oriented Appmach to the Design of Feedback 
Loops for Performance Managemenr’. Distributed Operations and Management. 2001. 
[4] I. Hershberger and S .  SUri. “Vickrey Prices and Shortest Paths: What is an Edge Worlhl”, IEEE 
Symgosium on Foundations of Computer Science. 2001, 
[SI I.Henhberger, S. Suri and A. Bhosle., “On the Difficulty of some Shortest Path Problems:’ STACS, 
Berlin. 2W3. 
(61 PAT, hnp:llwww.wandl.co“rmVipaVIPAT.nov.dm 
[7] S .  Keshav, “An Engineering Approach to Computer Networking: ATM Networks. the lotemel, and 
the Telephone Network”, Addison-Wesley, 1997. 
I81 D. A. Menasce and V. A. F. Almeida. “Capacity Planning for Web Services: Metria, Models, and 
Methods”. preotice Hall WR. 2002. 
[91 NetQuad, h a p : l / w w w . a n i t e t e l e c o ~ . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ o d ” ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ d . h ~  
[IO] NeIRule. http://www.analyticallengioes.coml 
[ I  I] Opnet, hap://www.opnet.com . 
[I21 T. Robertazzi. “Planning Telecommunication Networks”, Wiley-IEEE Press, February 1999. 
