Proceedings of ICCT.2003 
A New (t ,  n) Threshold Image Hiding 
Scheme for Sharing a Secret Color Image 
Chin-Chen Chang Iuon-Chang Lin 
Department of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering, 
National Chung Cheng University, 
Chaiyi, Taiwan, 62107, R. 0. C. 
Email: ccc@cs.ccu.edu.tw 
Ahtract-The objective of this research is to de- 
velop a method to hide a secret color image inside a 
set of meaningful color images. It illlows a group of 
n members to share the secret image such that any 
t or more members can cooperatively construct the 
secret color image, but (t - 1) or less members can- 
not. In addition, this technique has some outstaud- 
iug properties. The embedded image can he 512 col- 
ors, and the size can be as big as that of the cover im- 
ages. On the other hand, prior schemes have a secret 
weakness that some members may cheat other mem- 
bers to obtain their shares. Our new scheme can 
withstand the cheating attack. Therefore, the new 
technique is superior to previous works. Finally, our 
experimental results will also reveal that the distor- 
tion between our stego-image and cover image is iu- 
conspicuous. 
Keywords-Image hiding, secret sharing, stegauog- 
raphy, (t,n) threshold 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Today, the revolution of computer technology is ad- 
vancing rapidly, and so is the prevalence of Internet. 
More and more information is presented in the form of 
multimedia, especially digital images. Digital Images 
are applied to our daily life widely. Users can store, 
send or receive these digital data via Intemet. How- 
ever, the computer network environment is not secure, 
and information can be easily intercepted and tampered 
with. Hence, how to protect the data on Intemet is a 
great security concem. Many researches have heen fo- 
cused on topics such as copyright protection, copy con- 
trol. authenticity verification, and annotation of digital 
media. Besides, there are other applications, such as 
transmitting or storing a secret media. In this paper, we 
focus on the image hiding technology. 
In order to protect the confidentiality of the secret 
image transmitted via an open network system, the typ- 
ical way[l], [6], [I51 namely some encryption tech- 
nique, is always used. In other words, the sender se- 
lects a secret key to encrypt the secret image, and only 
the legal recipient can extract the secret image. How- 
ever, besides being inefficient and time-consuming, en- 
crypting a secret image does not provide enough secu- 
rih, in manv aoolications because the encmted image 
flags the importance of the image and attracts attack- 
ers’ attention Although the data have heen encrypted, 
attackers can still try to decrypt the data or even destroy 
them. Image hiding technology provides a good solu- 
tion to this problem. It allows a secret image, for in- 
stance, a military map, to he embedded in one or more 
cover images to prevent from being detected and ex- 
tracted. The joint image is called the stego-image, and 
the technique is also called steganography. The goal 
of this technique is to store information in a way that 
hides that information’s existence [3]. Data encryption 
uses a trapdoor function to encrypt data into cipher text, 
while steganographyhides the secret image into another 
meaningful image. 
So far, many literatures have been proposed con- 
ceming steganography [21, [4l. [81, [% [W, [181, 
[19], [24], [25]. Instead of encrypting the whole secret 
image, many these schemes combine encryption and 
streganography to enhance the efficiency and the secu- 
rity. They encrypt some important features extracted 
from the secret image and embed them into the cover 
image. Thus, the security of these schemes are guaran- 
teed through the use of camouflage and the difficulty of 
decryption. However. the capacity of embedding data is 
constricted. In order to avoid being detected, the distor- 
tion between the stego-image and cover image must be 
as inconspicuously as possible. Hence, the size of the 
secret image is usually smaller than that of the cover im- 
age, and the system usually supports few colors. Gen- 
erally, a good steganography scheme must meet the fol- 
lowing requirements [14]. 
High stego-image quality. The secret image can be hid- 
den in the cover image while the stego-image still main- 
tains good quality. This property can prevent the stego- 
image from being detected and thus keep the hidden 
image from being extracted 
High data embedding capaci@. On the grounds of high 
cover image quality, the capacity of embedding data 
should be as high as possible. 
Securiw. Due to the camouflage of the secret image, 
without plenty information no attacker can detect and 
extract the secret image from the stego-image. 
Low implementation mmplai@. The computationcom- 
plexity of the embedding and extracting processes must 
he as low as possible. 
Secret sharing is an important issue in confirming the . .  
196 
security of secret information [20] . In this paper, we 
shall propose a new ( t ,  n) threshold secret color image 
sharing scheme. In this scheme, a secret color image 
can be divided into n shares, hidden in n cover images, 
and distributed by the dealer to a designated group of n 
members, P I ,  P z , .  . . , P,. Each member holds a stego- 
image that contains a piece of information about the se- 
cret image. Only when any t or more members cooper- 
atively pool their stego-images can the secret image be 
extracted. However, (t-1) or less members can have no 
capacity in extracting the secret image. In practice, the 
scheme can allow users to flexibly choose the threshold 
t and the number n of the group members. It can be 
either(1,n). (t,n) or (n,n). 
There are many applications of this technique in real 
life. For example, a military map is usually a very 
important and confidential piece of information for a 
country. How to preserve the map securely is there- 
fore an important issue. The map can simply be pre- 
served by some certain officers directly. However, the 
map may be revealed by one of them easily. This is not 
secure. To raise the security level, the map can he pre- 
served by n commissioned officers together, and only 
when all cooperate can they recover the map. However, 
in this case, if one of the commissioned map keepers 
dies, then the map can never be recovered. Our scheme 
provides a good solution to this problem. 
Furthermore, some officers may deceive other offi- 
cers. For example, in‘the map extraction phase, some 
commissioned map keepers may present wrong stego- 
images to cheat those who hold correct stego-images. 
This security problem is called cheating attack. Many 
researches [5], [16], [22] have considered such prob- 
lems of cheating in threshold schemes. 
In our proposed scheme, the cheating attack can be 
prevented. Furthermore, the embedded image can be 
5 12 colors, and the size can be equal to that of the cover 
images. Besides, the stego-image holders do not have 
to hold any additional information (e.g. secret keys) but 
the stego-images themselves. The main advantages of 
the proposed scheme are that it‘ is practical and that it is 
efficient. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Before 
describing the proposed scheme, we will briefly review 
the related works in Section 2 and introduce some math- 
ematical tools in Section 3. Next, we shall propose our 
new (t, n) threshold image hiding scheme for sharing a 
secret color image in Section 4 . In Section 5, we will 
examine the security of our proposed scheme and ana- 
lyze the performance. The experimental results will be 
demonstrated in Section 6. Finally, we shall summarize 
the benefits that our scheme brings in the last section. 
11. RELATED WORKS 
In this section, some related works in the area of 
image hiding are to he introduced. The concept of 
steganography is proposed by Simmons in 1983 [Zl]. 
He formulated a scheme to solve the “Prisoners’ Prob- 
lem”. In this scenario, two prisoners wish to hatch an 
escape plan, hut all the communications pass through 
the warden. If the warden detects anv ciohertext. he will 
suspect the content is an escape plan and destroy the 
communications. On the contrary, if the warden gets a 
significant message, the communications may be suc- 
cessful. Therefore, the prisoners must find some way to 
hide the secret message under a significant cover mes- 
sage. 
As we know, many steganograpy schemes have heen 
brought up prosperous in recent years, including a fa- 
mous simple scheme [19] that works by modifying the 
least significant hits (LSB) of the cover image. The 
scheme has a high quality stego-image; however, the 
storing capacity is small, and if the cover image leaks 
out, the secret image can he easily extracted. 
To improve these drawbacks, some researchers have 
come up with schemes [2], [I21 that combine conven- 
tional cryptography and steganogriphy to enhance the 
security of the embedded secret image. In some other 
schemes [4]. [IS], [24]. the researchers,have proposed 
some algorithms to determine whether more bits can be 
embedded. They can enhance the storing capacity. Fur- 
thermore, still some other schemes [SI, [9], [25] have 
been proposed to use cryptography only. for the impor- 
tant features extracted fromthe secret image to enhance 
the efficiency. 
Visual cryptography, on the other hand, is another 
type of data hiding technique. The main idee of vi- 
sual cryptography is to extract the secret image with- 
out any computation In 1994, Naor and Shamir [I71 
first proposed the first (t, n) threshold visual crytpog- 
raphy scheme. In their scheme, the secret image can 
be recognized by the human visual system only if any t 
transparencies are stacked together. The advantages of 
this scheme are that it needs no computation to extract 
the secret image and that it flexile. Following Naorand 
Sbamir’s steps, many researchers began to invest their 
time and energy in this topic[l I], [13]. However, most 
early schemes can only work on black-and-white im- 
ages or images with few colors. Furthermore, the trans- 
parencies do not have high image quality, which makes 
them easy targets for attacks. 
Recently, some (t,n) threshold image sharing 
schemes [7], [23] have heen proposed. These schemes 
are more flexible and suitable for more applications 
in real life. However, these schemes cannot resist the 
cheating attack and cannot embed color images. In this 
paper, we shall propose a new (t,n) threshold image 
hiding scheme to improve these drawbacks. 
111. MATHEMATICAL TOOLS 
. 
. 
The following mathematical tools will be helpful 
later. 
A. Lagrange Inteq)olafing Polynomial 
form 
Assume that a polynomial f of degree t - 1 is in the 
f(z) a1X + ... + at-~X’-’ + K mod p l l )  
where al, a2,. . . , at-1 are random numbers, K is a 
constant, andpisalargeprime. LetGbeagroupwithn 
meet Emation I. T is a subset of G which has t ooints 
= 
points (51,f(51)).(~2,f(52)),...,(5~,f(~~)) which 
197 
with each of them satisfying (z,, f(zJ) E G. All 
the points in T can be used collectively to compute K 
through the Lagrange formula. 
where 
For a Lagrange interpolating polynomial of degree 
t - 1, t or more points in G are required for reconstruc- 
tion. 
B. MD5 One- Way Hashing Function 
The one-way hash function is a useful technique to 
provide authenticity. The features of the one-way hash 
function are ( I )  given an input, it is easy to compute the 
output through the function; (2) From an output, it is 
difficult to derive the input; (3) given an input, it is dif- 
ficult to find another input such that the two inputs have 
the same output; (4) given an arbitrary-length input, it 
always gives a fixed-length output. 
MDS is a well-known one-way hashing function. 
The input text is a 512-bit block. After the process- 
ing of MDS, the output is a set of four 32-bit blocks. 
We can concatenate the results to form a single 128-bit 
hash value. The advantages of MD5 are the high speed 
and easy soflware implementation It can also create a 
one-way, collision-resistant result. 
C. RSA Digital Signature 
RSA is the most popular public key cryptosystem. 
The public key and private key can he generated as fol- 
lows. First, two large primes p and q are randomly 
chosen, and then N can be computed as the product 
N = p x q. Another variable e is also randomly cho- 
sen to compute d through the Euclidean algorithm, such 
that 
. 
e x  de lmod+(N) ,  (4) 
whereb(N) = (p-l)(q-l).Let(N,e)bethepublic 
key and let d be the private key of this cryptosystem. 
To sign a message M, the signature S can be com- 
puted from 
S =  MdmodN.  (5) 
To verify the signature of M, we can compute 
M' = S e  m a l  N (6) 
and check whether M = M' or not. If yes, the verifi- 
cation result is positive. The technique can confirm the 
integrity and the origin ofthe message. 
IV. THE PROPOSED SCHEME 
The goal of our scheme is to embed a secret color 
image into n meaningful cover images for producing 
n stego-images. The secret image and the cover im- 
ages are independent and can be any image at all. Only 
when 1 or more stego-images are presented together can 
the secret image be extracted. Furthermore, our scheme 
must meet all the requirements listed in Section 1. The 
main idea of our scheme is to use the Lagrange interpo- 
lating polynomial [IO] to share each pixel value of the 
secret image and to use the shared value to substitute 
for the LSBs of the cover images. In our scheme, the 
size of the image to be embedded is equal to that of the 
cover images. The cover color images are in the RGB 
format, where each pixel contains three 8-hit unit: red, 
green, and blue, and the secret image is indexed 512 
colors with each pixel consisting of 9 bits. Our scheme 
can he divided into two phases: the embedding phase 
and the extraction phase. In the embedding phase, the 
secret image is embedded into n cover images. In the 
extraction phase, the secret image can be extracted, and 
the cheating attack is out of the question 
For the rest of this paper. EI stands for the secret im- 
age, C I I ,  CIz, .  . . , CI,  stand for the n cover images, 
and ,711, SIZ, .  . . , SI ,  stand for the n stego-images. N 
is the public RSA modulus for the.dealer such that N = 
p x q, where p and q are two secret large primes. Let d. 
be the private key for the dealer and its corresponding 
public key be e, such that d x e = 1 mod +(A'), where 
b(N) = (p - 1) x (q  - 1). The parameters e and N 
can be published. The parameter d is kept secret by the 
dealer. We assume the dealer is a person to he trusted, 
who sends the n cover images to the n designated hold- 
ers, respectively. Let G be those n holders as a group 
and T be a subset of G such that IT1 = t .  The details of 
our scheme are described as follows. 
A.  Embedding Phase 
In this phase, the dealer wants to embed the se- 
cret image EI  into the cover images GIi. for i = 
1,2,  . . . , n. The procedure of the embedding process is 
shown in Figure 1. The details of each step is described , 
in the following paragraphs. 
I. The dealer first retrieves the 4 leftmost most signif- 
icant bits (MSBs) from the RGB value of each pixel of 
CIi,  where i = 1 , 2 , .  . . , n. Therefore, we can obtain a 
conceptual image CIi where each pixel is composed of 
I2 bits. 
2. For each pixel in the positions (U, U), the dealer ran- 
domly chooses a polynomial f(.,") of degree t - 1, such 
that 
f(u.v)(z) = qU,"pz + qU,+z2 + ... 
+q.,+-~z'-' + K(",") mod P, 
where a(,  ,,) ~,a(,.,)~,...,a(,,,),-t are random num- 
bers, k(",+) is the pixel value of the pixel in position 
(U,.) in EI .  and p is a prime smaller than 512. The 
polynomial must be kept secret. Let SNi be a unique 
serial number for each cover image Cli  , Similar to the 
description in Section 3.1, the dealer can easily com- 
pute the value f(,, ,)(SNi.) to be shared for the corre- 
sponding position (U,.) in Clj. Since the modularp is 
smaller than 512. the value to be shared is also smaller 
Fig. 1. The pmedun of embedding secret image E1 into a wver 
imase Cl; 
than 512. After generating all the values to be shared, 
all the polynomials can be left behind. 
3. Then, we embed the shared value f ( u , v ) ( S N i )  into 
the due position in CI; in place of the onginal pixel 
value. Since each shared value is between 0-51 1 ,  we 
can record the value with 9 bits. Therefore. we can ob- 
tain a combined image Crr where each pixel becomes 
21 bits. 
4. We concatenate the dealer's public key, SNi ,  and 
(71: as the input text for the MD5 hash function. 
Through two rounds of MD5 processing, we get the 
hash value H K  as output whose size is only 1/16 of 
the input size. 
5 .  Similar to the descriptionin Section 3.3, The dealer 
applies the RSA cryptosystem to sign the hash value 
H K  with herbs  private key. Then we can obtain 
the signature Si on the hash value HVi from Si = 
H K d  mod N .  
6. The storage space of the rightmost LSB for each 
pixel is enough to store the signature. In other words, 
the signature can be embedded into the rightmost LSB. 
Finally, the stego-image SIi can be obtained, and each 
pixel is 24 bits. 
The cover image is in the RGB format. RGB is one 
of the most popular color space format, and it stores 
red, green, and blue in a consecutive three-byte unit for 
each pixel. The positions for the LSB substitutions of 
each pixel are illustrated in Figure 2. 
Shedvalve Signature 
- 
MSB 
- 
LSB 
Fig. 2. Positions for the LSB substitutions ofeaeh pixel 
Fig. 3. The procedure of embedding the secid image E 1  into a cover 
image Cli 
B. Extraction Phase 
In this phase, any t out of n stego-images can be 
used to extract the secret image. At the same time, any 
cheater can be easily detected. The procedure is in Fig- 
ure 3. The details of each step are described as follows. 
1.  Assume any t out of n holders present their own 
stego-images Sri and SN,, where i E T. We must 
check the validity of each stego-image to prevent the 
cheating attack. First, we decompose each cover image 
into two parts. One is formed by retrieving the 7 left- 
most MSBs of SI*, and we call it SI,?. The other is 
formed by retrieving the rightmost LSB of SIi, and the 
information is the signature Si  of SI:. 
2. We concatenate the dealer's public key, SN;, and 
SI;  as the input text and performing two rounds of 
MD5. The output is the hash value HV,. 
3 .  Then we compute HV: = S; mal N with the 
dealer's public key e and N. 
4. To verify the validity of the stepo-image S I i  fori E 
T, we can check whether HVi = HV,' or not. If all are 
positive, we can make sure that all the stego-images are 
correct. Then, we can perform the following steps to 
extract the secret image. 
5.  The shared values for each pixel can be retrieved 
from the 3 rightmost LSBs of SI;, 
6. Since we have t shared values for each pixel in the 
secret image, we can compute f(.,) (0) = K(",") from 
Equation 2 and obtain all the pixel values K(",") in the 
secret image. 
V. DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we shall examine the security of our 
new scheme and discuss the performance. 
A .  Security Analysis 
In the Lagrange interpolating polynomial, the poly- 
nomial of degree t - 1 requires t or more stego-images 
for the reconstruction of the whole secret polynomial 
j(.,"). That means we need any t ormore stego-images 
to extract the pixel value K(",") = f(0) in the secret 
image, but t - 1 or less stego-images will not work. 
Therefore, we can confirm the secrecy. 
To resist the cheating attack, our scheme uses the sig- 
nature concept. One'important property of signature is 
that it can provide integrity authentication. The imple- 
mentation of digital signature in our scheme is through 
the RSA cryptosystem. In the RSA scheme, any party's 
private key d and d ( N )  must be kept secret. From the 
public key, no one can derive the corresponding private 
key. The security of RSA is based on the difficulty of 
factoring the RSA modulus N .  
When a dishonest member modifies a stego-image 
and offers it for the recovely of the secret image as if 
the stego-image were kept intact, it must pass the test in 
Step 4 of the extraction phase before this disguise can 
work. However, the dishonest member does not know 
the dealer's private key. He/She cannot deliver a valid 
signature on the modified stego-image. The dishonest 
member will fail the test in the integrity authentication. 
Therefore, the proposed scheme is secure against the 
replay attack. 
Moreover, since the image hiding technique embeds 
the secret image into some meaningful images, which 
is different from typical ctyptosystems where the ci- 
phertext is meaningless or confused. we do not have to 
wony about the stego-image catching attackers' atten- 
tion and being destroyed. However. some compression 
techniques may destroy the hidden information. There- 
fore, to make our new scheme more powerful, we will 
focus our future work on the challenging task of making 
the hidden information compression-resistant. 
B. Peiformance Analysis 
So far, except for our new scheme, there seems to be 
no scheme capable of dealing with the threshold image 
hiding problem and the cheating problem at the same 
time. Our scheme can achieve the goal of ( t ,  n) thresh- 
old image hiding and simultaneously resist the cheating 
attack In addition, each holder only needs to store the 
stego-image carefully because all the other information, 
such as the dealer's public key and SNi ,  can be made 
public. 
On the other hand, the computational overhead of our 
scheme is also low. In the following paragraphs, the 
computational overhead of the embedding phase will 
be discussed. 
Assume that the size of the secret image is m; 
namely, it has m pixels. Therefore, in Step 2, the dealer 
needs to generate m polynomials for each pixel. Fur- 
thermore, the dealer must compute the values for each 
designatedpolder to share. The tasks require a total of 
mn polynomial computations, 
In our scheme, the RSA signature scheme is used 
for confirming the integrity of each stego-image. In 
the RSA ctyptosystem, before a message M is signed, 
it must be divided into several numerical blocks, and 
each block size must be smaller than the modular N .  
The size of N is usually 512 hits or 1024 bits. There- 
fore, the number of the RSA signing procedures to per- 
form depends on the size of the message to sign. Each 
RSA signing procedure requires one modular exponen- 
tial computation. The modular exponential computa- 
tion is more costly than modular multiplication com- 
putations or hash computations. Therefore, in order to 
reduce the number of RSA signing procedures, we per- 
form the hash function twice to reduce the size of the 
message to sign. Instead of signing the whole stego- 
image, we sign the output values of the hash function. 
In the MD5 one-way hash function, the input size is 
512 bits, and thus the number of hash functions to per- 
form also depends on the whole image size. 
In total, the following computations are required in 
the embedding phase: 
m polynomial generations, 
nm polynomial computations, 
O(m) hash function computations, and . O(m) modular exponential computations. 
On the other hand, in the extraction phase, the re- 
quired computations are described as follows. 
Similar to the embedding phase, the integrity authen- 
tication requires 2 MD5 hash function computations 
and I RSA verification computation for each message 
block. The numbers of these computations also depend 
on the size of stego-image. 
To extract the secret image, all the participating hold- 
ers first compute L, via Equation3. This requires ( t -  1) 
modular multiplications. Then, the pixel value can be 
obtained through Equation 2. Here, t modular multipli- 
cation computations and t modular addition computa- 
tions are required for each pixel. 
The total computations in the extraction phase are 
listed below. 
tm modular addition computations, . tm modular multiplication computations, and . O(m) hash functioncomputations, and 
O(m) modular exponential computations. 
VI. EXPERIMENTATION RESULTS 
In order to avoid the stego-image from being sus- 
pected of hiding secret information in, the quality of 
the stego-image should not be degraded significantly. 
200 
Fig. 4. The secret image 
1. Girl 2. House 3. Pepper 
4. Balsa“ 5. Tiffany 
Fig. 5. The five cover rmages 
Usually, the PSNR (Peaks of the Signal-to-Noise Ra- 
tio) formula is used to evaluate the distortion between 
the pre-processing image and the post-processing im- 
age. The PSNR formula is defined as follows: 
(7) 
(2” - 1)* 
M S E  ’ P S N R  = 10 loglo 
where n represents the number of bits per pixel, and 
MSE (mean-square-error) is defined as 
The notations U and zr stand for image’s height and 
width, respectively. The notations sij and z! . represent 
the preprocessing image pixel value in podhon (i,j) 
and the post-processing image pixel value in position 
(i, j ) ,  respectively. Theoretically, if the distortion be- 
tween the preprocessing image and the postprocessing 
image is small, the value of PSNR comes out larger. 
Therefore, a Jarger value of PSNR means that the pro- 
cessed image has better quality. Usually, if the PSNR 
value is greater than or equal to 30 dh, the distortion 
between the original image and the processed image is 
not suspicious to the humaneye. 
In our scheme, the 4 rightmost LSBs are replaced by 
the embedded data. In average, each pixel value dif- 
ference between the original image and the processed 
image is 8. The average PSNR value, obtained through 
Equation 7, is 31.34, and that means the quality of the 
stego-image is acceptable. 
In our experiment, we employ our scheme to hide a 
secret color image into 5 cover images, and any 3 out of 
I .  Girl 2. House 3. Pepper 
F i g  6. The five stsgo-images 
TABLE 1 
THE PSNROF EACH STEGO-IMAGE 
Stego-Image I Girl I House I Pepper I Baboon I Tiffiryg 
PSNR I 34.76 I 34.88 I 33.87 I 34.50 1 32.87 
5 stego-images can be put together to extract the secret 
image. Figure 4 shows the secret color image, which is 
an indexed color image and has 512 colors. The five 
cover images, “Girl”, “House”, “Pepper”, “Baboon”, 
and “Tiffany”, as shown in Figure 5, are all in the RGB 
format and have 24 bits per pixel. These digital images 
have a resolution of 512 x 512 pixels. The test envi- 
ronment of the experiment is a PC with a Pentium Ill 
450 Mhz processor, 128 MB main memory and Borland 
C+t Builder compiler. We apply our scheme to embed 
the secret image into the 5 cover images to produce 5 
stego-images as shown in Figure 6. Table 1 illustrates 
the PSNR values of the five stego-images. The results 
are acceptable. 
In the extraction phase, any 3 out of the 5 stego- 
images can be put together to extract the secret im- 
age. Figure 7 illustrates one combination where the 
three stego-images, “Girl”, “Baboon”, and “pepper”, 
are used to extract the secret image. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed a new (t, n) thresh- 
old image hiding scheme for sharing a secret color im- 
age. The advantages of our scheme can be summarized . 
as follows. 
To make the scheme flexible, t out of n stego-images 
can be put together to reconstruct the secret image. 
The secret image can be 512 colors, and the size is 
the same as that of the cover images. . According to the experimental results, the quality of 
the stego-images is also good. 
The computation complexity of this scheme is low. It 
only requires O(m) RSA signing process and nm poly- 
nomial computations in the embedding phase; as well 
as O(m) RSA verification processing and tm modular 
multiplications in the extraction phase. - Our scheme can achieve the goal of (t, n) threshold 
image hiding, and it can also resist the cheating attack 
at the same time. 
20 1 
solomon wLs:’ Communicutions of ACM, vol. 24, pp. 583- 
584, 1981. 
1171 N. Naor and A. Shamit, ‘Visual cryptography:’EumrryprW, 
pp. 1-12, 1994. 
[IS] I. Pi- “A metbod for signshlre esSting on digital images,” 
IEEE Infenarioml C o n f i e  on huge Pmmsing, vol. 3, \ . . . . .. . . . . pp. 215-218, IYW. 
1191 R G. Schyndel, A. Z XrkeI, and C. E Osborne. “A digital wa- 
I201 A. Shamir, “How to shan a secre&*’ Communuriom of ACM,. 
vol. U, pp. 612-613, 1979. 
1211 0. 1. Simmons. ‘“he odaoners’ Droblem and the subliminal 
Pepper 
Any 3 out of 5 stego-images 
Fig. 7. Tho experimental results 
. Except for the stego-image that the holder must care- 
fully store, there is no Secret information to be stored. 
(Note: the dealer’s public key and SNi  are public.) 
Finally, to design an image hiding scheme that is 
compression-resistant is our future task. 
111 
131 
151 
141 
161 
171 
191 
REFERENCES 
N. Bourb~&ts and C. Alexopoulos, “Pictun data encryption us. 
ing scan piutems:’Patten Recognirion, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 567- 
581. 1992. 
R 1. Aderson and F. A. P. Petitcolas, “On tbe limits of rpeganog- 
’ rapby:‘ IEEE Journal on .Select& h a s  in Conmunieofionr, 
vol. 16, pp. 474-481, May 1998. 
V. A* “Digital steganography: Hiding data within data:’ 
IEEElMenQ Computing. pp. 7%30, May-June 2001. 
W. Bender. V. Gmhl. and A. Liu, ’Techniques for data hiding:’ 
IBM&Wem Journul, vol. 35, no. 34, pp. 313-336, 1996. 
M. Carpentieri, A. D. Santis, and U. Vascaro, “Size of shares 
and probability of chezling io thnshold schemes:‘ Eum- 
q p t ’ 9 3 ,  pp. 118-125, 1993. 
C. C. Chmg, U S. Hwang, and T. S. Chen, “A new enclyp- 
lion algorithm far image c~tosys~etemn,” Journal of s).stenrr 
d.%fime,vol.  58,pp. 83-91, Sep. 2001. 
C. C. Chang and R J. Hwaog, “Sharing secret images using 
shadow codehks,” Infirmution Sciences, vol. 111, pp. 335- 
345, 1998. 
C. C. Chan& J. C. Yeh, and I. Y. Hsiao, “A novel scheme 
far securing image steganogmphy:’ Lecfure Nom in Com- 
pumSak?”-Advunces in M u l t i d l u  I n f o m w n  Pnxessinp 
PCMZOOI. Springer-Veda& pp. 8 W l 1 , 2 o O l .  
T. S. Chen, C. C. C h q ,  and M. S. Hvm& “A virmal image 
cryptosyslem based upon vector quantization:’ IEEE ~ansuc-  
tiomonlmaPePmeessinJSfnP. vol. 7. no. 10.00. 1485-1488.1998. 
~ _. . ... 
[IO] D.E.R Dennin& *Cryptography and data security,” Addiron- 
[I I] S. Drostle, “New results on visla1 cryptography:’ EumrryptP6, 
Wesley, 1983. 
pp. 401415,19%. 
[I21 E. F r a u  et al., “Computer-based stegaaography: in Informu- 
tion Hiding, k m r e  Notes in Computer science; Springer- 
Vedage, vol. 1174, pp. 7-21,1996. 
[I31 R 1. Hwang and C. C. Chang, “Hiding a pictun in two pic- 
tuns:’ Opricnl Engineering, vol. 40, pp. 342-351, Manh 2001. 
[14] S. Ka!z&nbeinser and E A. Petitcolas, “Information Hidding 
Techniques for Stegaoqaphy and Digital Watermarking:’ 
Altech House, Boston, 2000. 
[IS] C. 1. Kuo, ‘Novel image encryption techniques and its applica- 
tions in progressive lrmsmission:’ Joumd ofElecWonic Imag- 
ing, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 345-351. 1993. 
(161 R 1. McEliew and D. V. Sawate, ‘’On sharing secreta and teed- 
202 
~ , 1 ~ ~  . r .  ~~ 
1221 U Tompa and H. Woll. “How ;os& a secret with cheaters:’ 
Jomulof Clypfogruphj, vol. I ,  pp. 133-138, 1988. 
[U] C. S. Tsai and C. C. Chan& “A generalized semi image shar- 
ing and nwvely scheme:’ k f u r e N o m  in Computm Science- 
Advances in Multimedia Infiomarion Pmcessing-PCM2OOl,, 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 963-%8.2001. 
[24] R Z. Wang, C. E LiO, and I. C. Lin, “Image biding by opti- 
mal Isb substitution and genetic algorithm,” Putfen Recogni- 
tion, vol. 34, pp. 671483.2001. 
[25] W. H. Yeh and 1. J. H-& “Hiding digital information using a 
novel system scheme:’ Computers rmd Security, vol. 20, no. 6, 
pp. 533-538,2001. 
