Fingerprint Matching Based on Area under the 
Highest Peaks Curve 
Ahmed Baba Elmadani, Borhanuddin Mohd. Ah, V. Prakash, Adznan Jantan, Kasmiran Jumari' 
Department of Computer and Communication Systems Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering University Putra Malaysia 
Department of Electronics and Electrical and Systems 
Faculty of Engineering University Kebangsan Malaysia 
elmadan@,vahoo.com 
I 
Abstract Passwords are no longer valid for 
accessing personal resources, because it is easy 
to forge them, in either small or big systems. 
Today's challenge is to find other alternatives 
for passwords. Biometric is one of the ways, by 
mean of using human characteristics in 
accessing system resources. Fingerprint is one 
choice of securing systems, because it is unique, 
un-repeatable, and widely acceptable. This 
paper has an aim to present a model of 
fingerprint recognition to gain access to 
sensitive information for only authorized 
person. The method is based on recognition of 
the fingerprint image, which is tolerant to 
translation and rotation. A small size of 
fingerprint image is used to extract 
information. By calculating the area under the 
curve resulted from connecting three highest 
peaks as matching parameter. Other 
parameters are used to ensure a perfect 
matching. Our method takes into account a 
minimum image size and minimum number of 
searches. As a result we get minimum time in 
matching process. 
Keywords: Fingerprint, Hough Transform; 
Area under curve, and peaks. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This paper will investigate some alternative 
techniques for user password. It will focus on 
0-7803-8114-9/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE. 
fingerprint as alternative means user 
authentication to gain access to the system 
resources. 
1.1 Background 
To access a system, authorized needs to type his 
login name associated with his password, if it 
matches in the password file or directly, the user 
will grant the access to the system resources. But 
there are numerous problems with use of 
password-based system: 
1. In order to remember the passwords, users 
tend to write down passwords, especially 
when they use many different passwords. 
There is no solution to this problem except 
user education. 
2. Users tend to pick obvious passwords, 
such as names of friends, loved ones or 
pets. 
3. Passwords are transmitted from the user to 
the system in clear text on the 
communication lines. 
4. Password files tend to store passwords in 
encrypted (or hashed) form, but often 
there is no restriction on reading the 
password file. This makes them very 
amenable to dictionary based attacks [I]. 
In summary, passwords do not provide an 
adequate mechanism for authentication, 
because it may forget, stolen, or left behind 
and this will cause system security failure. 
536 
Password-based system does not prove the 
existence of the right user, because some one 
else such as friends, attackers can impersonate 
an actual user. Biometrics is an .alternative 
method to authenticate users. 
1.2 Biometric as Altemative of password 
Biometrics (face, Voice, Fingerprint, Iris), where 
an individual's identity is verified by unique 
physical or behavioral characteristic, is fast 
becoming a standard solution for a variety of 
applications, including physical access control, 
computer welfare payments and healthcare data 
security. While it traditionally has been used for 
applications that require highest security, it is now 
gaining acceptance in mainstream consumer 
applications worldwide [3]. 
1.3 Authentication using Fingerprint 
Fingerprints are geometric human characteristic. 
They are formed even before the birth during the 
hand development. Science has proofed that each 
person has unique fingerprint, even identical 
twins have different fingerprints. It has been 
estimated that the chance of two people, including 
twins, having the same fingerprint is less than 
one-in-a-billion [2]. 
In automation security, fingerprints are more 
secure than passwords, because of fine 
differentiation between seemingly identical 
fingerprints is provided by the structure of the 
friction ridges and won't forgotten or stolen. 
Ridges ending and bifurcations are referred to 
collectively as minutiae. Minutiae details are: 
bifurcation, divergence, enclosure, and endings. 
All related together forming a unique 
characteristic of fingerprint [3,4]. 
1.4 Fingerprint image processing 
In a closed search, where the target fingerprint 
image is already known, the problem is greatly 
simplified. The system simply retrieves the 
existing record and makes a one-to-one 
comparison with be subject fingerprints. When 
the number of images is small, comparison will 
determine the result in reasonable time, but when 
the one-to-one comparison deal with a large 
number of images say several millions the 
algorithm is time consuming. It maybe in some 
systems will last for days [3]. 
Fingerprint image always needs an enhancement, 
to come out with its features clear. This is because 
of the low quality images captured using scanners 
or fingerprint reader devices. Fingerprint image 
once captured and resized, it is filtered using one 
of the known filters methods such as Linear, 
Wiener, Median, and Gaussian. The image using 
one or more filtering algorithm is filtered several 
times until it came clear. Then a binarization 
using a threshold is applied to the image. At this 
point the fingerprint image is ready to detect its 
edges or minutiae points. Noting that after 
detecting the image edge retum the image to its 
origin is impossible. The constructed edge or 
minutiae points and other information are stored 
on a template file for future comparison use [5,6]. 
1.5 Fingerprint matching techniques 
Three techniques are used in image matching for 
pattem recognition, template, statistical and 
structural. The application is subject to the noise 
and number of invariant pattems in the image. If 
there are a small number of invariant pattems, 
then a template matching is probably most 
appropriate. But if there is a little apparent 
structure to the pattems, or if they are in the 
presence of high noise, then the statistical pattem 
recognition may be most effective. If, however, 
the pattems recognition have an obvious structure 
and a certain amount of variability, the structural 
pattem-recognition technique is usually most 
appropriate. A combination of more than 
technique can be used [7]. 
A statistical 'approach for image pattem 
recognition uses different factors to test the 
equality of two images. Among those factors: 
Hough Transform (HT) is a technique used to 
isolate features of a particular shape within an 
image. The desired features must be specified in 
537 
some parametric form. The classical HT .is most 
commonly 1 used for detection of regular curves 
such as' lines, circles. ellipses, etc:) The main 
advantage.ofthe HT is that it is tolerant.to gaps in 
feature . boundary descriptions. 8 and relatively 
unaffected by image noise [8,9,10,12]. 
Euler number (EN] isanother approach to identify 
the simi1arity:of two images. The EN is a measure 
of the topology of an image..It is-defined as the 
total number of objects'in the image minus the 
number o f ,  holes in those objects. .We .-can use 
either 4- or 8-connected neighborhoods. Two 
identical images they will have the same EN.[l I]. 
Correlation Coefficient (CC). . is. a simple 
descriptive statistic that .measures the. strength of 
the linear .relationship between two intervals. or 
ratio-scale variables. It measures the co-variation 
in the magnitudes,. of - two ,. images. The CC 
indicates the extent to which thbpairs iof numbers 
for these two variables of a given images lie on a 
straight line. Correlation is used, to measure the 
relationship between two variables (like two 
images). The values of the CC. can range from -1 
to + l .  If there is no relationship between two 
variables, the value.of. the coefficient is 0: If there 
is a perfect positive. relationship, the .value. is + l .  
If there is a .  perfect negative- relationship,. the 
value is ;l:So on the above the CC.of two images 
equal to,one or very close to one if the two images 
are from the same sense [ l  I] .  
. .  . .  1 . .  
. .  , I .  . . . .  , . .  
.. . ,  , ' I  ,. , . . , ' " ? ,  
1 , . .  . . .  
2. METHODOLOGY AND-DISCUSSION ' .  . 
. .  , .  I .  , '  . ,  
Note: In our new .fingerprint-matching algorithm, 
we assume that the image scale is ,I: 1 :; ' . 
i, 8 .  .. r . b .  * ' .  
2.1 Fingerprint ,Preprocessing ' 1 .  
! I .  
Due to low quality images obtained from 
fingerprint .reader device; the-.scanned image has 
to be -filtered several times to come out. with its 
features. They are as follows:. L' . i 
3. In order to reduce the impactTof noise on 
. . images, :we.perfom image equalization to 
all- fingerprint images sized ,240~240, then 
.. . filtered using standard median, and with 
. ' .  Gaussian. filtering on 3-by-3 pixel 
. , neighborhoods. Filtering reduce the 
. . graininess of the images, . so .that fewer 
false edges were detected in the next step 
of segmentation. The result of operation 
gives a clear image. For example see 
figure 1. Fingerprint image is equalized 
then filtered using'a median filtering. 
2. The Canny method for edge detection was 
chosen to .detect edges in the previous 
filtered .image. Canny method gives better 
results than other methods, and it helps in 
finding image features. The threshold was 
fixed to a predefined significant value. 
.3. The detected edge may contain noise( le. 
it I may contain multiple edge, fragments 
corresponding to a single whole. feature. 
Furthermore the output of an edge detector 
defines only. where features are in an 
image. For that reason a HT algorithm was 
, . .used, to obtain best results and is tolerant 
to fingerprint translation and rotation. 
Such tolerance is usually reached by using 
I Hough transform-based algorithm. The 
HT used to determine both what the 
features.are, and how many of them exist 
' 
_ .  
' .  
. intheimage. I 
Image ater equalization histogram ofthe equalized Image 
. Figurel. ' Fingerprint preprocessing 
equalization and median filtering. 
. .  
538 
4. :Using the detected edge image X [n, n], 
we form an accumulator array say A [b, c] 
which is contains values'of pixels ranging 
from 0..255, the values are .arranged in 
term of X and Y in. the A [h,.c]. A'HT (P, 
,@) values are computed using a, straight- 
P = X. COS Q + Y. 'SR\J~@, where P is the 
normal distance of the line from origin and 
@ is the angle of the origin. with respect to 
X-axis. . ' I .  ; 
'. 
.I 
line equation: 1 ,  . 
- ,  . ,  
5. Since we deal with fingerprint ,image, 
which is tolerant to translation. and 
rotation, an angle ranging from *lo in 
step of 0.2 was chosen to compute the HT 
(P, Q) values. 
. .  
. . ,- . - -  . b  . .  a' 
Figure.3. Pattem fo'rmed using a three FH peaks. 
Where y ( P i )  = Pi = y,COS 4 + x,SIN 4 
a = -10,b = 10,n = 100 
Calculate the EN for each PR, using a Matlab 
function EN= bweuler (PR, 8). Store the calculate 
AR in 6 with its EN for future use as shown in 
TABLE 1. . , ,  ., 
. .  . .  , 
TABLE 1. Calculated parameters (PR, AR,,and I, 
-EN).. ..i I . .  
I .  . .  . , # ,  " i '  I .  L .  I PR . ' , .  ;iI AR I EN- : '  
- 
9779 Y 2 8  
E S b  31 8 3252 3 
C O  -50 t 
2.2 Matching Procedure 
t h w a  <.leg> 
Figure 2. Peaks of the fingerprint image 
Using the result obtained from the HT, we locate 
three highest peaks (FH), and then we connect the 
three peaks to form a single pattem (PR) as in 
figure 3. We calculate area (AR) under the curve, 
which will be area of PR. 
A .  live fingerprint image is captured using 
fingerprint reader, and then we follow the step '1 
to 7,. Values- of*.EN are used *to: narrow the , 
searching list. We calculate the HT .of the' live 
image, find three FHs connecting. them ,to form 
pattem as in 6'then match their AR with stored 
A R s ,  by calculating CC. If no we move to other 
FHs until we found a matched ARs. Thus a user 
can secure his access to ,the,system resources. The 
CC formula is as following: . .  I I 
, . .  .. ,, , ' ,  , 
~. . . ,  . . , .  / .  - ~ c : (CR imi '- PR I )( PR 2;n - PR i ). 
. ,  . , .  
Where PR,: and. PR, iare Area of the live pattem 
and stored one.' 
539 
3.. CONCLUSION 
A method of fingerprintcmatching was shown, 
where a fingerprint image smoothed and its.true 
edges are detected using a HT algorithm. The 
fingerprint pattem features based on tbe area 
under the curve were. found. We show how 
pattems can be formed from the reSulted.peaks of 
running a HT process, which is tolerant to 
fingerprint translation and rotation. This method 
if it is applied perfectly it will enhance the 
security based on fingerprint authentication. 
REFERENCES 
[I] JISC, .Current Methods of Authentication, 
2000. Available at: 
www.iisc.ac.uWacnlauthent/auth4.htm, 
[2] Industry Information: Biometrics everything 
you need to know about automated biometric 
identification. . . 1998: .Available at: 
www.ctst.comibiometrics.htm1 
[?] SAGEM MORPHO Fingerprint Identification 
Technology in- Civil Applications. 1998. 
Available at: 
http://www.morpho.com/news roodlibrandwhit 
eoaaers/civil afis.htm. 
[4] S. Pankanti, S. Prabhakar, and Ai K. Jain, “On 
~~ 
the individuality. of fingerprints” 
IEEE Transactions. on Pattem .Lalysis  and 
Machine Intelligence, 2002, Volume: 24 Issue: 8: 
.[5] S. Wang and C. Lee, “Fingerprint recognition 
using directional micro - pattem histograms and 
LVQ networks”. 1999 Intemational Conference 
on . Information Intelligence and Systems 
Proceedings. 1999. Page(s): 300 -303. 
[6] A. Cordes, W. Demmer, T. Lee; and N. 
Bofferding, “One-Time passwords using 
.biometrics (OTPUB)”, 2000. . . Available at: 
seiord.ee.iastate.edu/decOOO3/pplan/pplan.html. 
[7] J. Welsh, “Biometrics Smart Cards as an 
alternative for ATM Authentication”, 2001. 
Available at: 
www.cs.uct.ac.za-/ierome welsh.htm1. 
[SI .W. Zorski, B. Foxon, J. Blackledge and M. 
Tuner, “Application of the Hough Transform: 
. .  PP. 1010-1025. 
Iris and Fingerprint Identification”,. Third IMA 
Conference in Image Processing Mathematical 
Methods, Algorithms and Applications Processing 
111, (Eds) Ellis Honvood 2001 pp69-81. 
[9] D. Young, “Hough. Transforni”. 1994. 
Available at: www.logs.susx.ac.uk/ 
-/vision4. html. 
[lo] P. Toft, “The Radon Transform - Theory and 
Implementation”, .Ph.D. thesis. Department of 
Mathematical Modelling, Technical University of 
Denmark, June 1996.326 pages. 
[ l l ]  C. M. Thompson and L. Shure, “Image 
Processing ToolBox”. 1995. Mathworks. 
[12] P. Ventura, “ATM Theft”, 2000. Available 
at: 
yww.sans.ordinfosecfaq/avthentic/ATM thefi.ht 
m -
