Mechanism to Improve the Reliability 
 of the Broadcasting for Multi Sources 
 
Song Yean Cho, Jin Hyun Sin, Byung In Mun 
Samsung Electronics 
Apkujong Bldg, 599-4, Shinsadong 
Kangnam-gu, Seoul, Korea 
sycho94; jh31.sin; bimun@samsung.com
 
 
Abstract— In contrast to broadcasting data packets in wired 
networks, broadcasting data packets in mobile ad hoc network 
(MANET) is a big challenge due to the high bit error rate and the 
high collision probability. Even though broadcasting in MANET 
is intrinsically unreliable, ad hoc routing protocols (AODV, DSR) 
and application protocols (SDP, IP auto-configuration) must use 
it to distribute important information. To make matters worse, 
broadcast is used by several protocols on a node in MANET, so 
more than one nodes can broadcast data packet at the same time. 
Simultaneous broadcasting from multi-sources makes packet 
delivery rate drop more severely than broadcasting from single 
source because of overlapped data paths from multi-sources. To 
solve these broadcasting problems in MANET, we propose the 
high reliable broadcast mechanism. Considering that network 
resource value in wireless network, the proposed mechanism 
minimizes network overhead to improve reliability using 
neighbor knowledge obtained through periodically exchanging 
Hello message. As the result of simulation using ns-2 shows, our 
mechanism achieves high reliability of packet delivery to whole 
nodes minimizing network resource consumption efficiently. 
Keywords-– ad hoc, broadcast, MAC, MANET, WLAN, and 
reliable and efficient broadcast 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
As wireless communication technique is advanced and 
mobile devices with high computing power become affordable, 
the wireless communication becomes popular. Wireless 
communication enables nodes to move around independently 
and freely, but on the other hand, it also has limitation due to 
radio power limitation, poor channel utilization, and mobile 
device’s battery limitation. To remove these limitations and 
provide network service for dynamically changing network, 
MANET protocols are the best solution. It’s because MANET 
protocols supports autonomous and instant network 
configuration. Every node in MANET forms temporary 
network to exchange data with any node in the networks 
without help of any existing network infrastructure or 
centralized administration. These MANET features lead active 
investigation in recent years. In this paper, among many 
problems in MANET we focus on sending broadcast data 
packet reliably and efficiently.  
Many protocols such as routing protocols, service discovery 
protocols, and auto IP configuration use broadcasting, to 
deliver data to all nodes in the network. Up to now, the 
bandwidth limitation of wireless link leads the research of the 
broadcasting in MANET to focus on reducing additional 
bandwidth consumption [1][2][3][4]. Yet as the broadcast 
mechanism becomes more efficient by reducing redundant 
packets, it becomes less reliable because single packet loss 
influence becomes larger. Especially, under multi-sources 
broadcasting in which more than one nodes try to send 
broadcast packet at the same time, broadcast packet distribution 
tree from the different sources can be met in some nodes. The 
overlapping of the broadcast path increases the collision 
possibility more and more. Unfortunately in real world, we 
can’t make sure that only one broadcast source sends the 
broadcast packet at a time. Hence to achieve both efficiency 
and reliability, new mechanism is required to support reliability 
and efficient broadcast. In this paper, we propose the 
mechanism not only to improve reliability but also to be 
applicable to any efficient broadcast protocol with little 
additional bandwidth consumption.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we 
describe the broadcast problem in MANET and in section 3 we 
propose our mechanism. In section 4, we present and analyze the 
simulation result and then in section 5, the paper is concluded 
and future work is presented.  
 
II. BROADCAST IN MANET  
Broadcasting is the process to deliver one packet originated 
from a source node to all other nodes in the network. The 
simplest broadcast mechanism is Flooding [5,6]. In Flooding, a 
source node broadcasts a packet to all its neighbors and then, 
each of those neighbors in turn rebroadcasts the packet exactly 
one time. This continues until all reachable nodes in the 
network receive the packet. Flooding operating like the above 
makes a node receive the same packet several times 
redundantly. This redundancy enables a single packet loss to be 
compensated with other redundant packet and decrease single 
packet loss influence. But this redundancy consumes network 
bandwidth and it can degrade network efficiency seriously. In 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1263 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
wireless network, network resource is so valuable that a 
number of research groups have proposed methods to minimize 
the number of the redundant packets [1,2,3,4] in order to 
prevent network efficiency degradation. These protocols permit 
only some of all its neighbors to forward the broadcasting 
packets unlike Flooding. In these protocols, a sender selects 
some nodes among its neighbors as relayers based on 
neighbor’s knowledge collected by Hello message [2,7,8]. 
While these methods can minimize the number of the 
redundant packet, they augment single packet loss influence. 
Accordingly, mechanism to improve broadcast reliability 
keeping efficiency of the broadcast protocol like [1,2,3,4] is 
required. To solve that problem, we propose reliable broadcast 
mechanism based RBS (Relayer Broadcast Sequence) ACK. 
 
III. BASIC IDEA OF RELIABLE                                         
AND EFFICIENT BROADCAST 
To achieve efficient broadcasting, we adopted the AHBP 
protocol [9]. In AHBP protocol, a source selects the relayers 
based on the neighbor information collected by exchanging 
periodic Hello messages. The selected relayers forward the 
broadcast packet to its one-hop neighbors and other nodes not 
selected as relayers stop forwarding the packet. The relayers 
forwarding broadcast packet choose its own relayers again 
among its one-hop neighbors using the same algorithm [8]. 
This process is repeated until whole nodes receive the packet. 
During this process, the broadcast packet can be lost because of 
unreliable multicasting and broadcasting in IEEE 802.11 
mechanism. Moreover, if multi-sources try to broadcast 
simultaneously and broadcast data paths are overlapped, the 
possibility to lose the broadcast data packet increases further. 
This situation can impair the reliability of the efficient 
broadcast protocol like AHBP seriously.  
To prevent the degradation of reliability under multi-source 
broadcasting, a sender must confirm the packet reception to its 
one-hop neighbors. If some neighbor nodes lose it, a sender 
must resend the packet. In addition a broadcast packet in 
MANET is relayed with the help of relayers. Hence not only a 
sender but also relayers must check packet delivery to all its 
one-hop neighbors. If the packet from a source is delivered to 
its entire one-hop neighbors without loss and this process is 
repeated by the neighbor nodes selected as relayers, we can 
sure that the broadcast packet is delivered to all nodes in 
MANET. Consequently, our mechanism focuses on detecting 
and retransmitting packet loss in one hop. 
 
A. Loss Detection with RBS ACK 
For a sender to detect the packet loss at the receivers, 
acknowledgements (ACKs) for the receipt of a packet are used. 
In MANET, ACK itself can waste bandwidth. Besides, the 
same interface is used to send and receive a packet in MANET, 
Hence ACK can cause severe ACK plosion. To prevent it, our 
mechanism piggybacks ACK in periodically exchanged Hello 
message.  
To send ACK, a receiver must identify the receive packet. 
Usually the source’s address and sequence number is used to 
identify the packet. But in MANET the packet must be 
forwarded by all relayers, so source address and sequence 
number makes all relayers search the packet in its cache 
because source address and sequence number are not relayer 
specific information but source specific information. In 
addition, the size of Hello message increases as much as source 
address size and the number of neighbors. To reduce Hellos 
message’s overhead like the above, we uses relayer broadcast 
sequence number (RBS) to identify the received packet. Every 
relayer in MANET manages its own RBS and increases its 
RBS whenever a node sends or relays the broadcast packet. 
Accordingly RBS in broadcast packet is changed from sender 
to relayer in each 1 hop broadcasting like Figure 1 while 
broadcast packet is distributed. 
 We present Hello, broadcast message, RBS and R_RBS (ACK 
of RBS) like followings in figure1 and 2. 
NK : broadcast packet sender or relayer  
NK+1, NK+2  ∈ { neighbors of  NK } 
M( NK ) :  broadcast  message relayed or sent from NK 
Hello( NK ) : Hello message from NK 
RBS(NK) : RBS number of NK 
R_RBS(NK+1 ,NK) : recently received RBS in broadcast packet from  
NK  
After sender or relayer broadcasts a data packet with each 
node’s RBS to one-hop neighbors, receivers send ACK by 
piggybacking the received packet’s RBS in the periodically 
exchanging Hello message like figure 2. If a neighbor didn’t 
receive the packet from NK, it will piggyback smaller RBS than 
current RBS, which is sent from NK previously. Consequently, 
NK detects packet loss just comparing its current RBS and 
R_RBS in hello message from neighbors. Piggybacking ACK 
Figure 1. RBS update in broadcasting in MANET 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1264 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
in Hello message can delay the ACK, but we assume that Hello 
message interval is short enough to detect neighbor’s changes 
and also broadcast data interval is longer than the hello 
interval. Thus a sender or relayer can detect packet loss using 
RBS piggybacked in Hello message. 
B.   Mobility 
To identify broadcasted packet between sender or relayers 
and receivers, our mechanism uses the RBS of the sender or a 
relayer. But RBS is valid only if sender or relayers and 
receivers keep neighbor relationship. If a sender or a receiver 
moves and the neighbor relationship among them is broken, 
RBSs from ex-neighbors became invalid. In other words, to 
support mobility keeping reliability, the lost packet must be 
retransmitted based on the relationship between ex-neighbors 
and new neighbors. 
 When a node moves, packet loss situations are similar to 
Figure 3.Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications 
In Figure 3.(a), the node moves to the area where the 
broadcast packet hasn’t passed yet. In this case, a node can 
receive the broadcast packet through its new neighbors. In 
figure 3.(b), a node moves to the area where the broadcast 
packet has already been passed before the node arrives in the 
area. In this case, a moved node can’t receive the broadcast 
packet. Observing figure 3.(b), we can find that the lost 
broadcast packet is the packet sent after the latest packet from 
ex-neighbors and arrived in new neighbors lately. It leads us to 
find that a moved node can receive the lost packet due to 
mobility from new neighbors if the packet is still is in the new 
neighbor’s cache. To receive lost packet, moved node must 
ask to resent it, but ex-neighbor’s RBS can’t be used to 
identify lost packet our mechanism use broadcast source 
address and sequence number for this special case. The moved 
node sends source address and sequence number from ex-
neighbors in Hello to its new neighbors, and then new 
neighbor searches the packet in its cache. If the lost packet is 
found, the packet is sent with new neighbor’s RBS to moved 
node. The packet with new neighbor’s RBS help to rebuild the 
     
(a) Successful packet delivery checking using RBS 
          
(b) Lost packet detecting using RBS 
Figure2.  Packet loss detection using RBS 
 
(a) Moved node receiving the broadcasted packet   
 
 
(b) Moved node not receiving the broadcasted packet 
Figure 3. broadcast packet losses due to mobility 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1265 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
neighbor relationship between the moved node and neighbors 
based on RBS. 
 
 
IV. SIMULATION AND RESULT  
To evaluate the efficiency and reliability of our mechanism, 
exhaustive simulations using the Network Simulator 2 (ns2) 
were conducted with simulation parameters in table 1. 
TABLE 1. SIMULATION AND SCENARIO PARAMETERS 
Simulation Parameters 
Propagation Model Two Ray Ground 
Network type IEEE 802.11 (2Mbps) 
Transmission range 250 m 
Scenario parameters 
Field Size 500m * 500m 
Simulation Time 100 sec 
Data packet size 64 bytes payload 
Mobility Model Random Waypoint 
Packet Send Rate 6.4 Bps 
 
We simulated Flooding, AHBP, and RAHBP. RAHBP 
(Reliable AHBP) is RHBP to which our mechanism is applied. 
We will call our mechanism as RAHBP after this point. 
Flooding is selected as the most reliable broadcast protocol and 
AHBP is selected as the most efficient broadcast protocol. We 
evaluated the reliability with packet delivery rate (PDF) and 
efficiency with bandwidth consumption by counting the 
retransmitted packet number. The simulation results show that 
our mechanism improves AHBP’s reliability similar with 
Flooding without increasing bandwidth consumption. We tested 
three broadcast protocols using both single-source scenario and 
multi-sources scenario. In single-source scenario, single node 
originates broadcast packet and in multi-source scenario, more 
than one node originate broadcast packet at the same time.  
We will present improved reliability at delivery rate section 
and minimized bandwidth consumption at bandwidth 
consumption section. In the last, we will present scalability of 
our mechanism when the number of broadcast originator 
increases. 
 
A.  Packet Delivery Rate 
The average PDF for Flooding, AHBP, and RAHBP with 
RBS ACK is illustrated for single-source scenario in figure 4 
and for multi-source scenario in figure 5. In single-source 
scenario, Flooding, AHBP, RAHBP achieves the same 
performance. But in multi-source scenario, the delivery rate of 
AHBP is severely degraded and dramatically drops under 20%. 
It’s because AHBP doesn’t check the packet loss in relayers. As 
our mechanism is applied, AHBP’s PDF is improved similar 
with Flooding as shown in figure 5.  
 
         
Figure 4. PDF with single-source scenario                                        Figure 5. PDF with multi-source scenario 
           
Figure 6. Retransmitted packet # with single-source scenario           Figure 7. Retransmitted packet # with multi-source scenario 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1266 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
B.  Bandwidth Consumption  
Figure 6 illustrates the total number of the retransmitted 
broadcast packet for three protocols with single-source 
scenario and figure 7 illustrates it in multi-source scenario. 
The Flooding’s retransmitted packet number increases linearly 
with single-source scenario and increase exponentially with 
multi-source scenario as the number of source nodes increases. 
But in case of AHBP, the retransmitted packet number almost 
remains under 100 with single-source scenario and under 400 
with multi-source scenario even though total node number 
increases. RAHBP with RBS ACK, our mechanisms applied 
to AHBP, consumes the bandwidth as low as RHBP. It shows 
our mechanism achieves high reliability with low bandwidth 
consumption especially in multi source scenario 
 
C.  Multi Source Rate 
To evaluate scalability of our mechanism, we simulate our 
mechanism increasing ω, multi-source rate. 
 
ω = )(
)(
tN
tSN  × 100 
SN(t): the number of nodes originating broadcast packet at 
time t  
N{t}:  the number of total nodes at time t 
Figure 8 and figure 9 illustrates the average PDF and the 
total number of the retransmitted broadcast packet when total 
node number is 40 and ω changes from 10 to 60. As figure 8 
and figure 9 shows, our mechanism’s PDF is slightly superior 
to Flooding’s and our mechanism’s retransmitted packet 
number is as small as AHBP’s even though multi-source rate 
increases. We conclude that our mechanism is scalable and 
highly reliable and efficient even if originating node number is 
increased. 
 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
When a packet is broadcasted in MANET, the receivers at 
current time become the senders at next time. If some 
receivers lose the broadcast packet, the receivers can’t forward 
the packet and the distribution of the packet stops. It drops 
packet delivery rate and impairs the broadcasting’s reliability. 
In case of efficient broadcasting, the reliability damage is 
more severe. To prevent this reliability impairment, we 
propose mechanism to confirm broadcast packet delivery in 
one hop. Our mechanism checks whether all neighbors receive 
the broadcast packet or not using ACK scheme based RBS.  
Our mechanism can confirm the distribution of broadcast 
packets in whole network because the packets are broadcasted 
by some neighbors’ forwarding and packet delivery is 
confirmed by neighbors in one hop whenever the broadcast 
packet is forwarded. To identify the broadcast packet, our 
mechanism use RBS and the receivers notify packet’s 
reception by piggybacking RBS in Hello message. As the 
simulation results with Flooding, AHBP and RAHBP (AHBP 
with our mechanism) shows, our mechanism improves 
AHBP’s reliability without degrading AHBP’s efficiency. In 
addition, simulation varying multi-source rates presents that 
our mechanism is scalable. The weak point of RBS is that it 
takes time to rebuild RBS if a node moves and neighbor 
relationship is broken. But the time to rebuild RBS is the same 
with the time to build neighbor relationship and our 
mechanism supports mobility based on relationship between 
ex-neighbors and new neighbor. Moreover Hello interval is 
short enough not to lose more than 2 packets in several Hello 
intervals except congestion situation.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Ni, Y. Tseng, Y. Chen, and J. Sheu. The broadcast storm problem in a 
mobile ad hoc network. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE international 
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), 1999 
[2] W.Peng and X. Lu. On the reduction of broadcast redundancy in mobile 
ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Mobile Ad 
Hoc Networking and Computing, 2000 
[3] B. Williams and T. Camp. Comparision of broadcasting technique for 
Mobile Ad HocNetworks, In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 
international Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, 2002 
[4] T. H. Clausen, L. Viennot, T. Olesen and N. Larsen, Investing Data 
Broadcast Performance In Mobile Ad-hoc NETworks, In Proceedings of 
Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, 2002 
 
Figure 8. PDF in changing multi-source rate (ω) 
 
  
Figure 9. Retransmitted packet # in changing multi-source rate(ω) 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1267 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
[5] C. Ho, K. Obraczka, G. Tsudik, and K. Viswanath. Flooding for reliable 
multicast in multi-hop ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile 
Computing and Communication (DIALM), 1999 
[6] J. Jetcheva, Y. Hu, D. Maltz and D. Johnson. A simple protocol for 
multicast and broadcast in mobile ad hoc networks, Internet Draft: draft-
ietf-manet-simple-mbcast-01.txt, July 2001 
[7] H.Lim and C. Kim. Multicast tree construction and flooding in wireless 
ad hoc netowkrs. In proceeding of the ACM international Workshop on 
Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems 
(MSWIM), 2000 
[8] A. Qayyum, L.Vinnot, and A. Laouiti. Multipoint relaying: An efficient 
technique for flooding in mobile wireless networks, Technical Report 
3898, INRIA-Rocquencourt , 2000 
[9] W. Peng and X. Lu. AHBP: An efficient broadcast protocolfor mobile 
ad hoc networks. Journal of Science and Technology - Beijing, China, 
2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOBECOM 2003 - 1268 - 0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
