CNSlATM FOR TACTICAL MILITARY AIRCRAFT 
Steven Frain, Naval Air Systems Command, Patuxent River, MD 
Garth Van Sickle, DCS Corporation, Lexington Park, MD 
Introduction 
Military aircrews are beginning to experience 
the benefits of having quality Global Positioning 
System (GPS) navigation information available in 
the cockpit to support their tactical missions. 
However, another big improvement in situational 
awareness and tactical effectiveness will be 
available when military aircraft capture the new 
capabilities known as Communications, Navigation, 
Surveillance / Air Traffic Management 
(CNS/ATM). Since tactical military aircraft do not 
have the space available to install civil approved 
avionics, they must develop dual use avionics and 
capture CNS/ATM functionality with military 
avionics equipment. Specifically, military aircraft 
must transition from airways flying using ground 
based navigation aids to area navigation (RNAV) 
and Required Navigation Performance (RNP) using 
GPS with a geodetic database. For access to some 
airspace, tactical military aircraft must transition 
from surveillance with Identification Friend or Foe 
(IFF) (Modes 3/A and C) to Mode S and eventually 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast 
(ADS-B). Significant improvement in situational 
awareness and tactical effectiveness will be possible 
when tactical military aircraft can file and fly with 
GPS and also self-report position and identification 
via the Mode S ADS-B data link. 
Civil Transition to Required 
Navigation Performance Airspace 
The primary function of civil airspace 
management is to support air traffic in a safe and . 
efficient manner during both visual and non-visual 
meteorological conditions. Since most aircraft 
flying in civil airspace do not have the capability to 
locate and avoid other aircraft during non-visual 
conditions, the airspace management rules were 
established to provide this function. For example, 
aircraft flying east are at a different altitude than 
aircraft flying west, east is odd and west is even. 
Likewise, other rules were established to allow 
aircraft at the same altitude to avoid conflicts during 
overtaking and crossing situations. The simplest 
solution to this problem is to put the aircraft on 
airways, highways in the sky, and keep slow aircraft 
on different airways and altitudes than faster 
aircraft. The basic form of overland aircraft 
navigation since the early 1950s, VHF Omni- 
directional Range (VOR), supports the airways 
system. The principle of operation of the VOR is 
very simple: the VOR facility transmits two signals 
at the same time. One signal is an omni directional 
30 Hz pulse, while the other signal rotates in the 
horizontal plane about the station at 30 Hz. The 
airborne equipment receives both signals, looks 
(electronically) at the difference between the phases 
of the two signals, and interprets the result as a 
radial from the station. With 2 VOR stations, an 
aircraft is capable of determining its location by 
knowing its magnetic radial from each VOR station. 
Aircraft navigation to and from VOR stations is 
fairly simple and the overland airways system today 
is based on aircraft doing exactly that. With VOR, 
aircraft can also locate airway intersections, 
establish holding, and fly non-precision approaches 
to the destination airfield. 
Tactical military aircraft use an equivalent 
Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) instead of VOR. 
TACAN introduced another useful navigation tool 
called Distance Measuring Equipment (DME). In 
the operation of DME, paired pulses at a specific 
spacing are sent out from the aircraft and received 
at a ground station. The ground station then 
transmits paired pulses back to the aircraft at the 
same pulse spacing but on a different frequency. 
The time required for the round trip signal exchange 
is translated into slant range distance (nautical 
miles) between the aircraft and the ground station. 
Usually TACAN, DME and VOR stations are 
located together and the airways system based on 
these navigation stations is usable by aircraft 
equipped with any or all this equipment. When an 
aircraft is authorized to fly in the airways system 
because it has an approved VOR, DhE,  or TACAN 
installed, this authorization is called equipment- 
based certification. 
US. Government work not protected by U.S. Copyright 
4.D.1-1 
The concept of flying from one TACANNOR 
to another TACANNOR does not yield the most 
direct route costing time and money. The ability to 
navigate from any given geodetic fix to another 
geodetic fm is called Area Navigation (RNAV). 
Modem aircraft with Flight Management Systems 
(FMS) can use several VORs, VOFUDME, or even 
DMEDME/DME to locate their present position 
and calculate the proper course to fly to another 
geodetic fix selected by the aircrew. RNAV is 
becoming fairly common. RNAV is also useful 
when using other positioning sources such as 
LORAN or GPS. With RNAV, the route of flight 
can be much shorter than flying the airways route 
and this direct routing saves both time and money. 
To obtain the navigation benefits of 
CNS/ATM, accurate, repeatable and predictable 
navigation performance must be demonstrated 
regardless of the positioning source. The capability 
to perform to a specified level of navigation 
performance regardless of the positioning source is 
called Required Navigation Performance (RNP). 
With RNP, aircraft will be authorized to fly in 
instrument conditions not due to specific certified 
equipage but because the entire navigation system, 
including the aircraft and the pilot, has 
demonstraed a specified, repeatable and 
predictable, level of navigation performance. For 
example, if the required accuracy for a designated 
airspace is 4 NM (RNP 4), it is assumed that for 
95% of the total flying time an aircraft flying in this 
airspace will maintain a position within +4 NM of 
its Air Traffic Control (ATC) cleared route. With 
RNP RNAV, an aircraft will also be required to 
achieve a specified level of integrity and continuity 
guaranteeing the aircraft shall not error outside 
twice the accuracy (for RNP 4,2 x 4 NM = 8 NM) 
without an annunciation to the aircrew. For tactical 
military aircraft, the transformation from TACAN 
to RhT RNAV as a primary means of navigation 
will be a significant achievement since tactical 
aircraft will not use civil approved avionics but 
capture this new capability in avionics designed for 
military missions. 
A Tactical Aircraft Solution for 
Required Navigation Performance 
For large military cargo and troop transports, 
the transition to CNS/ATM will leverage 
commercial system design used hy commercial 
aviation. By using the civil CNS/ATM solutions, 
the certification of the military transports will he 
fairly simple since the civil commercial air carriers 
will have already received civil certification. 
However, for tactical military aircraft where the 
addition of civil avionics is not possible, guidance 
was found in the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Master Positioning Navigation and Timing 
Plan. This guidance states: “The development of 
minimum performance standards for military users 
is the responsibility of the Services. These military 
standards must conform with civil airspace required 
navigation performance (RNP) requirements, 
prevent violation of civil air traffic clearances, and 
ensure safe separation of ‘military and civil air 
traffic.” From this guidance, a performance based 
requirements document was developed to capture 
civil RNP RNAV functionality appropriate for 
Navy and Marine Corps tactical military aircraft 
Scope and Limifutions of RNP RNAV 
Specijication 
tactical military aircraft was to decide what level of 
RNP would be the goal. Presently, there is airspace 
where RNP 5 (BRNAV) has been implemented and 
additional airspace where RNP IO or RNP 4 is 
required. Future plans also call for RNP 2 and RNP 
1 in selected airspace. Since the US DOD policy is 
to transition to GPS as the primary positioning 
source, the decision was made to use Precise 
Positioning Service (PPS) GPS as a primary means 
of navigation. The PPS GPS based navigation 
system will provide accurate positioning to RNP 0.3 
which is required for approach and departure 
Looking at the various documents published 
by ICAO, RTCA, FAA, and JAA, we discovered 
various contradictions and ambiguities related to the 
minimum functional requirements for RNP RNAV. 
There were contradictions as to required capabilities 
such as route leg types, containment limits, and 
required augmentation for GPS. Some of the 
RTCA publications have been updated several 
times and are still not implemented by the FAA. 
Since official guidance for RNP RNAV is still 
pending and the tactical military aircraft will not be 
using commercial avionics, guidance was needed to 
establish the appropriate functionality for RNP 
The first step in the effort to achieve RNP in 
4.D.1 -2 
RNAV in tactical military aircraft. This new 
guidance is called RNP RNAV Functional 
Requirements Document (FRD). Tactical military 
aircraft with navigation systems that are designed, 
integrated, and tested to meet the functional 
performance specified in the RNP RNAV FRD will 
be capable of meeting minimum RNP RNAV 
operational approval requirements to file and fly 
RNF' RNAV flight plans from takeoff through a 
published Non Precision Approach (NPA). 
Obviously, a document that establishes the 
minimum requirements will not contain capabilities 
that may later be desired or required. We accept 
this possibility and view the RNP RNAV FRD as a 
living document with plans to review this document 
on a regular basis and incorporate new 
functionalities, if required We anticipate most 
future capabilities will be captured with software 
updates. A precision approach capability is a future 
requirement and is not contained within this 
document. Neither is the requirement for vertical 
guidance. The RNP accuracy requirement pertains 
to cross track deviation, only. Along track 
deviation is really a function of ground speed and 
the RNP RNAV FRD does not address required 
timing issues or 4-D navigation. If these, or other 
functionalities that are not covered by th is  
document, become a requirement somewhere in the 
world, aircraft integrated and tested in accordance 
with the current RNP RNAV FRD will not be 
qualified to participate. 
the minimum functionality required, this limitation 
does not restrict the aircraft integrator from 
providing increased functionality above the 
specification. This document will provide the 
Naval Air System Command testers the minimum 
functionality that must be demonstrated during 
developmental testing of RNP RNAV on board an 
aircraft. Other capabilities, not covered by this 
document, will need to be properly defined and 
tested prior to being utilized. 
Even though the requirements are limited to 
Navigation Sensors 
Standard Positioning Service (SPS) GPS. Both 
Ground Based Augmentation Systems (GBAS) and 
Space Based Augmentation Systems (SBAS) are 
planned to support SPS GPS. One very good 
All civilian applications of GPS use the 
reason why the RNP RNAV FRD is required is the 
requirement to use PPS GPS for primary 
positioning. There are no ICAO, FAA or JAA 
documents that address PPS GPS utility. DOD 
policy dictates that military platforms will use PPS 
GPS receivers and those receivers shall be operated 
in the keyed mode. This means that there is no 
civilian guidance available and it will be DOD 
responsibility to ensure military aircraft are 
compatible with civil standards using the military 
PPS GPS. We do not anticipate a problem 
demonstrating the required accuracy, availability, 
continuity, and integrity to meet the civil standards 
for RNP 0.3. However, it is important that civil air 
authorities realize that the required functional 
performance is met even though not by the 
commercially available means. This realization 
may require an educational effort to explain how 
equivalent civil functionality is achieved with 
military avionics. 
PPS GPS is a two-frequency signal that 
measures and corrects for the error introduced by 
ionospheric distortion and supplies position 
information at ten times the rate of the single 
frequency SPS signal. The greater accuracy of PPS 
GPS provides the user the needed integrity 
availability to fly in R" 0.3 airspace without 
augmentation. No attempt is made to fly precision 
approaches, where RNP 0.15 is required, based on 
this document. SBAS implementations such as the 
United States Wide Area Augmentation System, the 
European Geostationary Navigation Overlay 
Service, and Japan's Multifunctional Transport 
Satellite Space-based Augmentation System 
provide enhanced accuracy over the SPS GPS 
signal but their use is not required. PPS GPS will 
provide tactical military aircraft the required 
performance worldwide to support air operations 
from take-off through enroute recovering to Non- 
Precision Approach minimums. 
Few publications address the contribution of 
an Inertial Navigation System (INS) to augment the 
GPS navigation solution. Since most naval aircraft 
are either equipped or plan to equip with at least 
one INS, the ability to provide PPS GPS with 
aircraft based augmentation (ABAS) is planned. 
The RNP RNAV FRD does not require INS 
augmentation to meet the RNP 0.3 requirements but 
if an INS is available, full utilization is anticipated. 
4.D.1-3 
The possibility of using inertial navigation system 
“coasting” for periods when the GPS signal is 
unavailable will augment the navigation system 
continuity capability of the GPS/TNS integration. 
The full utility of the Embedded GPS INS (EGI) to 
meet the accuracy, integrity, continuity and 
availability requirements for RNP RNAV is a topic 
for futther study. 
Vertical Guidance 
guidance or VNAV are listed in an appendix to the 
RNP RNAV FRD, there is no mandate for VNAV 
in the initial publication of the document. If 
individual platforms have a need or desire to 
implement a VNAV capability, the VNAV 
capability must meet the requirements in the FRD. 
In some discussions, a glide slope could be 
considered as part of a non-precision approach but 
until these issues are more mature, no attempt to 
provide a glide slope is established as a minimum 
requirement for RNP RNAV. The precision 
approach capability for naval aviation is paa of the 
Joint Precision Approach and Landing System 
(PALS) program, which will establish the 
m i n i “  requirements for a precision approach 
separately. 
Although the requirements for veItical 
Path Definition Requirements 
The list of required leg types for the RNP 
RNAV FRD are limited to Track to Fix, Initial Fix, 
Direct to Fix, and Course to Fix legs. These leg 
types are as defined in RTCAIDO-236A. Other leg 
types such as Radius to Fix, Fix to Altitude, and 
Hold legs were discussed but not considered a 
minimum requirement. The Radius to a Fix 
algorithm is considered a function associated with 
an autopilot vice manually flying the aircrafi. The 
RNP RNAV FRD contains no functionality that 
will require an autopilot upgrade to military aircraft 
for two reasons. First, military pilots of tactical 
aircraft do not let the autopilot fly the aircraR as 
much as commercial air pilots and it is not our 
intention to change the normal procedures and 
training of the military pilots. Second, there is no 
requirement for an autopilot as a distinct 
requirement to fly RNP RNAV. Likewise, Fix to 
Altitude and Holding legs are related to 
requirements for vertical guidance and since VNAV 
is not required, these leg types are also not required. 
The procedures for the terminal area are 
described in detail with strict guidance to prevent 
human error. No manual changes will be allowed 
to an approach procedure found in the electronic 
database and the approach must be selectable with a 
single keystroke. The aircraft shall provide auto 
sequencing of successive waypoints from procedure 
initiation until the designated Missed Approach 
Holding Point. Likewise, “direct to” the Missed 
Approach Point shall not be permitted due to the 
obstacle rich environment in close proximity to the 
airport. 
Database Management 
Flight with GPS is very dependent on the 
quality of the digital database being used. Most 
civil air cmiers use a commercial product database 
that is compatible with the Flight Management 
System (FMS) installed in the aircraft. For the 
United States military, the National Imagery and 
Mapping Agency (NIMA) is responsible for 
providing electronic Digital Aeronautical Flight 
Information Files (DAFIF) database. This federal 
agency performs the database maintenance and 
controls DAFIF distribution. Database integrity is a 
critical component in RNP RNAV and the 
assurance of database integrity is vital to the 
aircraft. An undetected error in the database can be 
as fatal as an undetected error in positioning. 
To ensure database integrity on board the 
aircraft, the navigation system is required to 
perform hardware fault detection initially and 
periodically as a regular course of operation. The 
software shall perform error detection and 
correction of information read from the database to 
ensure that corrupted data is not used. The aircraft 
system prohibits the manual modification of stored 
data. Should the database become corrupted, the 
pilot shall be alerted. All RNF’ RNAV is referenced 
to the World Geodetic Survey - 84 (WGS-84). 
WGS-84 is the standard geodetic reference used 
throughout the world by the GPS system and has 
been accepted by ICAO and the US Department of 
Transportation for air navigation. 
4.D.14 
Naval Aviation RNP RNAV Certification 
Process 
The RhT RNAV FRD will establish the 
requirement and initiate the certification process for 
naval aviation. When the RNP RNAV FRD is 
signed, the minimum functionality that each type 
aircraft must obtain will be established. The 
contradictions and ambiguities found in the various 
ICAO, RTCA, JAA,  and FAA documents related to 
RNP RNAV will be resolved. The systems 
engineering teams can then start to integrate this 
defined functionality into the lead aircraft. The 
various components will include a PPS GPS 
receiver with integrity, INS aiding (if available), 
electronic DAFIF database, various cockpit 
displays, and a cockpit processor to host the RNP 
RNAV software. During this developmental 
process, software industry standards will be 
followed appropriate for the severity of the 
potential failure condition. 
written to ensure all details of the defined 
functionality are completely demonstrated. 
Reliability and maintainability will be evaluated as 
well as appropriate aircrew training. At the 
completion of developmental testing, the properly 
integrated aircraft will be given to the operational 
testers for a through evaluation in the operational 
environment. When the fleet representative aircraft 
is declared operational effective and operational 
suitable by the operational testers, the paperwork 
will be routed to the decision authority for the 
authorization for fleet use. This authorization for 
fleet use is the naval aviation equivalent of civil 
certification. It is important to note that all the 
functionality defined in the RNP RNAV FRD will 
be obtained or the aircraft will not be authorized for 
fleet use. 
A Test and Evaluation Master Plan will be 
Civil Transition to Aircraft Self 
Reports 
The monitoring of air traffic with RADAR, 
whenever possible, allows controllers to ensure 
flight clearances are followed and supports the 
direct vectoring of traffic as required to promote 
safety and efficiency. To support this monitoring 
function, civil air traffic service providers use both 
primary Surveillance Radar (PSR), the reflected 
energy off the aircraft's skin, and Secondary 
Surveillance Radar (SSR), the triggered response 
from the aircraft's transponder. Air traffic 
surveillance requires that the aircraft must first be 
detected, then identified and then continuously 
tracked. Due to the safety of flight and time critical 
nature of air traffic control, little tolerance is 
allowed for misidentification or inaccurate tracking 
of aircraft. 
Today, civilian air traffic controllers use SSR 
to both detect and identify air contacts. Primary 
surveillance radar is used as a detection backup and 
for weather surveillance. Air Traffic Control Radar 
Beacon System (ATCRBS) is the civilian version OF 
SSR and it uses Question and Answer (QCA) 
procedures with Modes A, and C, to track air 
traffic. Civil Mode A is the same as military IFF 
Mode 3 and is usually called Mode 3/A. Mode C, 
which was first implemented by civil aviation, is 
the altitude readout (100 ft increments) and is the 
basis for altitude separation monitoring. Even after 
Mode S functionality is installed, Mode 3/A 
capability will still be required. The deficiencies 
associated with SSR Modes 3/A and C include: 
Signal garble due to overlapping replies 
from two or more aircraft that are in the 
main beam with approximately the same 
slant range (synchronous garble) 
Signal interference caused by replies 
from a transponder in response to an 
interrogation fiom another interrogator 
(FRUIT) 
No response from a transponder due to 
over-interrogation and the resultant 
transponder unavailability (fanning the 
transponders) 
Ghost targets displayed due to reflections 
off obstacles (multipath) 
Inefficient use of frequency spectrum 
with multiple interrogations and multiple 
replies and total reliance on 2-party Q & 
A procedures 
Only 4,096 codes available with Mode 
31A 
0 
. 
0 
Civil aviation is transitioning to Mode S 
because Mode S enables improved target degarbling 
and provides more information f?om the targets. 
Mode S is a digital data link with protocol formats, 
4.D.15 
error detection, and correction. Mode S permits 
selective interrogation since each interrogator and 
transponder has its own unique Mode S address. 
The operation of Mode S airbome equipment 
requires assigning a unique 24-bit aircraft address 
code to each individual aircraft. Within the high 
traffic density airspace of Europe, Mode S will be 
required by 2005 with Enhanced Surveillance. All 
Mode S transponders also broadcast their unique 
aircraft address once per second. This “squitter” is 
the first step in the transition to broadcast 
architecture for air traffic surveillance with 
information available to the entire line-of-site 
network. Specific advantages of Mode S include: 
Improved target degarbling due to unique 
discrete address, selective interrogation, 
and error detectiodcorrection 
Improved target azimuth accuracy due to 
Monopulse interrogator with single 
replies 
Improved spectrum channel efficiency 
with lockout, scheduled transponder 
replies and squitters for network 
information broadcasts 
Digital data link capability that is used 
for Enhanced Surveillance, Extended 
Squitter, and Resolution Advisory (RA), 
and aircraft-to-aircraft coordination 
Compatible with the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN) 
2 to the 24’h power or > 16 Million 
unique 24 Bit aircraft addresses available 
The concept of aircraft self-reporting their 
geodetic location, both in the air and on the ground, 
via a periodic l i e  of sight broadcast is called ADS- 
B. The goal is to routinely use ADS-B self reports 
as a primary source of aircraft surveillance. The 
accuracy of the GPS position and the positive 
aircraft identifications can be captured to improve 
the quality of air traffic surveillance. Three 
different data links are under consideration for 
civilian ADS-B utility. They are Mode S Extended 
Squitter (1090ES), VHF data link Mode 4 (VDL 4), 
and Universal Access Transceiver (UAT). All three 
data links capture aircraft self reports, provide the 
aircraft a Cockpit Display of Traffic Information 
(CDTI), and have potential to bring value to the air 
traffic surveillance problem. However, 
interoperability will always be an issue. The FAA 
plans to use both 1090ES and UAT within the 
National Airspace System (NAS) with a multi-link 
gateway in the terminal area. 
All ADS-B reports use the same geodetic 
reference, World Geodetic Survey of 1984 (WGS- 
84). WGS-84 is the standard geodetic reference 
used throughout the world by the GPS system and 
has been accepted by the US Department of 
Transportation for use in the NAS. This use of one 
standard geodetic reference for all ADS-B reports 
enables uncomplicated aircraft integrations 
regardless of which data link is used. By using 
WGS-84, ADS-B will facilitate a cockpit display of 
traffic information (CDTI) that can be used improve 
situational awareness and empower traffic 
deconfliction from the cockpit. Airbome Collision 
Avoidance System (ACAS 11) is capable of using 
this ADS-B information to reduce the number 
interrogations. ADS-B is truly a major step toward 
Air Traffic Management (ATM) vice Air Traffic 
Control (ATC) and a big step toward Free Flight. 
Civil ADS-B for Tactical Military 
Aircraft 
Since the military aircraft will be installing 
Mode S transponders for civil interoperability, the 
first ADS-B opportunity for the military aircraft 
should be 1090ES ADS-B. Another advantage of 
using 1090ES self-reports for ADS-B is its 
interoperability with ACAS I1 equipped aircraft. 
All aircraft that install Level I1 Mode S 
functionality will be able to provide the 1090 MHz 
Extended Squitter broadcast required for 1090ES 
ADS-B. This includes aircraft that install Mode S 
with their 2 box ACAS I1 system and also those 
aircraft that install Mode S but do not install ACAS 
I1 box. However only the aircraft that install ACAS 
I1 will have the 1090 MHz receiver required to 
receive the Extended Squitter broadcast of other 
aircraft in the vicinity. Without the ability to 
receive on 1090MHz, tactical military aircraft that 
will not install the ACAS I1 box will not have a 
functional 1090ES ADS-B and will not be able to 
build the CDTI picture. 
To address the requirement for Mode S in 
tactical aircraft, the Naval Air Systems Command is 
developing a digital common transponder, AF’X- 
118, with legacy Mark XI1 IFF functionality and 
4.D.1-6 
also Mode S functionality as a baseline capability. 
The new AF'X-118 has the form factor of the APX- 
100, will fit in all tactical aircraft, and also has a 
growth option for a 1090 MHz receiver; see Fig 1. 
When this growth option of the AF'X-118 is 
completed, the ability to receive on 1090 MHz will 
enable tactical military aircraft to participate in civil 
1090ES ADS-B. Even though there are two other 
data links available for ADS-B, (UAT and VDL-4), 
1090ES appears to be the cost effective way to go. 
There are several reasons why ACAS 11, with its 
automatic interrogations of other aircraft, is not 
appropriate for tactical military futed wing or rotary 
winged aircraft. With 1090ES ADS-B, there will 
MK XI1 INTERROGATOR 
be no capability to interrogate other aircraft but 
even without the ability to interrogate, military 
aircraft will still be able to use the self-reports of 
other civil and military aircraft to build a quality 
picture of participating aircraft in the vicinity. 
Other senices in development such as Traffic 
Information Service (TIS & TIS-B) will complete 
the air picture by providing information on local 
aircraft without ADS-B. This 1090 MHZ receive 
transponder upgrade will promote safety, facilitate 
civil interoperability, improve situational 
awareness, and greatly improve both military and 
civil air traffic surveillance. 
YES YES 
I 1030MHzTx 1 1030MHrRx I 1090MHzTX I 1090MHzRx I I 
ACAS II ACAS I1 Box Mode S Box Mode S Box ACAS 11 Box 
MODE S TRANSPONDER 
1090ES ADS-8 YES YES YES 
TIS TIS-B 
4.D.1-7 
Conclusion 
Commercial aviation will use RNP RNAV in 
the near future. Likewise, ADS-B self-reports will 
improve air traffic surveillance and provide 
sufficient situational awareness in each cockpit to 
support free flight. If tactical military aircraft are to 
operate within this new performance based 
airspace, they will require operational RNP RNAV, 
Mode S ,  and 109OES ADS-B functionality. To 
achieve these new functionalities, dual use avionics 
and integrations must be found to capture civil 
functionality with military equipment. The bottom 
line is that tactical military aircraft will achieve the 
required functionality or they can expect delays, 
rerouting, and some airspace exclusions. This 
paper describes one way to get RNP RNAV, Mode 
S, and 1090ES ADS-B capability in tactical military 
aircraft. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Mr. Wilfred Volkstadt, 
Mr. John Praktish, and Mr. Mike Gennain for their 
comments on this work. 
Acronyms 
1090ES---1090 MHz Extended Squitter 
BAS---Aircraft Based Augmentation 
ACAS II---Airbome Collision 
ADS-A---Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance - Addressed 
0 ADS---Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance 
0 ADS-B---Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance - Broadcast 
APX-l18---Common IFF Digital 
Transponder 
ATC---Air Traffic Control 
0 ATCRBS---Air Traffic Control Radar 
e ATM---Air Traffic Management 
e ATN--- Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network 
CDTI---Cockpit Display of Traffic 
Information 
CJCS---Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff 
System 
- Avoidance System 
Beacon System 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
0 . 
. 
0 . 
0 
. 
0 . 
0 
e 
0 
0 
e 
. 
. . 
. 
0 . . 
e . 
. 
0 . 
CNSIATM--- Communications, 
Navigation, Surveillance / Air Traffic 
Management 
DAFIF- Digital Aeronautical Flight 
Information File 
DME---Distance Measuring Equipment 
EGI---Embedded GPS INS 
EUROCAE-European Organization for 
Civil Aviation Equipment 
FAA----Federal Aviation Administration 
FMS---Flight Management System 
FRD---Functional Requirements 
Document 
FRUIT---Friendly Replies Uncorrelated 
In Time 
GBAS---Ground Based Augmentation 
GPS---Global Positioning System 
ICAO--4ntemational Civil Aviation 
Organization 
IFF---Identification Friend or Foe 
INS---Inertial Navigation System 
JAA--- Joint Aviation Authorities 
.PALS--- Joint Precision Approach and 
Landing System 
MASP---Minimum Aviation System 
Performance Standards 
MHz---Megahertz 
Mode S---Mode Select 
MOPS---Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards 
NAD-83---North American Datum of 
1983 
NAS---National Air Space System 
NUIA--- National Imagery and Mapping 
Agency 
NM---Nautical Miles 
NPA---Non-Precision Approach 
PPS---Precise Positioning Service 
PSR---Primary Surveillance Radar 
Q&A---Question and Answer 
RA---Resolution Advisory 
RNAV---Area Navigation 
RNP----Required Navigation 
Performance 
RTCA---RTCA Inc. 
SARps---Standards And Recommended 
Practices 
SBAS--- Space Based Augmentation 
4.D.1-8 
. . 
. 
0 
0 
. . . 
SPS---Standard Positioning Service 
SSR---Secondary Surveillance Radar 
TACAN-Tactical Air Navigation 
TIS-B-Traffic Information Service - 
Broadcast 
TIS---Traffic Information Service 
UAT--- Universal Access Transceiver 
VDL 4---VHF data link mode 4 
VNAV---Vertical Navigation 
VOR----VHF Omni-directional Range 
WGS-84--- World Geodetic Survey of 
1984 
References 
[l] CJCSI 6130.01C, 2003 CJCS Master 
Positioning, Navigation and Timing Plan, 3 1 March 
2003 
[2] Doc 9613-ANi937, ICAO Manual on Required 
Navigation Performance, Second Edition, 1999 
[3] AWOP-WP/756, ICAO Manual on Required 
Navigation Perfomance (RNP) for Approach, 
Landing and Departure Operations, (Draft) 
[4] RTCAiDO-236A, Minimum Aviation System 
Performance Standards: Required Navigation 
Performance for Area Navigation, 13 September 
2000 
[5] RTCA/DO-229C, Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards for Global Positioning 
SystemNide Area Augmentation Systems 
Airbome Equipment, 28 November 2001 
[6] RTCA/DO-l78B, Software Considerations in 
Airbome Systems and Equipment Certification, 10 
December 1992 
173 Specimen Aeronautical Information Circular 
(AIC) titled “Caniage and Operation of SSR 
Mode S 
[8] Airbome Equipment in European Airspace,” 28 
July 2000 
[9] ICAO SARPs Annex 10, Volume W ,  
Amendment 73, second edition -July 1998 
[ 101 ICAO Doc 9688, “The Manual on Mode S 
Specific Services” 
[ll] RTCADO-263, Application of Airbome 
Conflict Management: Detection, Prevention, & 
Resolution, December 14,2000 
4.D.1-9 
