Image Restoration Based On Level Lines 
Ling Qi, Niu Feng, Liu Zhengkai 
University of Science and Technology of China, Dept. of EEIS, Image Processing Lab 
Abstract Images in nature can rarely be whole 
seen and they are occluded by something else. 
To get recovery of images, it need image 
restoring technology. Traditional methods are 
based on interpolation, which is not good if the 
occlusion is big. This paper is based on an 
existing theory and realizes a variational method: 
image restoration based on level line. This 
approach simulates restoring ability of human 
vision, which can reconstruct edge features in 
images. Experiment results show this method 
can restore the information in big occluded area 
fairly well, moreover it spends time quite little. 
This method can be used to restore old photos 
and applied into image compression. 
Keywords Level line T-junction Occlusion 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Since middle ages, in order to protect 
civilization of human being, people have begun 
to recover pictures corrupted by spots. In order 
to restore the nontexture information, it is 
necessary to utilize the information of the 
vicinity of the spots and fill up occluded area 
with some rule. Obviously, spots can be seen as 
occlusions. Usually, we need mask to mark the 
occluded area and then use restoring algorithm 
to reconstruct images. This method can be 
widely applied to restoration of old photos. Our 
approach in this paper also can be used in other 
fields, like image compressing and watermark 
attack. 
Psychologically speaking, continuation of 
objects boundaries plays a central role in the 
restoring process. Our method proposed in this 
paper is related to a natural ability of the human 
visual system and a psychological model, the so- 
called amodal completion. This is illustrated in 
T-junctions 
Fig. I Amodal completion process 
Fig. I : there are four irregular white objects in 
front of a black rectangle. Under certain 
geometric conditions, our perception founds a 
model that the black rectangle is hidden by four 
white objects. Human vision is able to extend the 
visible edges behind occluded objects and 
between T-junctions, which are pivotal pixels 
abutting on boundary of occluded areas and 
critical points of different gray levels. So the 
continuation is performed to complete 
restoration in psychology. 
Assumed image is a two-dimension 
function, it can he restored with interpolation 
from a functional viewpoint. But the result of 
this method is not very good. Because image is 
not always a smooth function and has many 
boundaries of objects. Additionally this method 
can’t reconstruct boundary well. 
In [ 5 ] ,  it chose the TV model proposed by 
Rudin and Osher as energy criterion. Although it 
can extend the boundaries of objects and has no 
restriction of occluded areas, this method is 
based on interpolation in fact. So the time of 
restoring is long and the result of big occluded 
area is not good. 
The method we proposed in this paper can 
be viewed as a variational approach of Masnou 
and Morel’s disocclusion based on level-lines 
stmcture. From a theoretical viewpoint, we can 
get the orientation of level lines with boundaries 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Image and Signal Processing and Analysis (2003) 784 
information of vicinity of occluded area and use 
it to restore the most important aspect of image, 
boundaries of objects. As to the rest parts, we 
use fast propagation algorithm to recover the 
area. 
2. THEORY ABOUT LEVEL LINES 
Let us denote by r the occlusion and its 
boundary. We shall assume that r h a s  no hole 
so X is a man-connected curve. Let denote u(x) 
the gray level of an image at a point x. We define 
level lines as the boundaries of upper level sets 
Known in [4], edges are very sensitive to 
contrast changes and do not offer a complete 
representation of the image. However, definition 
about level lines i s  globally invariant with 
respect to any increasing contrast change, so the 
method based on level lines can keep invariant 
while contrast of image increases. 
Level lines have three important 
mathematical properties: 
1) Level line is continuous. 
2) Any two level lines cannot cross. 
3) The number of level lines aniveing at 
and leaving occlusion are equal. 
According to continuation of level lines, we 
can find an optimal set of T-junctions, painvise 
connecting the T-junctions with approximatively 
the same level and orientation. T-junctions 
represent the critical information of boundary so 
we consider how to connect them with level 
lines at first. 
The principles in painvise connecting the T- 
I )  Two T-junctions have similar gray level. 
2) Two T-junctions have similar orientation. 
(Similar can be explained equal or 
different in a small scale.) 
We call two T-junctions matching if two 
junctions are: 
criterions above are matched. 
Fig.2 is a diagrammatic drawing that can 
clearly illuminate what the “painvise” means. 
Gray Level Leve lines 
Fig.2 Possible connections of level lines. 
Our method consists in the minimizing 
follow energy: 
E = f( a + p div- )ds + angles [ ~ ,a ] 
Wherea , p are positive constants and “angles” 
denotes the sum of angle’s variation along the 
associated level lines. The parameter p can be 
seen as a generalization of the curvature 
exponent. According to psychophysicists, the 
continnation process of human vision is that 
restored edges must be as smooth and straight as 
possible. The method we describe in this paper 
gives a solution in the case p=l, which 
corresponds to a continuation of level lines by 
polygonal paths. 
From a theoretical viewpoint, optimal 
solution needs to minimize a global energy of all 
restored level lines that do not cross each other. 
But it will take a long time to get the orientation 
of level lines, which is not worthwhile when the 
occluded area is small. So we propose another 
approach faster than global optimization. 
Considering the gradient of image can get 
boundaries of objects in the image, we calculate 
gradients of all pixels in the vicinity of occluded 
area. The maximum is on behalf of the most 
important information of boundary. It is 
reasonable to take this orientation as main 
orientation of level lines. 
785 Proc. ISPAO3 
According to noncrossing property of level 
lines, once painvise connecting T-junctions, the 
orientation of rest level lines must be limited to a 
range near the main one. So propagation method 
can he applied to simplify the algorithm. 
3. A PRACTICAL ALGORITHM 
We only describe in detail the algorithm with 
p=lof  energy criterion. 
A. Orientation Computation 
We compute gradients of all pixels in the 
vicinity of occluded area by difference method. 
This is illustrated in Fig. 3: the coordinate of 
pixel 0 is (x,y); gray level can$be stored in a 
two-dimensional array u[x][y]. 
& Image Coordinate- System 
Fig.3 Gradient computation of pixels 
Then the gradient and its value of 0 
respectively are: 
h X+ h 
I V U (  = x J ( u [ x b ] - u [ x  I - I]G.D’ + (u[xLy + 1]1u[xIyD’ 
- +  
hislength,Xand yareunit vectors 
Make a statistical computation of all values. 
The maximal value represents the critical 
boundary information in this area. With the 
theory that orientation is the orthogonal vector of 
gradient, we can find the main orientation of 
level lines in this area. The orientation of 
connecting the matching T-junctions will not 
greatly depart from this main orientation. 
B. T-junctions Computation 
The other emphasis that will be helpful to 
restore the occlusions is the set of T-junctions. T- 
junctions are those points of the boundary which 
are not belonging to the occlusion and near 
different gray levels. A T-junction is determined 
by its coordinates and its related gray levels. 
Since the gradient value of pixel exhibits its 
variation in gray level comparing with the pixels 
around, it is rational that points with great 
gradient value along the boundary can be 
regarded as T-junctions. With data about gradient 
computed previously, we can gain a set of T- 
junctions in a short time. 
C. Propagation of Restored Level Lines 
After painvise connecting T-junctions in the 
occlusion, there probably are some new. occlusions 
to be built. Because of the noncrossing property of 
level lines, the rest level lines must have similar 
orientation with the main one. Corresponding to 
the restored level lines, it can be drawn very simply 
with propagation. 
In the following, we summarize below the 
main steps of our restoring algorithm. 
Step1 :Reading image, identifying the occlusion 
and marking it with mask. 
Step2:Computing the occlusion boundary. 
Step3:Computing the main orientation of 
restoring level lines. 
Step4:Computing T-junctions on the boundary. 
Step5:Capturing and storing matching T- 
junctions. 
Step6:Painvise connecting T-junctions with level 
lines. 
Step7:Use of fast propagation method to build 
the restored image. 
4. EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
We present in Fig.4 the performances of our 
algorithm for photograph restoration. It shows 
that the result is acceptable despite only use p=l, 
which results in the level lines are polygonal 
Proc. ISPAO3 786 
lines. The geometric nature of image has been 
restored with level lines. 
We also tested the restoring time under 
conditions of: CPU Celeron 333, 128M RAM 
Cost time is 1572 milliseconds, which is less 
than restoration approach based on TV, 2323, 
and global optimization method. 
(b) 
Fig.4 (a) Original image where occlusions are in white 
(b)Image restoration performed by level lines. The 
discontinuities are well recovered. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Proved in experiments, image restoration 
based on level lines can greatly restore the 
boundaries of objects and time is little. Moreover, 
this method can be applied to image 
787 Proc. ISPAO? 
compression. For example, regularly discarding 
213 information of image, it can also he restored 
by this method. But we only proposed the 
method about p=l  of energy criterion that can’t 
connect T-junctions with smooth curves and this 
method can’t restore texture information of 
objects. Therefore, our future research focuses 
on how to utilize curve information so that this 
method can he applied to more images and get 
better results. 
REFERENCES 
[ I ]  G.Kanizsa, Organization in Vision: Essays in 
Gestalt Perception. New York: Praeger, 1979. 
[2] M. Nitzherg, D. Mumford, and T. Shiota, 
“Filtering, segmentation and depth,” in Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Germany: 
Springer-Verlab, 993,vol. 662. 
[3] Simon Masnou, Jean-Michel Morel, ”Level 
lines based disocclusion” JEEE, International 
Conference on Image Processing, 1998 
[4] Simon Masnou, ”Disocclusion: A Variational 
Approach Using Level lines,”lEEE, Transactions 
of Image Procession,Vol. 11, No.2,February 2002. 
[5] %bikb%, %Ai%, ?rug@?, ‘‘-?$B?@ 
@%!+L9H2Zi@tl.%&’’ 9 ((ct;lBE40El% 
++E)) , Vo1.7, No.4, 2002. 
[6] A.A.Efros and T.K.Leung, “Texture synthesis 
by nonparametric sampling,” in Proc. I€€€ Int. 
Con$ on Cornputer Vision, Corfu, Greece, 1999. 
[7] Hirani A,Totsuka T. “Combining frequency 
and spatial domain information for fast 
interactive image noise removal,” Proceedings 
of SIGGRAP“96 [C],ACM Press.1996 
